Australia cleaned up a hapless New Zealand under the lights on the fourth day of the first Test to secure a commanding 296-run victory and a 1-0 series lead. Chasing a record 468 runs, New Zealand crumbled against sustained bowling from Australia’s undermanned attack and were bowled out for 171 in a lopsided contest. A rejuvenated Australia have won their third straight Test of the home season since retaining the Ashes in England and stretched their unbeaten run in day-night matches to seven. New Zealand’s BJ Watling (40) and Colin de Grandhomme (33) played defensively in a bid to stretch the test into a final day, but their dismissals triggered a swift end. Mitchell Starc and spinner Nathan Lyon claimed four wickets apiece in New Zealand’s second innings, with Starc finishing with nine wickets for 97 runs in the match. The tourists’ chase on a deteriorating Perth Stadium pitch got off to a disastrous start when opener Jeet Raval and Kane Williamson (14) fell before the tea break. Lyon picked up the prized wicket of Williamson with his first ball as the New Zealand skipper meekly poked to short leg. Raval made just one for the second time in the match, falling to a sharp Starc delivery.Ross Taylor, who top-scored with 80 in New Zealand’s first innings, played tentatively alongside Tom Latham before losing patience and edging an attempted pull shot off Starc for 22. Latham soon departed for 18 when he was trapped lbw by Lyon in a decision overturned on review. Watling had some luck on 27 when he was given not out after a loud appeal off Lyon. Replays showed he had edged the ball but Australia declined to review. He then was dropped on 30 by Steve Smith at slip. Smith, however, made no mistake when De Grandhomme edged a fierce short ball from Cummins. Watling’s charmed life ended when he gloved a short delivery from Starc in a decision overturned on review to effectively signal the end of New Zealand’s resistance. Australia dominated throughout with their formidable first innings total setup by a majestic 143 from Marnus Labuschagne – his third straight century. Starc, who was sidelined for most of the Ashes series, then overwhelmed New Zealand. New Zealand have only won one test in Australia since their sole series triumph across the Tasman Sea in 1985-86. Both teams were without a paceman after debutant Lockie Ferguson, himself a replacement for injured New Zealand spearhead Trent Boult, and Josh Hazlewood suffered leg injuries on the opening two days. Oppressive weather conditions continued for the fourth straight day as the temperature peaked at 41°C. The series shifts to the traditional Boxing Day Test at the MCG in Melbourne before concluding with the New Year’s Test at the Sydney Cricket Ground.