Playing its second year as an alternative Christmas offering, Circus 1903 offers an escape to the golden age of the travelling circus. With old-school charm and thrills, it’s like The Greatest Showman minus the pop songs, although the soundtrack here is just as fundamental. Evan Jolly’s score sews together a dozen disparate routines with its grandiose, button-pushing drama cueing every ooh and ahh.David Williamson is the avuncular ringmaster and occasionally slightly inappropriate uncle who sets about gently ribbing the kids who come up on stage to be stooges in routines mixing groan-worthy comedy, magic and nostalgic sentimentality. Skill abounds across the cast, even if not every act wows, and they are all eclipsed by the elephants – life-sized puppets full of grace and character. Still, the humans bring surprises too. When it said in the programme there’d be foot juggling, I assumed they’d be juggling objects, but actually it’s people: one man tossed in circles by the toes of another. Other highlights include the most contorted contortionist I’ve certainly ever seen, Senayet Asefa Amare, whose impossibly twisted torso generates a mix of awe and ickiness. There’s more stomach-flipping in the wheel of death, like a giant fidget spinner-turned-hamster wheel hoisted above the stage, in which two men essentially attempt to outrace the laws of physics.Audiences today aren’t the entertainment-starved folk who rolled up to the big top in 1903. In a culture saturated with special effects, juggling an extra club or balancing for a few more seconds doesn’t excite. It is the moments of connection, creativity and wonder that matter. There’s real artistry in the aerialism of Daria Shelest and Vadym Pankevych, their “we’re so in love” schtick translating into heady rushes of movement, Shelest swooping up the hanging silk and into her partner’s arms. And when utterly fearless acrobat Maria Boldyreva dons a blindfold to be swung, tossed and, crucially, caught at great height by Ivan Fomichev, for a moment the music cuts to silence. We’re left with only the audience’s gasps as the soundtrack – and that is the best theatre of the night. Circus 1903 is at the Royal Festival Hall, London, until 5 January.