Welcome to the 2019 Fiver Christmas Awards. We lost count last year of how many times we’ve done this, so don’t be expecting us to furnish you with a number now. All we know is, it’s been too many. You know it too. But despite the grinding familiarity and futility of it all, we go again. It’s a time-honoured festive tradition, see, like crackers, carols and crying. So here it is, merry Christmas, everybody’s trudging on. Charge your glass with a generous shot of your cheapest aftershave, top it up with a little turps, dig out the packet of tablets you should have taken for your bad back a few months ago but decided to save for the holidays, and sink into a gorgeous haze of delight, the better to deal with the next few minutes of existence. Make sure to have a couple of rolls of that Regina Blitz to hand, just in case you wake up with a start in a puddle! Enjoy, enjoy. In the room the women come and go, talking of Megan Rapinoe. The USA! USA!! USA!!! captain gets things done on and off the park, whether winning the World Cup or virtually poking the president on the shoulder blade, slowly, deliberately, repeatedly, until he snaps and makes an awful show of himself. Again. Six goals at the World Cup, a righteous fight for equality, and an innate ability to trigger paroxysms of impotent purple rage in those type of men. Most fair-minded folk had 2019 down as Virgil van Dijk’s year, mainly because it’s not often a defender proves to be such a transformative figure. Thing is, there have been times this year when his partner Joël Matip has outshone him. Also there have been a couple of games in which Degsy Lovren has been the man of the match too. So according to playground rules, that’s three players just at one club who are better than actual Ballon d’Or winner Lionel Messi. Two of them aren’t even in the team right now! Oh Lionel. While we’re on the subject of the most underwhelming greatest-ever player in history, CR7 is streets ahead too. Nations League, innit. Yes we are doing this to deliberately annoy a certain section of our readership, but we’re sure you’d expect nothing less. No, we can’t bring ourselves to do it. It’s attention football’s bureaucrats are after. We should stop giving it to them. Football’s very own version of coitus interruptus, only more frustrating. Alfredo ‘Up Yours, Motherwell’ Morelos fair racked up the numbers in 2019. He scored 38 goals, picked up 13 yellow cards, got himself sent off three times, missed one penalty and 174 chances in a cup final, and played a cumulative total of four and a half minutes in which he wasn’t running around with an aggrieved look on his coupon, searching out the nearest rammy. We love him. Comparisons have been drawn to a certain fellow South American trailblazer, though by the time Luis Suárez was Morelos’ age, he’d already got a controversial World Cup handball and his first biting incident to his name. Still, the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers man is only 23, so there’s plenty of time to develop his act. Gary Neville wins this for his reaction upon witnessing Vincent Kompany lashing one in from 90 yards against Leicester. His strange yelp of pseudo delight registered 9.6 on Gray’s patented YaBeauty-o-Meter, though to be fair the United legend was caught between a rock and a hard place given City were battling with Liverpool for the title. And at the end of the day, a confected reaction is better than none at all, as anyone who heard Steve McManaman and Jermaine Jenas drone their way through the Big Cup final, as though Tramadol cakes and Mogadon sandwiches were the order of the day, will attest. Royston Keane, whose punditry was consistently more entertaining than the matches he was paid to get annoyed about in the pantomime style. Keane plays the same song every time, but does so with such verve, turn of phrase and comic timing that it never fails to warm the heart. Our only regret is that the Sky Sports red button does not offer the opportunity to access his internal monologue, a service that would have been especially life-affirming when the knacked [sic] Paul Pogba turned up at Old Trafford for the Liverpool game wielding a walking stick, one bowler hat away from being a fully-fledged John Steed tribute. France underachieved in the Women’s World Cup, while this nonsense in Qatar right now doesn’t look particularly well organised, does it? But our gong goes to Egypt, who never really got going at their Africa Cup of Nations, and went out meekly in the round of 16 to one of the worst South Africa teams in living memory. Cue a level of silence in the Cairo International Stadium that made the Maracanã crowd at the 1950 World Cup sound like My Bloody Valentine playing excerpts from the Ring Cycle. Egypt join a long list of disappointing, anti-climactic major-tournament hosts that includes Brazil 1950, Spain 1982, Brazil 2014 and England 2020. Marcelo Bielsa. This shouldn’t require any additional comment. Who else but Maurizio Sarri, who was caught on camera trying to sneak out of Wembley towards the end of the League Cup final, presumably because he’d run clean out of snouts and/or Swan Vestas. That could be the only explanation for his making off in a slightly agitated fashion, right? Pop out quick to the corner shop, should be back in time to see the penalty shootout. The living Chelsea legend was also spotted at the end of the Big Vase final, enjoying a moment of silent solitude in the dugout, sucking down a valedictory cheroot. Such a shame the bloke on the PA didn’t put on Bach’s Air on the G String, it’d have been the perfect mise-en-scène. Gosport Borough’s George Barker, executing the perfect horizontal larrup. The sort of loose-limbed avant garde physical improvisation you only expect to see when poring over grainy footage of Ajax from 1971. George Barker, for Gosport Borough, with your goal of the weekend contender pic.twitter.com/JbmvRYKQ67 Brazil’s Copa Verde was up for grabs. All Paysandu defender Caique had to do to seal victory was slot home the final kick of a penalty shootout. After placing the ball on the spot, he took 13 long confident strides backwards, followed by 19 smaller ones forward, in a manner which suggested procrastination and doubt were very much uppermost in mind. Another backward lunge, and then it was time to blooter a wild one-step effort several miles right of the target. Of course opponents Cuaiba went on to win in sudden death. Of course they did. But at least Caique left everyone with this memory for the ages, an instant modern classic that makes Simone Zaza look like Ray Stewart. Key penalty in the Copa Verde shoot-out for Paysandu against Cuiabá pic.twitter.com/RtdK8BcF23 The grown adults who decided to dig up social media disgrace posts made by young players when they were knee high to a grasshopper. Social Media Disgrace Twitter is practically taking us back to the doctrine of Original Sin. Meanwhile, the fact that a fair few of the folk calling the lads out have been involved in unedifying online media spats while skittered on Tin during their time, while in their 40s and 50s, is quietly ignored. Marko Arnautovic, who forced through a move to Shanghai SIPG in the Chinese Super League because he was “desperate to win trophies”. Yes, nice one. John Stones, nobly and single-handedly ensuring England got stuck at the semi-final stage for the second year in a row. His mistake against the Netherlands in the Nations League semi-final – best played at 1.5x speed and accompanied by Yakety Sax – was 24-carat blooper VHS gold. The Expected Goals (xG) Premier League table, which has Liverpool in second place, two points ahead of Manchester United and Chelsea, and Jeremy Corbyn making himself at home at No 10. Manchester United fans who celebrated a triumphant end to the 2018-19 season because Liverpool didn’t win the Premier League and Manchester City didn’t do the real treble. To do this while sitting under that leaking roof showed great moral fortitude. Coleen Rooney, P.I. Having wowed the world with his genius in the first leg of the Big Cup semi-final, when he scored an open goal and a deflected free-kick, Messi was expected to finish Liverpool off in the second leg. Instead he was shoved about the noggin by Andy Robertson with such force that he disappeared into a black hole for the remainder of the match, reappearing just in time to slag off all his teammates for losing 4-0. Top work, wee man! Alexandre Lacazette, who threw a beautiful dummy against Brighton – just before taking the kick-off. Arsenal lost the game but won the style argument. None of us will ever forget where we were on the afternoon of Monday 2 December 2019, when the Sky Sports Breaking News ticker roared into life to break the seismic news that a Sean Dyche press conference was coming up. The USA! USA!! USA!!!’s Alex Morgan, who started an online riot by mocking England when she scored against them in the World Cup semi-final. Morgan’s inflammatory gesture was to, erm, daintily drink a cup of imaginary tea. If only she’d quaffed 12 imaginary pints before puking on the penalty spot and planting the head on the first person to make accidental eye contact. Right, aye. You are joking, aren’t you? Send your emails, presents and Christmas cards to the.boss@theguardian.com.