In 2019, “I’m making a podcast” overtook “I’m writing a film script” as the standard media dilettante response to that ever-tricky question: “What do you do, exactly?” Every week brought a new slew of podcasts. Sue Perkins launched one. David Dimbleby, too. Dawn O’Porter, Stacey Solomon, Gemma Collins, even Robbie Williams... The BBC, in particular, seemed to go podcast bananas, desperately flinging out new shows like they were old clothes. Some were great: Tom Neenan Is Not All Men was hilarious; You’re Dead To Me hilarious and informative. There were a couple of brilliant new BBC thriller docs: Intrigue: Tunnel 29, about a group of people who tunnelled under the Berlin Wall and The Missing Cryptoqueen, about a bitcoin con-woman. Fortunately… with Fi and Jane continued to be one of the funniest and most popular shows out there. Plus the Beeb’s chatty, inclusive sports podcasts are still second to none, with That Peter Crouch Podcast (football) and Tailenders (cricket) continuing to bantz their way into thousands of hearts (not mine, but I’m a grump). But despite all this podcastery hoo-ha, there are still many people who prefer radio and the transfer of BBC iPlayer’s radio content to BBC Sounds in September caused much listener heartache and disgruntlement. Corporations such as Spotify and Audible also made great strides with their podcast offerings. Bigger media networks snapped up podcast rights to turn them into TV series or films: Universal is adapting Wondery’s Dr Death for TV, following the success of true crime podcast Dirty John (also adapted by Universal) and drama Limetown (adapted by Facebook Watch) this year. And shows about shows flowered too: there were podcasts about Strictly, Peaky, The Crown, Love Island, His Dark Materials, Succession. Audio does well when it appeals to a niche audience, a small crew of devotees, which is why, of course, celebrities love podcasts so much. Radio saw a lot of presenter upheaval, partly due to regulation change. Commercial broadcaster Global moved to national breakfast shows, with Amanda Holden joining Jamie Theakston on Heart Breakfast, very successfully. Chris Evans moved to Virgin, again, to much success. Simon Mayo went to Scala, John Humphrys left Today and depped for Tim Lihoreau on Classic FM for a week. This went so well that Humphrys has landed a new weekend show on the station, starting early next year. He joins Moira Stuart, who left Radio 2 to present her own show on Classic too. This trend of big names – BBC or otherwise – being attracted to commercial radio stations looks set to continue, as does the creation of ever more niche stations. Bauer launched Scala plus Country Hits, Magic at the Musicals, Absolute Radio 00s as well as online stations Kiss Dance, Kiss Ibiza and Kiss Garage, among others; LBC launched LBC News. On the BBC, things settled down at Radio 2 and 6 Music, with Sara Cox on 2 and Lauren Laverne on 6 managing their new slots particularly well. Emma Barnett and Nihal on 5 live were as good as they ever have been, which is extremely good indeed. Outside the mainstream, where all the interesting stuff occurs, George the Poet’s podcast rightly stormed the British Podcast awards and led to his second series being broadcast on Radio 4. Indie producer Eleanor McDowall, of Falling Tree Productions, won several international awards for A Sense of Quietness, her beautiful documentary about women coming from Ireland to the UK to get abortions. And writer-director Julian Simpson followed up last year’s The Case of Charles Dexter Ward with another spooky drama, The Whisperer in Darkness. All personal, all imaginative, all ambitious, all wonderful. Audio works best when it allows talented people to get on and do their thing. There is room for everyone now. 1. Have You Heard George’s Podcast?George the Poet’s second series outshines all other podcasts for inventiveness, honesty and beauty. 2. Lights Out: A Sense of QuietnessBBC Radio 4Eleanor McDowall’s adocumentary about Irish women seeking abortions in the UK won gold in the best radio documentary category at the Prix Europa, among many other awards. 3. The Emma Barnett ShowBBC Radio 5 Live  The indomitable Barnett has stormed through the year, taking no political prisoners. 4. LBCGlobal’s flagship station goes from strength to strength. Let’s hope they kick Farage off the airwaves. 5. Intrigue: Tunnel 29BBC Radio 4/BBC SoundsHelena Merriman’s brilliantly constructed, utterly gripping doc about an escape from East to West Germany. 6. BrexitcastBBC SoundsInescapable, formidable, funny, informative. What will they do after Brexit? 7. The Sun King AudibleDavid Dimbleby’s first project since Question Time is a superlative history of Rupert Murdoch. 8. The Whisperer in DarknessBBC Radio 4/BBC SoundsA mesmerising, utterly modern adaptation of HP Lovecraft’s spooky tale. 9. Slow Burn: Tupac and BiggieSlate’s podcast contextualises and explains the history around gangsta rap’s two biggest tragedies. 10. Roman KempThird-placed in I’m a Celebrity…, the Capital breakfast co-presenter is charm personified. The Gemma Collins PodcastThat joke isn’t funny any more.