Johnny Vegas and Sian Gibson are back as Terry and Gemma from Draper’s Tours in the latest instalment of their comic film series. After their coach breaks down, the pair find themselves making an unplanned stay at a grim caravan park where the residents are being killed off one by one in Agatha Christie-like circumstances. Torrential rain has cut off all the exits and anyone could be a suspect, from the park’s creepy owners Evie and Jed to mismatched young couple Penny (Ambreen Razia) and Phil (Jason Forbes). Murderous fun. Ammar Kalia As the shiniest Saturday night show hits 15, here is a look at its history. From Natasha Kaplinsky and Brendan Cole’s inaugural victory to the YouTuber-speckled show that it is today, it’s a nostalgic feast. But the real treat is a look at Come Dancing, the show that spawned the ratings legend. Hannah Verdier It’s been another year of thrilling sambas, fast-paced jives and romantic waltzes for our Strictly celebs and their partners. Now it’s time for the remaining couples to perform three routines: one of their choosing, one set by the judges and one last show dance. Taylor Swift also stops by to perform. AK There is always a queasy hint of the climate crisis being repurposed as high-octane entertainment about these annual docs. But even so, plenty of the footage – mostly obtained by citizen journalists – is extraordinary. Expect extreme heat, record-breaking rain and an avalanche. Phil Harrison From surviving prostate cancer to his now famous model railway hobby, Rod Stewart sits down with Dermot O’Leary to talk through his career. There are cheeky anecdotes about his tempestuous love life, as well as encounters with Motown greats and Abbey Road recording sessions. AK The intense potboiler wraps up its second season with a double bill front-loaded with revelations. Damaged detective Harry (Bill Pullman) intuits the truth about Julian’s disappearance from care, but will he be able to reacquire his young murder suspect before Vera (Carrie Coon) and her Mosswood cult intervene? Graeme Virtue Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, 7.30pm, ITV Gareth Edwards’s standalone spin-off tells the story of how the rebels got their hands on the secret plans of the Death Star, as in the original Star Wars. It’s mainly down to Felicity Jones’s fugitive Jyn Erso, a heroine in the Princess Leia mould, in a high-powered yarn with sombre notes. Paul Howlett Premier League Football: Liverpool v Watford 12noon, BT Sport 1. A daunting trip for the Hornets. Champions Cup Rugby Union: Leinster v Northampton Saints 4.35pm, Channel 4. From Aviva Stadium in Dublin. Premier League Football: Southampton v West Ham United 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. A relegation battle at St Mary’s.