The rhetorical questions her flyers asked were: “Who wouldn’t want to run away with the circus? Who doesn’t dream of travelling in a velvet-lined circus wagon, under the stars, circus music accompanying a life of freedom, family and art?” Nell Gifford, the owner and ringmistress of Giffords Circus, who has died of cancer aged 46, lived that big-top dream. The Oxford-educated girl from a bohemian family ran away to the circus, not to join it but to found, with her then husband, Toti Gifford, her own; a retro-chic troupe based on Gifford’s idea of a traditional travelling show, which did not exploit wild animals. “Our vision was a miniature village green circus, bursting at the seams … a little band of performers who live nomadically … engrossed in the serious business of making magic,” she said. Regular acts included Tweedy the clown, magicians, a tumbling troupe from Cuba and gymnasts, but Gifford was open to ideas. “You would come up with this mad idea and Nell would say, ‘Right, let’s do it,’” the theatre director Cal McCrystal, who directs the shows, said. Other acts have included shire horses, ponies and various birds – doves, a turkey and chickens. There would be a theme for each season’s show, often harking back to a particular period. Last year the spectacular was My Beautiful Circus, a celebration of its heyday in the 1930s with all the feathers, glamour and sparkle of the era. This year’s was Xanadu, an interpretation of Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s poem Kubla Khan, which harked back to the flower power days of the 70s. “When I was young, my mother often used to say, ‘Nell, you are SUCH a drama queen.’ And it’s true. Everything I do seems to be a massive drama,” Gifford said in an interview with the Observer last year. “I’ve had cancer not once but twice. I didn’t have one baby, I had twins. And I started my own circus. My mother was right. It’s all so dramatic and full-on.” She was born Eleanor Stroud in Oxford. Her father, Rick Stroud, was a television director. Her mother, Charlotte (nee Pumphrey), was the pillar of family life for Nell, her sister, Clover, and their three older half-siblings from Charlotte’s first marriage, Tom, Sophy and Emma Bridgewater, the last of whom founded the eponymous pottery brand. As a child, Nell told friends she wanted to be a monkey trainer; her favourite game involved pretending to be a Gypsy traveller living in a caravan. She was aged 18 and set to study English literature at Oxford when her mother fell from a horse while out riding and suffered a serious brain injury. She lived for another 22 years but needed round-the-clock care. Later Gifford said of the accident: “Some people really close to me have never had a family tragedy, they’ve never experienced severe loss when they were young, but that’s just good luck. We lost our mum and when something like that happens you realise at what point things can go really wrong in your life.” Gifford took a gap year and travelled, working at Circus Flora in New York before returning to take up her Oxford place. After she graduated in 1994, she did various jobs in British circuses including driving vans, selling tickets in the box office and mucking out stables before moving to Germany to work as a groom with the Circus Roncalli. She wrote a book about her circus life called Josser: The Secret Life of a Showgirl (1999); a “josser” is a circus word for an outsider. Also in 1999, she married Toti, a farmer’s son. A year later the couple bought a secondhand tent, built themselves a makeshift wagon to live in and advertised for performers in the Stage. Giffords Circus was born. “Toti and I both put everything into it, which wasn’t a lot … we both had energy and ideas and determination, and he had a tractor and the technical know-how,” she said. They were penniless by the time of their first show, in 2000, held at the Hay festival in front of a small audience perched on plastic chairs. It was a sellout and grew from there, touring south-west Britain in vintage vans, from April to the end of September, with a big top that seats 600. McCrystal would later describe Giffords as the “circus equivalent of Glyndebourne”, attracting a firmly middle-class or well-heeled audience. However, people from old European circus families would also come to see the show and would end up in tears, because it reminded then of the past. The Giffords had twins, a son, Cecil, and daughter, Red, born in 2010, but the marriage broke down just before Nell’s first breast cancer diagnosis in 2015 and they later separated. In the last few years, Nell had been in a relationship with the circus’s Cuban strongman, Alejandro Dayla Pozo Pita, known as Pozo. When not on tour, travelling the country in an original burgundy 30s wagon, she could be found at the circus’s base, a farm in the Cotswolds, where she juggled hospital appointments and operations while ensuring that the show went on. She had recently taken up painting, including large oil works that covered the sides of the circus wagons, then more recently watercolours of circus life. An exhibition of her work will be held in London next year. The cancer returned a third time, but this summer she was back in the ring, as every year, a dream-like apparition in a long white dress on a magnificent cloud-grey stallion. She and McCrystal were working on next year’s 20th-anniversary spectacular, The Hooley, at the time of her death. Gifford is survived by Pozo, her children, her parents, and her siblings. • Nell (Eleanor Rose) Gifford, circus founder and ringmistress, born 24 January 1973; died 8 December 2019