The director of the Cornley polytechnic drama society appears on stage to greet the audience. The company, he says, has put together a little holiday show called The Spirit of Christmas. We are privileged to be able to sit and watch it come apart. The CPDS is a fictional troupe, a creation of the Mischief Theatre Company, the people behind the West End and Broadway hit The Play That Goes Wrong, as well as Peter Pan Goes Wrong, which was adapted for television and followed by A Christmas Carol Goes Wrong in 2017. It is a formula, it seems, that can be applied widely to good effect. Now Mischief Theatre are back with a six-part series, The Goes Wrong Show (BBC One), beginning with this Yuletide effort, which doesn’t look as if it would be very good if everything went to plan. Fortunately, nothing does. The plot, insofar as there is one, is negligible: it’s Christmas Eve and a little girl is sad because her parents, beset by holiday stress, are fighting. In desperation, she writes to Father Christmas for help. Even this simple story is hard to follow, so burdened is the production by incompetence, unprofessionalism and bad luck. The props have been placed in all the wrong boxes, forcing the hapless actors to cook the Christmas decorations and trim the tree with sausage links. Father Christmas gets stuck on his way down the chimney. “My sack’s caught in the flue!” he says. “You can’t say that,” someone mutters backstage. “Of course I can,” says Santa. “It’s a literal sack. I’m not talking about my balls.” Eventually he makes his appearance, crashing into the room headfirst. He’s lucky – one of his elves never makes it out, and has to deliver all his lines from inside the chimney. Cues are missed. Father Christmas drinks real sherry by mistake, and embarks on an on-stage bender. Obviously things going wrong is funny, but the main pleasure in the chaos is the sheer precision of it. Co-written by cast members Henry Lewis, Henry Shields and Jonathan Sayer, The Goes Wrong Show relies on incredibly elaborate errors going right. Although it’s performed as a stage show, a lot of the visual gags depend on camera angles that reveal more than they are supposed to. There is a clockwork choreography to the whole thing. Ironically, it must take a tremendous amount of work to look this under-rehearsed. If the jokes are simple, they are also durable. For example, someone picks up a mince pie, and the plate comes with it. It’s not so much the relentless goings wrong as the determination to cover for each fresh disaster and plough ahead that makes it progressively funnier. Everyone on stage is playing two parts: the character and the desperate actor behind his or her eyes. All are condemned by that purgatorial maxim, the show must go on. A lot of the mistakes are quite proactive. It’s one thing for a bit of set to topple over, quite another for a large prop – in this case a “toy machine” – to catch and basically eat a fully grown actor in a snowman costume, while he attempts to sing a song. This happens very slowly, and in addition to being hilarious, it has some of the grim horror of an actual workplace accident. I don’t think I’m spoiling it for you by describing it in too much detail. I watched it three times, and it only got better. Everybody needs a bit of festive stupidity at this time of year – pratfalls, broad humour, Christmas cracker wit – but too much of it can leave you feeling a bit bad about yourself. The Goes Wrong Show would, I think, wring laughs from just about anyone, young or old, sober or not so much. And you don’t have to feel guilty about your Yuletide-induced lack of discernment – there’s just too much to admire in it. There is a lot of sophistication behind its obvious crowd-pleasing mission to please crowds. Best of all, this first instalment – the series continues in the new year – has a little chip of ice in its heart. It has nothing nice to say about Christmas, no goodwill towards men. “Who’s the real winner at Christmas?” asks a drunken Santa. “I’ll tell you who: Amazon.” This isn’t just a joyful and welcome addition to the Christmas telly schedule. In many ways, it feels like the antidote.