As a lens through which to view the past, period drama is the “obstinate, headstrong girl!” of British culture. If you want to get all Jane Austen about it, which of course you do. The genre most blindly beloved by the country has spent decades stubbornly shooing history away with a gloved hand in favour of a more manicured (read: posh, white) version of how we used to live. Backpedal to the comparatively sunny uplands of the late Noughties, when New Labour was in its death throes and phone hacking at News International crowned its head (OK, not so sunny). What were we saluting our slippers to on a Sunday night? Cranford! That confection filled with candied dames force-feeding cats laxatives to retrieve lost Victorian lace. Not exactly representative of the times. More like hitching up its skirts to escape them. In contrast, the 2010s – which to take a hammer to the Dickens quote was simply “the worst of times” – were when period drama finally loosened its corset. When a genre characterised by nostalgia cast open the Georgian shutters to the realities of race, class and sexuality that had always been there. Sort of. It was also the decade that launched with Downton Abbey. Yet this, too, was in perfect keeping with the 2010s’ ever-rising levels of polarisation. In what other 10-year span might we have entered stage-right with Julian Fellowes’ elegant post-Edwardian drama, which ran for six buttoned-up seasons and culminated in the promise of a film only Americans could love. Then exited stage-left with Gentleman Jack, a sly, swaggering and deeply sincere masterpiece about a Yorkshire woman dubbed the first modern lesbian, directed by the Andrew Davies of the 2010s. Our new crown: Sally Wainwright. It was in Wainwright’s skilled northern hands that period drama shifted into the tanking present. Became raw, bleak, true, subversive, funny in the most off-kilter British sense. In To Walk Invisible, her stunning account of the three pinched years in which the Brontë sisters wrote the novels that made them famous, we got a version of then that was viscerally now. There was poverty, alcoholism and not a marriage in sight. Everyone looked cold, all the time. In Gentleman Jack, Wainwright proved she could pull off a romp while crafting cliffhangers out of the trials and tribulations of 19th-century coal mining. Consider the high romantic finale, tuned in to by millions, that saw Suranne Jones’ roguish Anne Lister and her beloved, Ann Walker, declaring their love atop a windblown Yorkshire hill. “Don’t hurt me. I’m not as strong as you think I am,” Lister said, before adding with a soft-butch stoicism never before seen in a primetime period drama slot, “Well, I am, obviously.” As an antidote to the badly-acted costume drama playing out in parliament, it was perfect. Most awkward, unsurprisingly, was the insertion of race into a genre that for half a century has been almost exclusively white. In Vanity Fair, the Sedleys’ servant, Sam, was black and, though not fleshed out enough, a great character: proud, dripping with contempt, endlessly ignored. His silent presence for such lines as “better than sending him back to India into the arms of some dusky maharani, better than a dozen mahogany grandchildren” foregrounded the everyday racism of the time without falling into the trap of anachronism. Howard’s End, the BBC’s simultaneously old-fashioned and highly timely adaptation of EM Forster’s great novel about Englishness, just about walked the line between representation and tokenism by making the Basts an interracial couple, and giving the Schlegels a black maid. These were changes so incremental they often felt uncomfortable. Nevertheless, they made the Merchant Ivory version seem as long ago as the novel. The race problem in period drama, as it was termed, was better addressed in series that focused on black and Asian history from the outset. Like The Long Song, a stellar adaptation of Andrea Levy’s Booker-shortlisted novel set during the last days of slavery in 19th-century Jamaica. It was intelligent, ambitious, heartbreaking. Turning to sex, which all period dramas must in due course, Harlots was a microcosm of 2010s confusion. On the one hand, it was your average sauce-fest inspired by the sex trade in Georgian London and overflowing with ever more purple euphemisms for cockstands. On the other, a criminally overlooked post #MeToo feminist triumph, created by and starring women and for once, focusing on the brutality of prostitution without reducing it to a load of actually quite sexy sex. At times it could be both at once, and I didn’t know whether to be enraged or enjoy myself, which was probably the point. A similar discomfort was induced by The Crown, which was so sumptuous, eye-wateringly expensive, and bloody well done that you had to applaud, even while an actual royal was stepping down from all 230 of his patronages over his association with Jeffrey Epstein. Wrapping up smack-bang in the middle of the decade, with a finale that we will never stop dissecting, Mad Men expanded our sense of what period drama could be. Not just bonnets, but social commentary, style and substance, plus – who knew we had got this old – the 60s?! 2015 also delivered the sensual magnificence of Wolf Hall, which felt surprisingly roomy considering it packed Hilary Mantel’s two magnum opuses into six of the decade’s most perfect hours of television. Wolf Hall could have been the same old, same old: another BBC period drama about the Tudors, all bonking and baroque music. Instead we got Peter Kosminsky’s glittering psychological portrait of Thomas Cromwell, who in Mark Rylance’s hands became a figure as shadowy and representative of then and now as Don Draper. Like all the greatest period dramas of the decade, from The Crimson Petal and the White to Parade’s End, A Very English Scandal to The Crown, darkness was the mode, tone and, in Wolf Hall’s case because it was lit like a Rembrandt painting, palate. It turns out the past wasn’t a foreign country after all. It was here, and now.