Jürgen Klopp has warned Salzburg that Liverpool “are still ambitious like crazy” and will not be stopped from achieving their aims by the most intense schedule he has ever encountered. The European champions can progress to the knockout stage of the Champions League on Tuesdaywith a win or draw in Austria, or with a defeat should Napoli lose at home to Genk. They will be eliminated, however, should Napoli win and Salzburg beat Klopp’s side by the same scoreline or better than their 4-3 defeat at Anfield in October. Liverpool have qualified from the group on the final matchday for the past two seasons en route to the final and, for all of Salzburg’s hope of reaching the knockout phase for the first time, Klopp insists his Premier League leaders remain determined to add to June’s Champions League triumph. The Liverpool manager explained: “Two weeks ago Salzburg were very happy that they won against Genk and we had a draw against Napoli because they thought now they have the ‘final’ against us. Napoli was really happy that night because they got a point at Anfield and thought they ’only’ have to play Genk next week in a home game. Two weeks later, everybody knows it’s a final. We knew it since two weeks ago and we are prepared for that. “Salzburg has to win against us, has to win against Liverpool; it’s possible because it’s football, but we are not a typical Champions League winner of last year or finalist of two years before. We are still ambitious like crazy, we will go for everything, we will run for our lives – that’s what we are, plus playing football. It’s not that we come here and think that we have to dominate Salzburg, we will fight in each challenge, 100%.” This fixture marks the start of a demanding schedule for Liverpool of nine games until 5 January. They are the first top-flight team to play five competitions in 27 days – the Champions League, Premier League, Carabao Cup, Club World Cup and FA Cup – but Klopp, whose rotation in the last two matches has brought two convincing league victories, insists Liverpool will not be derailed. “It is difficult but there is a job to do,” he added. “We don’t ask for excuses, we know our schedule. We know where we have to go. We don’t expect drops, we don’t accept drops, not just me – the boys as well, we ask ourselves for the highest concentration. Then we will see what we get for it. We are a group which is in the most intense period of our lives and we will try to enjoy it. It is difficult, no doubt about that, but that is nothing that can stop us.”