With reference to your two articles on Tom Watson, are we seriously to believe he was driven out by a “brutal and hostile” Labour party (Report, 28 December; Interview, Weekend, 28 December)? This is someone who is described in the articles themselves as being accused of bullying, a “brutal scrapper” with “a reputation as a bruiser”, who ran a “filthy” election campaign for Liam Byrne in 2004, and who has been disloyal to four party leaders. Is he really so sensitive? Not probed are two other possible reasons for his resignation. One was Harvey Proctor’s declared intention to stand against him in his constituency. That would have made Watson’s support of the conman Carl Beech a central issue in his local campaign – a very damaging prospect for him. Another is that he may have feared that his heavily leave-voting constituency (by 68%) might not want to re-elect an MP who had been so vociferous in pushing Labour to support remain. It is a shame that neither of these issues was discussed in depth. Instead, a longtime political bruiser was allowed to cry victim and fix the blame solely on his leader and party for his departure.Lindsey CharlesOxford • Tom Watson doesn’t grasp how much his constant undermining of Jeremy Corbyn contributed to Labour’s defeat. For instance, he suggests Labour’s campaign was in total disarray, but doesn’t link the alleged disorganisation to his bombshell decision to step down from a key leadership position in the run-up to the national vote. It’s such a pity that the likable Watson, a Labour man down to his marrow, couldn’t have been more loyal to Corbyn. As deputy leader he should have contributed so much more to unifying the party. Joe McCarthyDublin • Simon Hattenstone’s excellent and subtle narrative, in his interview of Tom Watson, reveals no evidence of brutality, only of richly deserved hostility. But then it’s vital, isn’t it, to put an end not only to Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership but also to his courageous vision of a fairer, more decent Britain, and to his project of restoring those rights, public services and welfare benefits that only a few years ago we were able to take for granted. Onward into the dark.John HeawoodYork • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition