James McNicholas: The Boxer30-31 January The former Beasts sketch comic should have been a contender for the 2019 Edinburgh Comedy award with this tribute to his real-life boxing-champ grandad, Terry Downes. Brilliantly structured, with heartfelt laughs, it’s an hour that leaves you punchdrunk. McNicholas also tries out new material in a work-in-progress on 23 February. Frankie Foxstone aka The Profit: Walking Tour28 January-2 February In hard hat and killer heels, here comes Amy Gwilliam’s unstoppable property developer Frankie Foxstone, to survey potential Waterloo developments and ask if you consider yourself to be a basement bedsit or a penthouse suite. Interactive, knockabout satire with a taste for the ridiculous. Since U Been Gone4-9 February Tender autobiographical storytelling about learning from – and losing – your friends, growing up queer and finding you can finally, à la American Idol’s Kelly Clarkson, breathe for the first time. This show by non-binary writer-performer Teddy Lamb comes with an original pop score and was one of 2019’s most rapturously received debuts. Mo Omar1-2 February Recently seen on Harry Hill’s ClubNite, Mo Omar is a young comic with an easy charm, huge promise and jokes that can catch you offguard. Born in Somalia and raised in Cardiff, he spins tales about growing up with six sisters (“my family tree is a forest”) and will be trying new material on culture, faith and love. Bully30 January and 13 February The 2017 Funny Women award-winner Thanyia Moore explores the impact of bullying – concentrating not so much on the victim but on what it does to the bully themselves. Moore is a quick, frank and instantly engaging comic so this self-analytical debut standup hour is one to watch. Gorgon: A Horror Story 5-9 February Elf Lyons’s last comedy show asked audiences to hold hands and gaze lovingly at each other. This time, you may clutch your neighbour in fear. She’s created a Grand Guignol-inspired horror story about female anger. Lyons and Helen Duff also perform Unlikely Darlings (11-13 March), about surrealist Leonora Carrington. Sister!8 and 15 February Make an appointment for this intriguing-sounding two-hander about the NHS, produced by Rosa’s Assembly, an activist physical-theatre company. It’s the story of two nurses in 2030 who consider the gruelling work of the women before them, and the triumphs and strains of the service that is an eternally emotive political football. The Wild Unfeeling World 28 January-1 February This captivating solo show reimagines Moby-Dick as a young woman’s nocturnal voyage through the streets of London, replacing Ahab with a prowling ginger cat. Its creator, Casey Jane Andrews, also brings back The Archive of Educated Hearts (2 February), about families facing breast cancer. Sticky Door 11-16 February Katie Arnstein’s solo show revisits the year she decided to “Casanova myself around our nation’s capital looking for consenting heterosexual adult males”. Expect jolly songs, icky details and troubling insights from a smart and funny performer. This is the final part of Arnstein’s It’s a Girl! trilogy, comprising Bicycles and Fish and the brilliant Sexy Lamp. She performs all three on 16 February. Ask Me Anything11-16 February The Paper Birds create shows by carefully gathering real stories about subjects such as class, austerity and alcohol from around the UK. This time they’ve turned agony aunts. The company invited young people to write to them and ask them absolutely anything – this show, with music from Rosie Doonan, is their reply to those letters. Sukh Ojla: Life Sukhs19-20 February The super-charismatic standup, actor and playwright, who stormed the BBC Asian Network’s Big Comedy Night, presents her first solo comedy hour. Expect gags about dating, ayahuasca and world-weary insights about what it’s like living with Mum and Dad in your 30s. Joseph Morpurgo (Work in Progress)20 February Joseph Morpurgo’s Desert Island Discs-inspired Soothing Sounds for Baby was one of the decade’s finest fringe comedy shows; it was followed by Hammerhead, a deliriously funny riff on the rampant pomposity of post-show Q&As. Here’s a chance to watch the high-concept comic and Austentatious star try out some new material. • Vault festival runs 28 January-22 March at various venues in London.