Brendan Rodgers believes Liverpool are going to be “very, very hard to stop” after watching them demolish his Leicester team 4-0 and extend their lead at the top to 13 points. Roberto Firmino scored in the first half before Liverpool struck in nine second-half minutes, James Milner scoring a penalty before Firmino struck again and Trent Alexander-Arnold completed an emphatic win. It was a demonstration of excellence that could deflate Liverpool’s other pursuers. But, despite Rodgers’ assertion, Jürgen Klopp said no one at his club is talking about the title. “We don’t feel it, we don’t think about it, we didn’t mention it once before the game because it’s just not interesting,” he said. “We know the story – that never before in the history of British football has a team had a bigger lead and lost that lead. But that sounds, in my ear, negative. “So why should we think about something like that? We are just focused on the next games. “We have Wolves, Sheffield United, Everton, Tottenham and Manchester United in the next five games so it doesn’t sound like anything is decided. The number [of points] is absolutely not relevant.” Speaking about the club he previously managed, Rodgers said: “They’re a fantastic team and the confidence is high. They have enough quality and experience to get the job done, though there is still a lot to do.” As for his own team, Rodgers said that this defeat, which came on the back of the loss at Manchester City, illustrated that his collection of players is not yet ready to vie with “the super clubs” over the course of a whole season. “The last two games have been great benchmarks for us,” he said. “Because of how well we’ve done we’ve been catapulted into this race of the title but you’ve seen the quality of opposition we’re against.” Klopp did not agree with the suggestion that this was Liverpool’s best performance of the campaign. “We played an exceptional game against Manchester City,” he said. “We played a super game against Arsenal. We’ve had a few good games this season.” “But this was exactly the performance we needed. A little bit less good and we would have had problems. But we had no real problems because the boys were 100% in the game.”