NRL club Canterbury have offered counselling to players and staff after the death of promising teenager Ziggy Vincent on Sunday. Vincent, who hailed from Griffith in north-west NSW, recently spent six weeks trialling for the club’s Under-20s side for next season. He was understood to be staying at the home of close friend CJ Mundine, the son of former NRL star Anthony who was recently signed by the Rabbitohs on a two-year deal, while in Sydney. “The Bulldogs would like to express their deepest sympathies to the family and friends of Ziggy Vincent who tragically passed away yesterday,” the Bulldogs said on Monday. “Although Ziggy was only around the club for six weeks as a triallist for our Jersey Flegg side, he had made a great impression on all those that had met him and had made some close friends in and around the club. His passing has come as a major shock to everyone at the club and we offer our condolences and deepest sympathies to his family and friends.” Anthony, who played for St George, Brisbane and St George Illawarra between 1993 and 2000, spoke emotionally about Vincent’s death on social media. “It’s a very sad day, very sad. I’m a bit emotional here. We lost a brother, young Ziggie Vincent,” Anthony said. “Took his life last night. It’s very hard to take for myself but I can’t imagine (what) his family and close friends, brothers and siblings (are going through).” Anthony urged those struggling with mental health issues to talk to others. “I let Zig know I was always there for him … but a lot of these brothers feel like they’re a burden. But they’re actually not,” he said. “They’re just shy and don’t want to bring their problems on anyone else. To anyone that has any problems with mental health or are looking to harm themselves or are not in a good place, please speak up to somebody you trust, someone that sheds a good light in your life. “That’s the most important thing. Even hit me up if you have to. Hearing this news really affected me. I haven’t left bed all day.” In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or emailjo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. Other international helplines can be found atwww.befrienders.org.