As a child, I was scared of my mum. She used to hit me. Eventually, I left my family home. I moved in with a family friend. I lived with her for five years, but our relationship broke down when I fell out with her partner. The day she threw me out was dramatic. I felt lost. I didn’t know what to do. My then boyfriend had a moving van owned by someone in his family, so I spent the night sleeping in it. That night, I lay awake, crying in disbelief at what my life had become. I remember thinking: is this really happening to me? I was placed in a really rough hostel with drug dealers and criminals. I didn’t feel safe. I was scared every day that something bad was going to happen. I remember coming home one evening and seeing dark figures in hoods in the middle of the hallway. It was me, a little frightened black girl, and these figures. I have never opened my door so quickly in my entire life. After that, I spent most of my time sleeping on friends’ sofas and slept at the hostel only when I had absolutely no other choice. A lot of the people in that hostel were demoralised; I was lucky that I had it instilled in me from an early age to avoid trouble. I also saw a way out. I was always creative and ambitious and was adamant that I wouldn’t get stuck in this situation. My time at the hostel came to an end when I got a place with Centrepoint, a charity that helps homeless young people. They found me a a self-contained supported flat and I took the cooking and budgeting classes they offered. I told my key worker at Centrepoint that I would have my own place within a year and that is what happened. I have had my flat for nine years and channelled my creativity into a career involving photography, film and fashion. If you are worried about becoming homeless, contact the housing department of your local authority to fill in a homeless application. You can use the gov.uk website to find your local council For more stories of life after homelessness, read Guardian Cities’ the empty doorway series Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram to join the discussion, catch up on our best stories or sign up for our weekly newsletter