Although it aired in the US in March, and a trailer for its second season is already online, the first season of Shrill (BBC Three) has only just made its way to the UK. This sneakily affecting comedy is a loose adaptation of Lindy West’s memoir, Shrill: Notes from a Loud Woman; audiences familiar with her journalism, particularly her astonishing segment for the podcast This American Life about meeting her online troll, will find pleasure in spotting the bits borrowed from real life. But there is much to enjoy everywhere, in ways that slowly reveal themselves. This is a show worth investing in, rather than an instant fix. Shrill is a comedy in the way that The Bisexual is a comedy, or Barry is a comedy, or Russian Doll is a comedy: you will end up laughing, but not very much, and not all that often, although that is not necessarily to its detriment. Aidy Bryant stars as Annie, a journalist on the up in Portland, Oregon, who picks unhappily at a plastic container filled with “thin menu” slabs of things that are supposed to be pancakes, but look more like courtroom sketches of them. When she goes for coffee, a stranger – a fitness instructor – grabs her and reels off a best-of list of patronising comments: “Your wrists are tiny. You actually have a really small frame,” followed by a suckerpunch: “You could be so pretty.” Annie’s dismissive sort-of boyfriend, Ryan, is the kind of man whose idea of romance involves a text that reads: “Fuck?” without even the good manners to add a kiss at the end. Annie’s life, which in many ways is fine, begins to slowly, elegantly unravel, not because she is losing it, but because she is finding new purpose. It may sound self-helpy, yet it is almost entirely unsentimental. Ryan is a masterly comedy creation, a crude, overgrown man-baby who communicates in gifs and sneaks Annie out the back door. When she gets pregnant, she talks it over with her best friend and flatmate, Fran (a brilliantly droll Lolly Adefope), who tells her to get an abortion “before it becomes illegal or something”. What follows is a conversation about self-esteem that is excruciatingly raw. Annie says she didn’t necessarily think she would ever be in this position: “Maybe if I was just sweet enough, and nice enough, and easygoing enough with any guy, then that would be enough for someone.” Really, it is this, not the pancakes, that is the start of the story. It is the fork in the road. Annie decides no longer to be sweet or nice or easygoing. That is what Shrill is all about. At her magazine, the Weekly Thorn, Annie stops genuflecting to her domineering, over-the-top editor, Gabe (John Cameron Mitchell, continuing his acting comeback after a stint on The Good Fight), and starts publishing the stories she wants to write. She reports on the lives of the women who work in a strip club, and a plus-size pool party, which turns into a moment of personal liberation, to a soundtrack of Ariana Grande’s One Last Time. “I’m honestly thinking about buying a crop top,” she declares as she dives into the pool, unselfconscious and happy. It sounds cheesy, if not downright whimsical, but Shrill manages not to be either. While the pool party episode is the best of the season, and its moment of triumph is earned, the overall story has complex undertones. Annie’s journey from pliable and meek to assertive and strident has its issues, not least because, in no longer being “nice”, she becomes selfish and self-involved at times. This makes her victories nuanced, rather than empowered air-punches. She treats her friends as window-dressing to her own issues. Her articles may be hits, but if I insisted on publishing my pieces without the involvement of an editor, I would get the sack. Her father, who has cancer, and her mother, who is keeping it all together, eventually lose patience with her: “You are acting like a little brat.” Bryant, a long-time Saturday Night Live cast member, makes even Annie’s brattiest moments watchable, and her performance carries the show. Occasionally, the story feels small, and too familiar to anyone who has watched these sorts of not-comedy comedies before. Some of the minor characters are less well drawn than Annie, Ryan and Fran. I would watch Mitchell read the weather, but Gabe veers into cartoon villainy (“The last thing we need is everyone feeling comfortable in their own skin. That would be the 70s”). Despite its flaws, though, Shrill drew me in. It is darker than it first seems, and far more subtle. At only six episodes, it is short, sweet and pleasingly sour.