In 1620 the Mayflower sailed from Plymouth for the New World with 102 pilgrims. Four centuries on, a staggering 30 million Americans can trace their ancestry to them. During 2020, Mayflower 400 will be a year-long arts festival commemorating the pilgrims’ historic journey, their arrival and impact on Native Americans. The programme is centred on Plymouth, but 12 other partner towns and villages, including in the US and the Netherlands, will also take part – such as Scrooby, Nottinghamshire, birthplace of pilgrim elder William Brewster, and Harwich, home to the ship’s captain. So off I went on Wednesday to the historic port city for the launch of the celebrations, which began with a terrific display of 30 light commissions that ends this evening. The main programme next year will include the opening of the Box, combining the refurbished City Museum with a new contemporary art gallery and an exhibition, Wampum, acknowledging the cultural connection to the Wampanoag, the original inhabitants of modern-day Massachusetts. Native Americans will be a central theme of Mayflower 400, including This Land at the Theatre Royal, and Settlement, an installation in Plymouth’s Central Park on the effects of colonialism. In July, hip-hop organisation Street Factory will perform Roots Up!, their response to the Mayflower. But there will also be The 400, a comedy on the “special relationship” between Britain and the States. Which might not be so funny when chlorinated chickens are dumped here after Brexit… Confession. I have never seen The Mousetrap. The Agatha Christie play last week celebrated 67 years of continuous running in the West End - first at the Ambassadors then, since 1974, the St Martin’s. To commemorate its birthday, a marketing campaign of stylish posters is running on tube station platforms. I had assumed the bulk of audiences would be midwestern Americans for whom The Mousetrap is a force-fed part of their UK tour. But no. While one-third of its audience is from overseas, the rest are Brits. The 541-seat theatre is pretty full most nights, and is booking until November next year. Great that St Martin’s is occupied, but it is also “bed-blocking” other plays hoping to come to the West End. The Doctor, one of the very best of this year, announced its transfer from the Almeida in September, but lack of a free theatre means it cannot arrive at the Duke of York’s until April. Similarly, The Watsons, adapted from Jane Austen’s unfinished novel, is unable to get into the Harold Pinter until May following its sell-out run at the Menier. As a kid, the Little Tim books were a real favourite of mine. Next Wednesday, the original and very evocative artwork and hand-written words from Edward Ardizzone of his Tim to the Rescue, the third in the series, are being auctioned at Bonhams. No snip at between £30,000 and £50,000, but this gem has been in the Ardizzone family for 70 years. Stephen Fry was a devotee too, telling Bonhams Magazine: “They promised a true escape from… cutesy children’s worlds or the lemonade-and-bicycles world of Enid Blyton.”