From youthful fame to tabloid romances to a tragic, untimely death, INXS singer Michael Hutchence’s life seemingly has all the hallmarks of that of a destructive rock star. Yet, as this lovingly crafted and thorough feature documentary shows, Hutchence was anything but stereotypical, from his poetic sensibilities to his role as a father to his daughter with Paula Yates. Featuring interviews with the Hutchence family as well as celebs such as Kylie Minogue, this is a touching tribute. Ammar Kalia Let the hose see the rubber gloves: Paddy McGuinness celebrates the period between Christmas and New Year with a special edition of the dating show. Thirty women from the emergency services will tonight choose from John the firefighter, Iman the doctor and Johnny, a paramedic. Hannah Verdier Special edition of the inoffensive Rochelle and Marvin Humes-hosted music quiz that’s essentially a very long game of “beat the intro”. Susan Calman, John Barnes and Chris Kamara are among those with their fingers glued to buzzers for the chance to win £10,000 for charity. Hannah J Davies The last in this insightful series of lectures from mathematician Dr Hannah Fry on the power of numbers and their governing roles in our lives. Here, Fry looks at how maths can be used to perpetuate secrets and lies, from programming deep-fake videos to online anonymity. AK With a snowy backdrop of rural Norway, this crime drama follows widowed detective William Wisting as he investigates the murder of an American, which triggers an international manhunt. Meanwhile, his journalist daughter Line is becoming entangled with the case. A slow-burn winter thriller. AK The NHS winter crisis hits Holby City Hospital and the chaos is having an impact on Rash (who rejects Ethan’s attempts to make amends) and clinical lead, Dylan. So, it’s a bad moment for a management inspection. This is all leading up to a big character comeback in the new year, but can you guess who? Ellen E Jones Guardians of the Galaxy Vol 2, 8.30pm, ITV Marvel’s jolliest bunch of superheroes return for another cosmos-spanning adventure set to a 70s pop-rock soundtrack. Chris Pratt’s likable, leather-jacketed Quill and his colourful gang of renegades are once again embroiled in crazy space stuff, while Quill learns about his troubled past. Paul Howlett International Cricket: South Africa v England 7.30am, Sky Sports Cricket. The third day of the first Test. Premier League Football: Brighton v Bournemouth 12noon, Sky Sports Main Event. From the Amex Stadium. Premiership Rugby Union: Northampton Saints v Gloucester 1.30pm, BT Sport 2. From Franklin’s Gardens