Judging by the column inches being devoted to it, you might suppose that the future of the Labour party is the most important political question in Britain today. Maybe that is understandable if you are Labour member. After all, it is only human, when you have had a traumatic setback, to take refuge in the familiar. Yet the most important and interesting story in British politics today is the future of the Conservative party. The main reason for this is simple. The Tories won the 2019 election. Labour lost it. Victors have power. They set the terms. They have to make choices. They are more interesting as a result. Journalists should instinctively gravitate towards the biggest story; to treat Labour rather than the Conservatives as the biggest story in town is at best perverse and at worst a form of denial. The Tories' newly won voters could prove to be on permanent loan, and any new Labour leader will have their work cut out to win them back Today’s Queen’s speech will start to fill in some of the detail. Nevertheless, the Tories also matter because last week’s victory crowns a historic recovery. No book on the Tories ever fails to point out that the party has always been a great adapter to change. Given that the Tories were out for the count in 1997 and 2001, and had only governed with a majority for two years this decade, last week’s result is in some ways the most emphatic confirmation of that legendary capacity to adapt since Benjamin Disraeli swept the Liberals aside in 1874. The Tories have now formed four governments in a row. Remarkably, they have increased their share of the vote for the last six elections. They have 200 more MPs today than in 1997. Those who sit for seats in the north and Midlands have got most of the attention, and rightly so. But the tightening Tory grip in parts of the south that were once marginal also matters. The Tory advance across Wales is dramatic. And they remain a player in Scotland, something Labour can barely claim. They are UK-wide again. And they now have a new generation of MPs who can shape their party. While Labour agonises about how to reassemble a coalition of classes and interests for the future, it is the Tories’ success in creating such a coalition in the here-and-now that shows how far the opposition will have to go. Few dispute that the emergence of the working-class Tory vote in the north and Midlands last week was catalysed by Brexit. But both the research and the anecdotal evidence show that Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership and Labour’s spending plans were also crucial in helping those voters across the line into the Tory camp. The fullest significance of these facts lies in what it says about the reasoning of voters who made that journey. It is common on the left simply to caricature the Tory party and its voters as either bigoted or deluded. Doing this absolves them from ever having to think carefully about what the Tories stand for, or why people vote for them. After a result like last week’s it might be wiser to experiment for a while by treating the Tory party as a rational organisation, and its voters as people making reasoned decisions. Look carefully, for example, at Lord Ashcroft’s 13 December poll on how the country voted and why. According to Ashcroft, Tory voters fell way behind Labour, Liberal Democrat, SNP or Green voters in the importance they attached to trusting the motives of the party they voted for. Only 29% of Tory voters said they voted the way they did because they trusted Tory motives more than those of the other parties, compared with 65% of Labour voters who prioritised the fact that they trusted Labour’s motives. Tory voters, on the other hand, were much stronger than Labour voters on prioritising three other issues: that the party leader would make a better prime minister (58%), that the party would run the economy better (64%), and that the party would get their preferred Brexit outcome (68%). These issues were far lower priorities for Labour voters, only 19% of whom voted Labour because they thought it would deliver their preferred Brexit outcome. The figures suggest that the switchers voted with their heads rather than their hearts, in which case Labour might struggle to persuade them to “come home” next time. It may also follow that it is wrong to place too much weight on the idea that those who swung from Labour to Conservative have merely “lent” their votes to Boris Johnson. Brexit is certainly a top priority for these voters, and Johnson’s early reaction to his victory included a recognition that these votes were conditional. But these swing voters do not seem to be Brexit obsessives to the exclusion of all other issues. They also have some confidence in Johnson himself (at least in comparison to Corbyn) and they think the Tories would run the economy better. If that is correct, then these newly won votes could prove to be on permanent loan, and any new Labour leader will have their work cut out to win them back. The Johnson government is focused on these voters. The Queen’s speech and the budget will be aimed at retaining them. Tony Blair predicted yesterday that, after Brexit, Johnson will try to define the Tories on the centre ground. Blair is probably right. Labour, meanwhile, will first have to regain the right to be heard and then have to set out its own measures to regain their trust. In this, precisely because they are the government, all the cards are in the Tories’ hand. How will those cards be played? It is true that Johnson has put himself at the head of one of the most rightwing cabinets in modern Conservative party history. It is also true that Brexit – especially a no-deal Brexit in a year’s time – may make it tougher for the government to splash the cash as it has talked of doing. NHS investment – symbolised by the expected spending commitment in the Queen’s speech – will be the domestic priority. Infrastructure investment in post-industrial towns will in any event come more slowly, even if there is the money. Nevertheless, if one thing is true about Johnson it is that he will do anything to retain power. He will do many things that his opponents will hate, and be justified in hating, in the coming years. But he is also fully capable of doing things that would surprise them. Don’t write him off. It would be premature, less than one week into Johnson’s unfettered premiership, to assume everything he does can be dismissed as merely rightwing. A certain humility is in order in the wake of 12 December. One-nation Toryism may be one of the most hackneyed terms in British politics, but Johnson’s ability to deliver on it will set the agenda for Britain in the 2020s, whether Labour is capable of countering it or not. • Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnist