In late 1860 there was a bit of a squabble in the English clergy provoked by the Bishop of Rochester’s condemnation of some of the unbecoming habits that some clergymen had unfortunately taken up. He took particular umbrage at those guilty of “too great developments of beard and whisker”, and added the desire to “blot out the names of [cricket clubs] as fit for the occupation of clergymen who desire to influence those with whom they mixed”. For a clergyman, playing cricket and “adopting the modern excesses in cultivating the hair”, he said, “showed that they wished to stand on an equality with the fashionable and fast young men of the present day”, which was of course not something that they should have been aiming for. Though by then he was well into his retirement, this attitude goes some way to explaining why Nicholas Wanostrocht, a former schoolmaster, felt compelled to play the game under the pseudonym Felix. Though the difficulties presented by the ownership of a name such as Wanostrocht probably contributed. Last week, under the flimsy pretext of commemorating the anniversary of the end of cricket’s distinction between the amateur and the professional, we crowbarred into The Spin a profile of the great Kent amateur Alfred Mynn. It seemed remiss to put the toolkit away before also commemorating Mynn’s teammate and occasional adversary Felix – cricketer, comedian, teacher, artist, musician and inventor. The cricket and the comedy often came together, Felix showing an uncanny ability to “keep the field in good humour by his attitudinising”, to quote one report – though one obituary criticised him for being “somewhat inclined to frivolity in the field”. “What a temper Mr Felix had! And what a laugh too,” wrote another great old teammate, Fuller Pilch, before telling the story of how he would horribly wind up William Lillywhite, a bowler so successful he earned the nickname ‘The Nonpareil’. “I never was, nor did I ever pretend to be, a great player,” Felix wrote. “I could play perhaps a little better than moderately well, but by no means well enough to be called a proficient.” Others would disagree. As Pilch said: “Mr Felix on his own day was my man. When he got to work and the ground and light suited him, it was a wonderful sight to see him bat. He knew the whole science of the game, and he had a hand and eye such as no one e’er beat him at.” Anyway, cricket was only a small fraction of what made Felix interesting. His mother died at 43, having had 21 children. Nicholas was one of only seven who reached adulthood, and as the oldest male heir took over the school his family ran, Alfred House, when he was 19. Both his parents died in quick succession. He was an excellent musician: according to legend he once attended a ball at a country house in Hampshire and, when the band went to supper, proved himself able to play with distinction every one of their instruments. He favoured the violin, but he also recalled of Mynn that “many a time I have drawn a tear from his beautiful blue eyes when he has requested me to play him some favourite air on my flute”. His drawings of fellow players were excellent, and he harboured a desire “to take my rank with some of the leading portrait painters of the day” which was scuppered only when “the introduction of photography put an end to any hopes of success”. He once painted a portrait of an ox so accurate a butcher who had seen it once at market was able to recognise the individual animal. He was also a serial innovator. When he wanted alternative headgear to the then fashionable but in practice ludicrous top hat, he designed his very own cap. Though he was not the first player to wear pads, he came up with the idea of sewing linen sheaths into the inside of his trouser legs so as to make them invisible. “Long slips of Indian rubber, half an inch thick, can be inserted therein, and taken out as they go or come from the wash,” he enthused. He created the first protective gloves and decided not to patent them (so someone else did), and then there was his bowling machine, the Catapulta. The user placed a ball at the top of the machine, and an arm would swing up and thump it downfield, making contact much like a cue on a snooker ball. It could be set to deliver the ball “so fast that it would split your bat in two, or so slow it would scarcely reach the wicket”, and was so versatile one early report said the machine was “by means of a screw made to imitate the fast bowling of Sam Redgate”. Harrow school bought one to train their young players, as did Surrey. Some were sent over to India. Felix used his Catapulta to hone his defensive game, which at the start of his career had been a noted weakness but towards the end truly set him apart. “He is,” Arthur Haygarth wrote, “what is called a late player, that is to say, he did not begin to distinguish himself much in the great matches till he was about 30 years of age, he then however ran a most brilliant career”. He demonstrated his improved technique in June 1846, when he played a single-wicket match against Mynn, attracting “the most brilliant assemblage of spectators ever gathered” to Lord’s. Mynn scored five runs in his one innings; Felix was dismissed without scoring in his first, but in his second he settled in for the long haul, facing 247 deliveries and scoring only three. It was, the Sporting Life later wrote, “one of the most brilliant specimens of batting ever remembered”. His first-class career ended in 1853, and four years later he suffered a stroke that severely limited his movement for the last 19 years of his life – if not his ability to write and paint. “Fortunately for me, I always possessed something of the nature of that soubriquet,” he wrote of his pseudonym, though he reverted to Wanostrocht in retirement. “Buoyant in spirit, full of careless ‘hope for the best’, I never would allow any calamity to weigh me down. Many a strong-minded man would have shrivelled into nothing if he had had to bear but half the anxieties which I could here unfold, but to which it would be tedious now to refer. Like an Indian rubber ball, I was no sooner down than the bounding spirit of ‘hoping for the best’ buoyed me up again.” • This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.