If Marcus Rashford performs, Manchester United often follow suit. So it was that he transformed this quarter-final, turning it on in the second half to give Ole Gunnar Solskjær the win, which is the best way to celebrate his first anniversary of taking charge on Thursday. They were then drawn to play Manchester City, who they beat at the Etihad on 7 December, in the semi-final. Despite this Solskjær believes a new gameplan will be required. “You won’t beat City twice in a row or three times with the same tactics so we’ll have to do something better. Pep will have his team fired up,” he said. Rashford scored the opener and was a key factor in the other two strikes in a 10-minute burst that was precisely what was required against a Colchester who had been durable. It took the striker to a career-best 14 goals for the club in one season, though Solskjær held back from describing him as world class. “What is world class?” the Norwegian asked. “Marcus is developing and improving and getting better and better, we’ll get a world-class player [Paul Pogba] back very soon – we missed him, of course.” Solskjær proved he meant business by including Harry Maguire, Anthony Martial and Rashford. “A fully loaded team,” the Colchester manager, John McGreal, said. Colchester, who had brought 5,271 fans, ensured everyone was behind the ball as they settled in for a long siege. United enjoyed virtually all the possession as would be expected against opponents standing ninth in League Two. Mason Greenwood had a shot blocked. Andreas Pereira pinged a 40-yard pass in behind to Greenwood who just failed to connect with the ball. Manchester City will need to beat rivals Manchester United over two legs if they are to defend the Carabao Cup trophy this season. City and United, who beat their neighbours in the Premier League on 7 December, were paired together in the semi-final draw. The other last-four clash is also a derby, with Leicester taking on midlands rivals Aston Villa. City have won the trophy in three of the last four seasons, with United not making the showpiece of this competition since 2017, when they left it late to beat Southampton. Leicester have reached the semis for the first time in 19 years, when they went on to beat Tranmere in the final, while Villa were last at this stage in 2013, losing to Bradford. The first legs will be played in the week beginning 6 January, with the return fixtures taking place three weeks later. On drawing rivals City in the last four, United boss Ole Gunnar Solskjaer told Sky Sports: "We always want to win trophies and we want to win games. "We've got a nice little draw coming up so it'll be exciting times coming up. I don't think anything is written in the stars. We just work hard and you take what you get and you do the best out of it." The latter was indicative of United’s problem: the final pass was not being delivered precisely enough. When Pereira did slide an inch-perfect pass to Rashford the forward had a clear run at Dean Gerken but his control was slipshod and Colchester escaped. Next Rashford – again – failed with his first touch right in front of the goalkeeper and the ball bounced to safety. All of this caused merriment to the travelling contingent who cheered every United misstep in a contest of attack-v-defence compressed around the Colchester area. Solskjær’s team struggle against sides who do not come at them, so having to try to break down visitors whose playbook was similar could be counted a useful exercise. The problem, though, was that by half-time United had not done so which meant the chance of a surprise scoring breakaway for Colchester could not be ignored. The manager may have reminded his players of this at the break while also encouraging more composure. Greenwood came close to stabbing home from close range after Colchester were breached in behind. The sense was that one goal could lead to a few – and this would prove the case. Yet when Ryan Jackson broke down his right-back berth and shot, Sergio Romero had to save. Now, though, United struck. The keeper quickly found Nemanja Matic and he dinked a 30-yard ball into Rashford down the left. From here the 22-year-old turned on the after-burners, cut inside, left a panicking defence trailing and smashed past Gerken. United’s second followed soon after. This time Greenwood was the supplier as he aimed for Rashford at the far post only for the unfortunate Jackson to steer home from near in. Rashford’s last act, before he was replaced by Jesse Lingard, was to set up Martial to make it 3-0, with Brandon Williams coming on for Luke Shaw. The goal flurry meant United could coast through the remainder of the game and enjoy a night of satisfaction.