Prep 25 minMakes 1 1 big handful walnuts1 tsp butter or light olive oilSalt and black pepper1 tsp honey2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil5 brussels sprout tops or 10 brussels sprouts, choppedLeftover cheese, cut into chunks (stilton, brie or cheddar would work well)Juice of ½ lemon3-4cm block parmesan, gratedTwo slices good-quality bread Put the walnuts, butter or oil and a pinch of salt in a frying pan over a low heat. Once the butter has started to melt, shake the pan to coat the walnuts. Cook on a low heat until the nuts start to roast: you can also do this in an oven heated to 150C (130C fan)/gas 2 for about 12 minutes. Add the honey and mix, cooking for another two minutes, until golden brown. Put a skillet pan over a medium heat and, once almost smoking, pour in the extra-virgin olive oil, followed by the greens, and season: they will take about two minutes to char. Remove from the heat, stir through the cheese, squeeze over the lemon juice and sprinkle with the grated parmesan. Wedge the mix, along with some of the candied walnuts, between two pieces of bread, and serve. Prep 20 minMakes 1 1 tsp butter or light olive oilSalt and pepperThinly sliced turkey (or other leftover meat)Two slices good-quality bread1 bunch watercress, washed, dried For the aïoli2 tbsp quince jam or membrillo1 garlic clove, peeled and crushed with a pinch of saltJuice of ½ lemon 100ml olive oil For the dressing2 tbsp white-wine vinegar (I like Forum cabernet sauvignon vinegar)5 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil Start by making the aïoli. Put the quince jam, garlic and lemon juice in a food processor (or use a stick blender or stand mixer with the whisk attachment) and blend. Slowly pour in 100ml olive oil so it emulsifies: it will look like a coloured mayonnaise. Taste, season and set aside. Put a pan on a medium heat and add just enough butter or oil to cover the base. Season the meat, then fry for about a minute on each side, until browned. Remove the meat, then fry the bread in the remaining juices and fat for about 30 seconds on each side. Wash the watercress, spin or drain and leave to dry on a tea towel. Make the dressing: vigorously mix the vinegar and extra-virgin olive oil, then season (add the sugar to taste, if it needs it). Dress the watercress to taste, making sure you give the dressing a good stir beforehand. To assemble the sandwich, pile the meat on to one slice of bread, dollop on the aïoli and finish with the dressed watercress salad. Add any bits of crackling or crisp skin you have knocking around. If you have chestnuts, cook, peel and roughly chop them, then fry in a pan over a medium heat with a knob of butter until crisp. They add a lovely crunch to this sandwich. You can use readymade harissa if you don’t fancy making your own, or any hot sauce you have around. Prep 25 minMakes 1 1 tbsp honey (or brown sugar)Extra-virgin olive oil1 tsp fennel seeds, lightly crushed5 carrots, cooked or raw, halved lengthways and cut horizontally5 beetroot, cooked or raw, peeled if raw, and quarteredSalt and pepper1 big handful skinless hazelnuts, bashed1 pinch chilli flakes3 pinches caster sugar2 slices good-quality bread For the harissa 3 pinches caraway seeds3 pinches cumin seeds10 red chillies, stalks removed1 roasted red pepper from a jar1 garlic clove, peeled and crushed1 pinch sweet paprika1 tsp red-wine vinegar Heat the oven to 190C (170C fan)/gas 5. Mix the honey, three tablespoons of oil and the fennel seeds in a bowl. Add the carrots and beetroot and some salt and pepper, and mix again. Tip out on to a large roasting tray and put in the oven for 10 minutes if the veg are cooked, and for 40 minutes if raw. In a separate bowl, mix the hazelnuts with a teaspoon of oil, the chilli flakes and caster sugar, and season with salt. Transfer to a small roasting tray just large enough for the hazelnuts to sit in one layer, and roast for 10 minutes, until golden. Set aside to cool. To make the harissa, put the caraway and cumin in a dry frying pan over a low heat, and toast for three minutes, until crackling and golden. Remove from the pan and crush in a mortar, using the edge of a knife or a spice grinder. Put the chillies, red pepper, garlic, paprika and ground spices in a blender, and blend smooth. Stir in the vinegar and a teaspoon of extra-virgin olive oil. Take the veg out of the oven and, when cool enough to handle, mix with a dollop of harissa and the nuts, and wedge between two pieces of bread. You can add some dressed watercress, if you want a hit of greens. Prep 30 minMakes 1 4 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil100g leftover cooked sausage, chopped into rough chunks, or raw sausagemeat, skin removed and torn into chunks 6 fennel seeds, crushed1 splash white wine1 squeeze lemon juice1 tbsp creme fraiche or leftover blue cheeseSalt and pepper1 garlic clove, peeled and thinly sliced¼ red chilli, deseeded and thinly sliced, or a pinch dried chilli flakes1 head leftover cooked greens (chard, cabbage, sprouts, for example), sliced1 handful grated parmesan (optional)2 slices good-quality bread Put a frying pan on a medium heat and, after about a minute, add a tablespoon of oil if you’re using cooked sausages. Add the sausage chunks, turn the heat down to low and brown on all sides. Turn up the heat, add the fennel seeds and wine, and swirl the pan so the fat emulsifies. Add a squeeze of lemon juice, the creme fraiche or any leftover blue cheese. Season with pepper and leave on a very low heat, or turn off. Gently heat the remaining oil in a frying pan, and add the garlic and chilli. When they start to sizzle, add the greens, and cook on a medium-low heat for five to eight minutes, until soft. Check the seasoning and add a handful of grated parmesan, if you like. Toast both slices of bread on one side in a dry pan over a medium heat. Remove from the pan and dollop the wet sausage mix on one of the toasted sides, followed by the braised greens. Top with the other slice of bread, toasted side down. • Recipes by Rebecca Oliver, co-founder of The Dusty Knuckle Bakery, London E8