Duncan Ferguson took a bath at 2.30am on Friday to compose himself for his first game as Everton temporary manager. If he dared to dream of the perfect day as he lay there it would have been like this. A thumping header to start with, two more goals from an Everton No 9 and standing in front of a delirious Gwladys Street after the final whistle punching the air in celebration. He has some script writer. Chelsea were defeated by emotion, fight and character on Ferguson’s big day. Frank Lampard’s side played well and will struggle to comprehend the margin of defeat, but they were up against a formidable obstacle in the shape of an Everton side playing for survival, for their reputations and for a club favourite standing, shaking and kicking every ball in his technical area. Ferguson was greeted by a rousing reception from the Everton faithful and the dream start from his players. Five minutes had elapsed when Richarlison gave the home side the lead and the shot of confidence they desperately needed after three consecutive defeats. The first goal of the former Everton centre-forward’s temporary reign had to be header. Richarlison started like a man possessed, not one dwelling on the departure of the manager who signed him twice and helped make him a Brazil international. He released Djibril Sidibé into space on the right and immediately set off into the heart of the Chelsea penalty area in anticipation of a first-time cross. The Frenchman delivered to perfection, sweeping his delivery into the six yard box and away from Kepa Arrizabalaga, and Richarlison rose above the defence to score with a powerful header. Ferguson was swept up in the perfect opening and sprinted halfway down the touchline in celebration, returning to his technical area with several fist-pumps to the crowd and the directors’ box. The passionate Scot lived every moment of the game on the sideline. The brave fourth official, Darren England, eventually reminded him to remain inside the technical area. There was far more commitment and passion from the Everton players, too. There was nothing pretty about the performance, with Jordan Pickford clearly under instruction to play it long at every opportunity and the outfield players fighting for every second ball in the 4-4-2 formation. They could so easily have had the luxury of a second goal when Theo Walcott drilled an inviting cross behind the defence where Richarlison just failed to connect at the far post. Walcott also released Dominic Calvert-Lewin in behind the visiting rearguard but his shot was too close to Arrizabalaga, who pushed clear. Gradually, Chelsea’s quality began to tell as their intelligent distribution and movement sapped the energy out of Everton’s high-octane opening. Lampard must have been bewildered at the half-time deficit but it was also a reflection of the hosts’ resolve that Pickford did not have a genuine save to make before the break. Defenders threw themselves in the way of everything, so, too, the impressive Morgan Schneiderlin, although Michael Keane almost gifted an equaliser to Tammy Abraham when he turned a routine clearance into the path of the Chelsea striker. Abraham and Willian over-elaborated, however, and the chance was squandered. Christian Pulisic and Mason Mount worked their way through on the left frequently but Abraham and Willian failed to capitalise on dangerous balls across the face of goal. Abraham did connect with a Willian cross from the opposite flank but his deft touch sailed wide of the far post. Chelsea’s approach play was a delight, the ball would just not fall for them inside the penalty area, and they were two down when Everton made another stirring start to the second half. Calvert-Lewin prospered from a mistake and a slice of misfortune by Kurt Zouma, the defender who spent last season on loan at Everton and who Marco Silva desperately wanted to re-sign in the summer. Zouma miscued a clearance on the edge of his area, allowing Calvert-Lewin to beat Andreas Christensen in an aerial challenge. The striker’s header bounced off Zouma and back into his path in front of goal. Arrizabalaga was beaten by a fine finish into the bottom corner and Goodison erupted. Ferguson’s celebration on this occasion involved picking up the nearest ballboy and swinging him around in circles. Chelsea’s response was immediate. Once again they weaved their way down the left with César Azpilicueta. Lucas Digne managed to clear the cross with a sliding challenge but it was returned emphatically by Mateo Kovacic who drilled an outstanding first time shot into Pickford’s bottom corner from distance. The visitors laid siege to the Everton goal in pursuit of an equaliser. Pickford tipped over from Azpilicueta, several defenders took heavy blows but battled on until, in Digne’s case, they could run no more. Just as Goodison braced itself for another late blow, having suffered so many this season, Everton scrambled home a third. Kepa sprayed a poor clearance straight to Walcott, who enjoyed a fine game, and he worked the ball inside to Calvert-Lewin. He back-heeled to Tom Davies but the chance seemed to have gone when the substitute took an extra touch. It fell to Calvert-Lewin, however, and he poked the ball under Kepa from close range. Ferguson set off down the touchline again, swinging ballboys in the air as he went. His perfect day.