Philip Pullman asks what we must do to rekindle kindness, empathy and cooperation (Drip by drip, this country has been poisoned, Journal, 11 December). The Brexit “debate” has taught me the importance of listening and trying to understand where other people are coming from. Not all Brexiters are racist, ignorant and too stupid to understand the issues, any more than all remainers are comfortable, self-righteous and unpatriotic. Sadly, there are few places where remainers and Brexiters actually meet and listen to each other. David Goodhart describes in The Road to Somewhere two tribes with different values: the anywhere people and the somewhere people. This analysis was not well received by most liberal or left-leaning people, many of whom were quicker to criticise the other than look in the mirror. I have been shocked by the anger and lack of empathy among many remainers towards Brexiters. In the complex system that underlies social-political life, hostility creates a loop that only makes the other side more virulent and intransigent, and vice versa. In partial answer to Philip Pullman’s question, we need to get off social media and make an effort to meet and understand those with whom we disagree. This is necessary (though not sufficient) to restore empathy.James PittYork • I was surprised Aditya Chakrabortty (The truth about Labour leavers: they feel locked out of politics, Journal, 12 December) was able to distance himself from the attitude towards leave voters summed up in the phrase: “Oh those idiots who don’t know what they voted for”, because this sentiment has dripped from the pages of his (and my) newspaper for the last three and a half years. But it is not just ignorance of which Brexit voters are accused, it is something far more vicious. This was eloquently stated by Philip Pullman: “I’m coming more and more to believe there’s something in us that relishes wickedness and nourishes stupidity … that something was kept in check by other equally ancient human impulses: kindness, empathy, cooperation. But the balance has swung the other way – perhaps not by much; perhaps by 52% to 48%.”Derek MatthewsNewcastle-on-Clun, Shropshire • I reread Philip Pullman’s piece after the election results and it made me cry. He and I are the same generation and he puts into words my feelings exactly. We live in a democracy and so abide by the rules, but I will keep that article as a reminder that I’m not the only one who wishes we had a society that could care for everyone.Helen McCarthyEnfield, London • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition