Anonymous, thirtysomething, south-east England Oh dear, yours is an intimidating question. Well, if any of my recommendations are what you’d call obvious, maybe we can agree that they’re good, at least. You’ll have read every word of the holy trinity (Sarah Waters, Ali Smith and Jeanette Winterson), but what about Jackie Kay’s Trumpet? Crossing the Irish Sea, Sally Rooney’s Conversations With Friends? You’d probably enjoy Sara Collins’s genre-blending (historical/queer/crime) The Confessions of Frannie Langton – I lapped that one up. Angela Chadwick’s XX isn’t exactly literary, but it is a page-turningly plausible tale of the first two-ovum baby and the cultural ructions it causes. Getting very literary again, from Canada (where I live) I’d fervently recommend Ann-Marie MacDonald (Fall on Your Knees, The Way the Crow Flies, Adult Onset). Also, Helen Humphreys – any of her exquisitely crafted fiction, but I have a particular fondness for Afterimage (set on the Isle of Wight, about Julia Margaret Cameron) as well as Machine Without Horses (about a Scottish fly-tier), which somehow manages to analyse the process of writing historical fiction and be a historical novel at the same time. In the US, one of my favourites is Carol Anshaw (eg Lucky in the Corner). Claire Messud’s The Woman Upstairs might not technically be lesbian, but it’s the most memorable account of a woman’s obsession with another woman and her family that I’ve ever read. OK, Alison Bechdel’s Fun Home and Are You My Mother? are graphic memoirs (by which I mean told in words and pictures rather than rude), not fiction, but they’re uniquely brilliant. Since I keep slipping over the category boundaries of your question anyway, let me mention that Confessions of the Fox by Jordy Rosenberg is a novel about an 18th-century transman that offers thought-provoking meta-brilliance and wit in drawing on, as well as deviating from, lesbian literary tradition. Enjoy! Anonymous, 27, London You have my sympathies. It sounds as if your boyfriend may be suffering from Obsessive Compulsive Brexit Disorder, a distressingly common condition that our best minds are still struggling to fully comprehend. Therapy of a kind may be found from Heroic Failure: Brexit and the Politics of Pain. Fintan O’Toole casts a pitilessly acerbic and searingly witty outsider’s eye on our national ailment. Understanding of its pathology will be deepened by reading David Reynolds’s Island Stories in which he locates Brexit in the context of British history. One of his themes is that British – or, more precisely, English – ambivalence about the relationship with continental Europe goes a long way back, a millennium and more. Excellent though both these books are, I fear there is a danger that they will inflame rather than alleviate your boyfriend’s condition. An alternative course of treatment would be to immerse him in books that remind us that Brexit, Boris Johnson and Jeremy Corbyn are relatively minor blips in the affairs of the human species when considered in the broad sweep of history. I always find value in going back to Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies, Jared Diamond’s classic analysis of why some civilisations go right and some go wrong. Another favourite is Paul Kennedy’s The Rise and Fall of The Great Powers. Do not under any circumstances expose your boyfriend to For The Record by David Cameron. It will trigger an extreme allergic shock. Your boyfriend may simply be in need of some cheering up. As an antidote to the pervasive feeling that we are all going to hell in a handcart, I prescribe the late Hans Rosling’s Factfulness: Ten Reasons We’re Wrong About the World – and Why Things Are Better Than You Think. Laughter is often the best medicine. I suggest The Little Book of Brexit Bollocks in which Alistair Beaton and Tom Mitchelson have a lot of fun at the expense of the Brexiters and their many fabrications. It will make a good stocking filler. Please let us know whether your boyfriend responds positively to any of these suggested remedies so that we can help the many millions who are afflicted by OCBD. Catherine, full-time mother, 37, Chichester Starting with the youngest, your one-year-old would adore sharing the latest book from Patricia Hegarty, On Sleepy Hill. The illustrations are whimsical and the cute peek-through pages are perfect for little fingers to turn. Handa’s Noisy Night, by Eileen Browne, will have them giggling as they guess which animal is making a racket on a special African sleepover. Pull up a deerskin to the roaring fire and your nine-year-old can dig in to the wintry tale of She Wolf, a Viking adventure by Dan Smith set in the wilds of AD866 Northumbria. Totally different is Zanib Mian’s uplifting Tom Gates-style book, Planet Omar: Accidental Trouble Magnet, which is full of humour and heart. For your 11-year-old, the beautifully hopeful Where the River Runs Gold by Sita Brahmachari is an empowering adventure about climate change, set in a dystopian future where bees have disappeared and children are made to work on farms. As night falls, double-lock your doors before opening The Switching Hour by Damaris Young – a spine-tingling quest to rescue Amaya’s baby brother, Kaleb, from the dreaded monster, Badeko. Girl Boy Sea by Chris Vick is perfect for your 14-year-old, taking them on a sea voyage that transports them to a world of near death and the discovery of an unlikely friendship. Sticking with the oceans, they’d love Frances Hardinge’s latest, Deeplight. A story full of imagination, gods, myths and a twisty plot. Cordelia Tucker O’Sullivan, 27, policy and public affairs professional, London You’re right, nonfiction may be better, although I would point you in the direction of Diana Evans’s Ordinary People if you think your father might take to a great read about the middle-class black experience, brilliantly portraying a social and psychological drama played out in deceptively “ordinary” events. It’s beautiful and clever. However, if you think he might prefer nonfiction, then Lovers and Strangers by Clair Wills is terrific. It charts the experience of a whole range of immigrants who came to the UK following the second world war, not just people from the Caribbean but from Latvia, Malta, Italy, Cyprus and Ireland. It also explores how these communities lived with one another, the alliances and tensions, the romances and suspicions, with humour and insight. Some were prisoners of war, some were refugees, some were coming to the motherland where they had been promised jobs, security and a warm welcome. It’s very thoroughly done without being dry and academic and was shortlisted for the Orwell prize last year. My Name Is Why, the memoir of Lemn Sissay, is a bit leftfield and a challenging read if only because it’s terrible, unbelievable and utterly true. It is the story of his life as a black boy in the care system and his efforts to forge an identity, to feel whole and loved despite being confounded at every turn. Yes, race is a key factor in his treatment (he has recently been reunited with his Ethiopian family), but it’s also a story of dislocation and harsh treatment by the very people who should be looking after our most vulnerable children. The happy ending is Lemn himself, full of life and forgiveness, with the kind of wisdom that comes from a long hard look at the monster under the bed. Philippa Varcoe, 46, London Is your friend a fan of Christopher Logue’s versions of Homer? If so, he should already have a copy of Alice Oswald’s Memorial, about the war dead in the Iliad. And if he’s soaked up that then he might be one of the best readers of Oswald’s new book Nobody, which takes a Homeric bard to a rocky island in the Aegean and leaves him there to sing of a “water damaged” war. For another radical classical update, there’s Fiona Benson’s magnificent Vertigo & Ghost, which presents a startling vision of Zeus the rapist, or Richard Osmond’s Rock, Paper, Scissors, which takes Osmond’s own experience of the Borough Market attacks and transmogrifies it through juxtaposed ancient texts, from Beowulf and the Qur’an, to present a truly Logue-like vision of elemental, amoral violence. War as a bodily, earthly experience is one of the strongest themes of Logue: your friend might find something similar in Jay Bernard’s intensely moving Surge, which memorialises the fires at Grenfell and at New Cross with such power that the poems seem to lay the dead in front of us. For a Beckett fan, though, Deaf Republic by Ilya Kaminsky might appeal even more. This absorbing, tender, singular book is part drama, part sequence, powerfully and essentially international – Kaminsky is a Russian immigrant to the US – and always at the thrilling boundaries of language. If he wants more language being taken to bits, there is Alison Winch’s Darling, It’s Me, Rebecca Tamás’s Witch and Sophie Robinson’s Rabbit to enjoy, all of them witty, bizarre and frightening in the proper Beckettian manner. If it’s the Irish Beckett that your friend loves, though – the chattering, mordant voices of Happy Days – then he should enjoy Martina Evans’s terrifying tales of peace, Now We Can Talk Openly About Men. Gill Fitzgerald, 61, teacher, Herts For any six-year-old who has a great sense of humour and loves anything off the wall, The Treehouse Books series by Andy Griffiths is fabulous. It’s about two guys trying to write a book, oh... and their 13-storey tree house to which they add 13 more floors with every book and where you can find all sorts, from swimming pools to rollercoasters. I was a reluctant reader myself before stumbling upon Superfudge by Judy Blume, which is actually the third in the hilarious five-book Fudge series. I may have been a little older than your six-year-old, but I think it was the first book I read of my own volition that didn’t have many, if any, pictures. I devoured it. It’s about a character called Peter whose mum, much to his horror, is having a baby; he thinks his little brother Fudge is more than enough. The latest edition of the series features gorgeous cover art from Emily Gravett. Pip Jones’s Izzy Gizmo is a feisty, creative young girl who loves inventing things and carries her tool kit wherever she goes, so she should appeal to any inventive, determined young things. Sara Ogilvie’s exuberant pictures may attract any reluctant readers too. Following in the footsteps of her grandfather, Sophie Dahl’s children’s book debut is magical. Madame Badobedah is an intriguing new guest at the Mermaid hotel, where Mabel lives with her parents. Little does Mabel know but she and this suspicious newcomer – who Mabel decides must be a “supervillain” – will become great friends. Perfect for those who like a whimsical adventure, with beautiful pictures by Lauren O’Hara. Martin, sixtysomething runner, north-east England Many brilliant books have been published in the past half century or so about particular aspects of gay male history that your friend might appreciate – James Davidson’s The Greeks and Greek Love or John Boswell’s Same-Sex Unions in Premodern Europe would go down a storm with someone serious. Graham Robb’s Strangers, about gay life in the 19th century, is not only very well informed but seriously funny. One of the most enjoyable books on the subject this year was Paul Baker’s Fabulosa!, an excavation of the now pretty well lost gay language of Polari, richly evocative and entertaining. Oliver Soden’s new life of Michael Tippett is a terrific account of a gay man living his life more or less openly throughout the 20th century which your friend would enjoy, particularly if he’s musical, as they used to say. Or why not go directly to the original voices and give a beautiful copy of a gay classic? The Library of America’s handsome three-volume set of James Baldwin, for instance. Or go vintage – online secondhand stores will offer you a complete edition of all Ronald Firbank’s novels, for instance, and a first edition of EM Forster’s Maurice is very reasonably priced. As it’s Christmas, a bit of ribaldry doesn’t go amiss in the form of art books. I’m hoping for Michael Glover’s Thrust: A Spasmodic Pictorial History of the Codpiece in Art in my stocking, as it were. The art book I’ve had most success with over the years, if you can track it down, is Chad States’s Cruising, a collection of photographs of old-school cruising grounds in public parks. From most points of view, it’s a series of pictures of trees and bushes. To recipients of a certain age, this has proved a present supplying endless hilarity. There is nothing nicer than a gift that you feel only the giver and the receiver can be certain of understanding. Anonymous, 25, Houston, Texas I think your father, Anon Snr, and I would be fast friends, and may I be so bold as to say you have come to the right place with your fantasy-centric question. JRR and George RR are certainly the most celebrated double Rs in fantasy literature, but there are other initials that bear inspection. CS, for example. Many people mistakenly believe that the Narnia books belong in that most dreadful of categories: just for children. But The Lord of the Rings novels were once considered children’s books, too, so tell pater to throw aside his preconceptions and dive through that wardrobe and into a parallel universe of divine lions, snow queens and Turkish delight. Your dad will not regret the visit, and he will never fully return. A good book is a good book, no matter what age the reader or what label people stick on the spine. Another perfect example of both this and more timely timeless fantasies is Tomi Adeyemi’s Children of Blood and Bone, which follows heroine Zélie as she attempts to restore magic to the kingdom of Orïsha. If the first book is anything to go by, the series is destined to be a blockbuster. However, at the moment this is only one book, so if your dad loves a tower of tomes point him towards Raymond E Feist’s Magician series. He will thank you for the tip once he comes back from the Kingdom of the Isles. Feist’s Riftwar cycle is rightly one of the most venerated fantasy series ever committed to paper, and Pug’s odyssey from accomplice to (spoiler alert) magician is as twisty and epic a journey as ever undertaken by hobbit, orc or troll – hence the oft-quoted saying: “If it’s a Feist, don’t think twice.” Actually, I just made that up. It’s terrible, don’t tell Raymond. But corny or not, it’s true, and if your dad enjoys Magician, as I feel confident he will, then Feist has more than two dozen excellent works that should keep your father going for a few years. And if you’re not convinced by my case, just look at the man’s name: Raymond E Feist. Floating initial. Case closed. Anonymous, executive assistant, 48, London For sheer electric tension and doomed heroic medicine, the standout medical memoir of 2019, David Nott’s War Doctor, can’t be matched. Your father will be enthralled by Nott’s descriptions of being trapped under fire in a makeshift Sarajevo operating theatre, helplessly trying to clamp a child’s torn aorta with his own gloved hand. Every doctor I know secretly yearns to be as brave and admirable. Nott’s exploration of his addiction to danger zones – the psychological lure of performing life-saving surgery in some of the most deadly places on Earth – is every bit as compelling. Closer to home, but no less blood-soaked, is Sue Black’s superb All That Remains. You can’t help but warm to this retired professor of anatomy and forensic anthropology who chose “the many faces of death” as her medical speciality, yet is herself so vividly alive. Like Nott, Black travelled the world at times, sifting maggots, bullets and human body parts in war and disaster zones. Despite it all, she remains convinced that our essential humanity transcends the very worst of which our species is capable. New York-based oncologist Siddhartha Mukherjee’s magnificent The Emperor of All Maladies remains the most moving book from a clinician turned scientist I have ever read. Mukherjee makes cancer his central character. His history of humankind’s most feared disease turns malignancy into a cunning, shape-shifting, bullet-dodging adversary – part Voldemort, part Moriarty. The descriptions of molecular malfunction are the most exquisite you could ever imagine. For sex, searing honesty and scalpel-sharp prose, surgeon Gabriel Weston’s slim volume Direct Red is a mesmerising account of a woman navigating the locker-room machismo of the predominantly male surgical world. And lastly – for sheer bloody vivacity, though not written by a doctor – Lindsey Fitzharris’s The Butchering Art is a gloriously grisly, pulsatingly repulsive, deservedly award-winning biography of the Victorian pioneer of aseptic surgery Joseph Lister. Delicious – and utterly irresistible.Catnip for anyone, retired doctor or otherwise. Mark, 54, electrician, Manchester It’s a shame you think your wife’s profession is out as a subject, because there’s a terrific novel called Midwives by the American author Chris Bohjalian, who’s huge in the US but less well known than he deserves to be here. A midwife attends a home birth one freezing Vermont winter as an ice storm descends – she saves the baby’s life, but the mother dies and the midwife is prosecuted for involuntary manslaughter. OK, maybe a bad choice for your wife, but it’s a great read. If she enjoys romance, how about some classics that have romantic love as a driver but also offer a great deal more? Emma is a great start to discovering Jane Austen. Howards End by EM Forster begins with a romantic misadventure but develops into a touching and true story of the Schlegel sisters (and if she liked that, she’d also like A Room With a View). She would probably also love I Capture the Castle by Dodie Smith, which centres on the Mortmain sisters and their desire for love while living in genteel poverty in a crumbling 1930s castle. Its famous first line will give you a clue to the tone of the book: “I write this sitting in the kitchen sink.” If you’re looking for bittersweet and contemporary, you can’t go wrong with anything by Deborah Moggach or David Nicholls. Julie Gray, 61, freelance editor, Bloomington, Indiana, US Don’t go first to the farm. You’re a wild thing, even if you wear a suit, and even the most miserable battery chicken is only relatively unwild. Rewild yourself by swimming with Henry Williamson’s Tarka the Otter through the rivers of Devon, being hunted across fields by red-faced and red-coated squires (Wild Lone by BB, AKA Denys Watkins-Pitchford), dodging goose-shot on the Wash and riding the sky roads (BB’s Manka the Sky Gipsy), duelling with an obsessed trapper on Dartmoor (Brian Carter’s A Black Fox Running), and living in an ancient and highly political rabbit city in a Berkshire hill (Richard Adams’s Watership Down. Then start wondering whether it’s intellectually disreputable to think that you can understand anything about animal minds. It’s not: anthropomorphism is a good first guess. Darwin knew it. His intuitions about animal emotion are exhilaratingly confirmed and amplified in Carl Safina’s Beyond Words (focusing on elephants, wolves and orcas) and Frans de Waal’s Mama’s Last Hug (mainly primates, including man). Be prepared for tears, shame at your membership of a psychopathic species, and the loss of a lot of comforting presumptions. By now you’ll have a better idea of what sort of creature you are (it’s nature writing’s main job to give you that) and it’ll be time to look at what happens when humans meet non-humans. It can be mutually redemptive (Gavin Maxwell’s Ring of Bright Water) or malignant (Jonathan Safran Foer’s Eating Animals, and Philip Lymbery and Isabel Oakeshott’s Farmageddon). Most modern farm animals (most of which are birds) have wretched lives, deprived of the possibility of being themselves. It needn’t be so. The last couple of suggestions will have made you thoroughly depressed. Pick up anything by James Herriot, or by his North Yorkshire veterinary successors Peter Wright (The Yorkshire Vet) and Julian Norton (Horses, Heifers and Hairy Pigs) to cheer yourself up. Juliet Humphreys, 56, teacher, Uxbridge Top of my list would be the novels Olive Kitteridge by the American author Elizabeth Strout and the sequel, Olive, Again. I know that there is much pleasure to be found in encountering people like yourself in fiction (do please also consider giving them to yourself as a gift: Olive is a retired schoolteacher!), but there is also joy in getting to know people you are likely never to meet in real life, in a setting you are unlikely to enter, and still recognise the truthfulness of their experience. I love these books. I can’t tell you how delighted I am that you want to give short stories as gifts. Zadie Smith recently published her first short story collection, Grand Union. It is bursting with what I call “absolute Zadieness”: wit and intelligence, clever observations and startling insights, shot through with a sense of both fun and wonder. I would also recommend Manchester Happened by Jennifer Nansubuga Makumbi, from Uganda, and Better Never Than Late (what a wonderful title!) by Chika Unigwe from Nigeria. These two collections are part of my Christmas reading this year, so I am recommending them purely on the basis of the supreme gifts of their authors, who oth have an ability to make you look at familiar things in new ways. I was thrilled to learn recently that one of my favourite authors, the New Zealander Eleanor Catton, has written the screenplay for the film, out in February 2020, of my second favourite Jane Austen novel, Emma (my favourite is Persuasion). I absolutely love this witty, bucolic book. It is Austen’s second longest novel, after Mansfield Park: there are no villains, nothing much happens, and yet it is riveting and propulsive. I know you asked for modern novels but this is a classic that is modern in sensibility. Poor, deluded Emma. The way Austen narrates the story from her unreliable perspective is unparalleled. No wonder it is her most filmed title. Happy giving! Browse the books featured in Book Clinic at guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all books orders over £15. 