A wild boar squats centre stage and, much to this young audience’s delight, squeezes out three huge poos. Rapunzel holds her nose, sticks in a hand and pulls a golden acorn out of each. Annie Siddons’ version of the fairytale, first staged by Kneehigh in 2006, revels in this mix of mess and magic. Some unruly scenes sparkle, but it’s an overgrown garden of a show. When herbalist Mother Gothel wields shears to snip away at Rapunzel’s locks and – look away! – Patrizio’s eyes, you wish they’d been used to chop the running time, too. Reflecting the tale’s roots in Petrosinella, written by Giambattista Basile, Siddons’ setting is Italy. Rapunzel is abandoned as a baby and brought up lovingly by Mother Gothel in her secluded garden until, wary of the outside world, she shuts her away, limiting her growth like the plants she prunes. There is plenty of potential in a Rapunzel caught between the love of carer and prince. But Mother Gothel (Peta Maurice) bewilderingly transforms from over-protective parent to cartoonish witch and there’s little chemistry between candyfloss-haired Samantha Sutherland and Joseph Tweedale’s Patrizio, even if they do snog alarmingly quickly after an icky “meet cute” when he crashes into the tower. The actors develop an easy banter with the audience, who at one stage seize a couple of villains chasing Rapunzel into the auditorium and look unwilling to let them go. A speech imagining Tuscany’s austerity as a rundown ice-cream parlour has promise for a young audience but meanders – as does the second hour of the show, which ties itself up in knots. Rosanna Vize’s appealing design has strings of lightbulbs that climb like ivy and vines growing around a band of musicians who don’t feel truly unleashed in Nik Partridge’s production. The show’s dark heart is a trio of swampy, leaf-covered performers who become a pulsating mass of limbs as they morph from plants to forests and even bouncers, preventing Patrizio’s entry to the tower. It’s like seeing Stranger Things’ demogorgon rampaging through idyllic Tuscany. Rapunzel is at the Egg, Bath, until 12 January.