A second person has died in South Australia, and fires were burning at an emergency level across three different states, as Australia’s severe heatwave and national bushfire crisis continued on Saturday. Catastrophic fire conditions were declared in New South Wales as high winds, above 40C temperatures, low humidity and long-term dryness in the bush combined to fan flames across the country. Catastrophic is the highest fire danger rating and is the equivalent of the conditions before the 2009 Black Saturday bushfires in Victoria. Saturday was only the second time that greater Sydney had catastrophic conditions declared. At 1pm, two fires in NSW (Gospers Mountain and Green Wattle Creek), two areas in Victoria, and one in South Australia on Kangaroo Island were all burning at emergency level. The SA premier, Steven Marshall, confirmed that two people had died on Friday. One, a 24-year old from Queensland, died in a car crash at Lameroo. Another person died in a fire in the Adelaide Hills that also seriously injured another. Firefighters said they still had up to 100 properties or calls to follow up on, to find out if others are affected. Twenty-three firefighters were also injured in the state, one seriously, and three trucks were destroyed. Five homes, 28 buildings and 16 vehicles had been destroyed. Lightning strikes on Kangaroo Island on Friday started up to eight separate fires, authorities said. Marshall also confirmed that the fatal crash itself started a fire that injured a resident. In Victoria, the Marthavale fire in East Gippsland quadrupled in size overnight, growing so large it created its own weather. Throughout the morning, there were two emergency warnings in place, for Ensay, Reedy Flat, Stirling, Holstons; and Tambo Crossing, Wattle Circle, Stirling. In NSW, the huge Gospers Mountain blaze and the Green Wattle Creek fire both flared to emergency after easing overnight. The NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, and police told residents to please delay travel and obey directions from authorities. “Today is not the day to start your holiday,” a police spokeswoman said. On Saturday morning, the federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, criticised prime minister Scott Morrison’s holiday to Hawaii. The Labor leader said there had been no transparency around the trip, and “media inquiries were met with misinformation, at best” after Morrison’s office initially told reporters he was not in Hawaii. Morrison is scheduled to return to Australia by tonight but was spotted at 7am AEDT still in Hawaii. On Friday, he released a statement that he would return “as soon as possible” after the deaths of two firefighters on Thursday evening. The acting prime minister, Michael McCormack, told reporters on Thursday that Morrison had originally been scheduled to return to the prime minister’s role on Monday night. On Saturday, protesters gathered outside Kirribilli House, accusing Morrison of a lack of leadership on the fires and on combating climate change. The NSW RFS has set up a dedicated donations fund for the families of two firefighters who died on Thursday after their truck overturned near the Green Wattle Creek fireground.