Jim Allison doesn’t quite fit the archetype of the studious, buttoned-up scientist: with a full beard and long hair, the most gravelly of Texas drawls and a history of ripping a harmonica on stage with Willie Nelson, Allison seems more like a longstanding Grateful Dead fan than game-changer in the quest to cure cancer. The music-loving, 71-year-old scientist, long a renegade in the field of cancer research, is perhaps an unlikely prism through which to view the world of cutting-edge medicine. But the internationally renowned researcher has fundamentally shifted the trajectory of cancer treatment – an achievement covered in the new documentary Jim Allison: Breakthrough, by film-maker Bill Haney, which traces the arc of Allison’s iconoclastic career from a childhood marred by loss from cancer in rural Texas to a Nobel prize in medicine, along with Tasuku Honjo of Japan in 2018. Breakthrough is a double-sided film: part novice explainer on the significance of Allison’s advancements in the promising world of cancer research, part personal story of a renegade Texan overcoming entrenched establishment thinking (and, in high school, a creationist curriculum) to invest decades into what was once considered wishful thinking: igniting the body’s immune system to fight cancer cells. Cancer has, of course, been around for millennia – ancient Egyptian papyri record techniques for removing breast tumors. Traditionally, surgery was the only method for treating cancer; it wasn’t until the turn of the 20th century that scientists began experimenting with radiation therapy. The modern standard for cancer treatment – chemotherapy, a combination of toxic chemicals that kill off cancer cells along with plenty of healthy ones, too – was developed in the 1950s. All three conventional methods rely on outside agents to destroy cancer cells; Allison’s breakthrough was to see potential in the body’s own immune system, which cancer has adapted to avoid, to fight cancer cells. Perhaps the holy grail of medicine, “curing cancer” is a misnomer – there’s too many different types, too many mutations, for a blanket solution. But Allison’s harnessing of the immune system to fight cancer represents a paradigm shift, to a future of less grueling, more effective cancer therapies. The progress already captured Haney’s attention for a film even before the Nobel prize win (filming wrapped, coincidentally, the day before the prize was announced). “The country is so divided right now that I was trying to find a storyline that was more uniting and that could serve as a prism to think about how we could solve big problems together rather than how we demonized the opposition,” Haney told the Guardian. There’s no pro-cancer lobby, he added. “We’re all against cancer.” “While society’s attention has been particularly focused on the darkness in Washington, out of the science laboratories around the country and around the world, some extraordinarily beautiful things are happening,” he said. Haney’s film, narrated by Texas native Woody Harrelson (who, according to Haney, “couldn’t have been more generous or supportive or fun”), retreads Allison’s journey from his childhood in Alice, Texas, where his mother died of cancer when he was 11, to years of research on the immune system that tested the boundaries of medical knowledge. His determination to look into the immune system’s potential to fight cancer – an idea, according to the film, often dismissed as fanciful or failed – often drew skepticism. “For years, people said, this will never work,” Allison told the Guardian. “And if it doesn’t work, you’re wasting your time.” Haney’s film depicts how, luckily, Allison and his team at labs in Berkeley, California, at Sloan Kettering in New York and now MD Anderson in Houston were not wasting their time. Treading against the weights of established treatment pathways and the heavy investment of time and money required for groundbreaking research, Allison and his team, from researchers to altruistic pharmaceutical executives, devote nearly 20 years to mainstreaming their first immunotherapy drug, ipilimumab (“ipi”), for late-stage melanoma patients. Before ipilimumab, late-stage melanoma was basically a death sentence; at the time Allison started developing the drug in the mid-90s, the median survival time after diagnosis was seven months. Sharon Belvin, featured in the film as first-person testimony to Allison’s achievements, was diagnosed with metastatic melanoma at 23; her wedding was held days after her first chemo treatment. Faced with a terminal diagnosis and failed chemo rounds, Belvin was put on the first clinical trial of ipilimumab; over a decade later, now mom to two kids, she’s still cancer free. Her gratitude to Allison is ineffable, she says in the film. “There’s no thank you for that.” Haney interweaves Belvin’s survival story, one of extreme time sensitivity, with the much longer arc of Allison’s dedication to developing ipi, personal costs and all. In one particularly moving sequence, home video shows Allison’s son growing from a toddler to a precocious child with the passage of years; during that same time, almost no progress was made on building a specific antibody critical to the idea underlying ipi in Allison’s lab. There are “things that came across in the film as personal sacrifices,” Allison said, “but to me at the time, it was what I thought needed to be done. But looking back on it I do realize that there was a cost.”The timeline of medical research can feel glacial; as one commentator remarks in the film, we’re still just in the first few chapters of immuno-oncology treatments. Still, the film argues, if the entry revolved around the questions: is this possible, could this work? Then we have resolved the introduction: ipilimumab and its successor immuno-oncology drugs have, according to the film, treated millions of cancer patients worldwide – including Allison himself, who has faced cancer three times (his older brother died of cancer, another family trauma which the film posits as motivation behind Allison’s relentless research drive). At this point, “ipi” is no longer an experimental drug, meaning it can be prescribed by doctors around the world and is covered by insurance. The next chapter, then, asks how can we make this work better, with higher rates of effectiveness for different types of cancer. Haney attributes the success of the first chapter, and the subject of Breakthrough, to Allison’s “iconoclastically creative point of view”, as well as his “relentless, resilient spirit”. But the larger import of Allison’s story, he said is “how you solve big problems. It’s a reminder in a world that is negative about solving climate change or income inequality or immigration problems that man has always had difficult challenges and we’ve solved them the same ways – we’ve pulled together to our common purpose with good leadership. “I ultimately hope people are inspired by Jim and by his personal example, by the notion that we can solve the most challenging possible problems if we just go about it together in the right way and by the life of joy and creativity that living in the world of sciences can be,” Haney said. Allison is, characteristically, a bit more prosaic: “I hope people see it and say, yeah that’s something that I’d like to do,” he said on his science career balanced with a healthy dose of fun. “You can enjoy doing science and help make the world a better place at the same time.” Jim Allison: Breakthrough is available now digitally in the US and in the UK next year