TransPennine Express has apologised to passengers after four in 10 of its services were delayed or cancelled in the run-up to Christmas. Thousands of people are expected to travel on the railways on Monday to reach family and loved ones for the festive period. The operator has blamed a shortage of drivers and staff for the disruption to trains in northern England and Scotland. On Monday morning, 44 of 115 trains – 38% of all services on the network – were more than half an hour late or cancelled, and a further 5% were delayed by between five and 30 minutes. Since 17 December, more than 30% of TransPennine’s services each day have been severely disrupted. The company runs trains between central Manchester and cities including Liverpool, Sheffield, Leeds, Newcastle, Edinburgh and Glasgow. The introduction of a new fleet last month has been beset with issues. Staff and drivers are still being trained to work on the Nova trains, bought by the franchise owner FirstGroup from the Japanese manufacturer Hitachi. A number of services between Liverpool and Newcastle have also been temporarily withdrawn as a result of the implementation of a new timetable this month. Leo Goodwin, the managing director for the network, said: “I am really sorry for the disruption to our customers’ journeys. I know what a busy time it is with people travelling during the festive period. “We have had a number of issues to contend with: crew training caused by the late delivery of some of our new trains, a maintenance backlog and the implementation of a temporary timetable along one of our routes.” On Sunday the mayors of Greater Manchester and Liverpool urged Boris Johnson to publicly commit to ending the railway chaos in northern England. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, has outlined plans for Northern to be stripped of its franchise and brought back under public control after years of late and cancelled trains. Mayors Andy Burnham and Steve Rotherham said TransPennine had performed worse than Northern for much of the year. “A timetable needs to be set for improvements and, if they fail to deliver, TransPennine should be next,” they said.