Mikel Arteta has confirmed Freddie Ljungberg will remain part of his coaching staff at Arsenal, with the pair having held positive discussions after Saturday’s match at Everton. Ljungberg, for whom the goalless draw was a sixth and final game as the interim head coach, will return to a back-room position. While the precise makeup of Arteta’s coaching team is yet to be announced, the experienced former England, Newcastle, Everton and Manchester United assistant Steve Round will also be among its number. “I spoke to Freddie after the game,” Arteta said. “I told him my idea and the people I wanted to bring to form my coaching staff, their roles and responsibilities of each of them. I wanted to know what he was feeling, I wanted to know what he had in mind, what his expectations were. “We talked and we made a decision that the best thing was for him to stay with us. I think he can be very available. I think he knows the players, he knows the situation, he knows the history of where we’re coming from and also his knowledge of the game is going to really help us to be better.” Ljungberg had worked as the club’s under-23 coach until last summer, when he stepped up to work alongside Unai Emery with the first team. Arteta did not reveal the nature of his forthcoming role but confirmation is expected soon. It looks certain that Round will be involved after the 49-year-old, who worked with Arteta during their time at Goodison Park, told TalkSport he had been recruited. “Mikel called me in the week and asked me if I would join his staff and I jumped at the chance straight away,” he said. “It’s a great opportunity at a magnificent football club and just having brief conversations with Mikel I think he’s going to be a really, really top manager.” Arteta watched the Everton game from the directors’ box and will make his debut in the technical area in the Boxing Day fixture at Bournemouth. Among his first quandaries is what to do about Mesut Özil, who was unavailable on Saturday owing to a foot injury but would not have been involved in any case. Ljungberg said Özil’s conduct when replaced against Manchester City was “not what I accept from an Arsenal player”. The playmaker is fit again and Arteta emphasised his tenure marks a new start for all the players. “With me, they have a clean slate,” he said. “I told them that. You’re not going to be judged on things you’ve done in the past, whether they are positive or negative. This is evolving every day and I’m expecting you to perform and be in the right mindset every single day for me. If you do that, you’ll have a chance to play. If you don’t, you won’t.”