Jordan Spieth’s position at 44th in the world is not alarming when placed in the context of others. Jason Day is 31st on the same list, Sergio García has slipped to 35th and Bubba Watson is 41st. Nonetheless the scale of Spieth’s arrival into professional golf – whereby he won two majors in 2015 and added another two years later – means his subsequent tribulations are worthy of attention. The last of Spieth’s 11th main tour wins was the Open Championship of 2017. “I’ll probably be better than I ever was because of it and have better perspective as well,” Spieth says of his recent struggles. This next week will sting for Spieth, just as it will serve as an indicator of how far his star has fallen. He did not secure automatic qualification for the USA’s Presidents Cup team and was not a back-up pick either, meaning this weekend’s Hero World Challenge will conclude his 2019 while friends and colleagues fly to Melbourne. “It will be tough for me at home,” he says. “I’ll try and just get away while the tournament’s going on because you never want to miss those events when you’ve been a part of them for a number of years. “When it’s being played without being there? That will be where I’ll probably say: ‘I took it for granted.’ I’ll certainly work my butt off not to miss one of these again. I always liked the lead-in and the playing practice rounds together, preparing to be a team representing your country. Yeah, it’s tough.” Spieth’s diligence has never been in question. He has admirable perspective on life but when asked how his toils have impacted upon him, technicality is the theme. “I’m hitting shots and I’m like: ‘Something feels off and I can’t quite figure it out,’” the 26-year-old adds. “That’s been the toughest part for me because I know when I’m in control, I will put myself in position. I have the confidence mentally when I’m in control of the mechanical side of things to win out here and to contend week in and week out.” So what actually happened to Spieth, once the kid tipped to redefine top-level golf? His putting, outstanding as the Masters, US Open and Open were won, deserted him for a spell. Whereas that problem appears close to resolution, driving accuracy – or lack of – continues as a hindrance. He found just 53% of fairways last season and was 181st on the PGA Tour. “Unfortunately, it’s not just one thing,” he says. “I wish it was easy to say one thing but if it was then I would have already figured it out. I think it’s just part of the game. Tiger [Woods] set a standard of dominance that is very difficult to match, impossible I would say, at this point, to match.” Spieth is a rarity in an individual sporting environment as many others are willing him to bounce back. The Texan is such a decent, respectful and grounded individual that he did not offend anyone when the going was good. Throughout 2019, when top-10 finishes were a rarity and frustration frequently apparent, Spieth was as candid as he was courteous. This week in the Bahamas, he has been able to play with an element of freedom. “It’s a little easier when you’re not having to play a full schedule where every day you wake up and you’re like: ‘I know that I’m not there but I’ve got to go do it anyway,’” Spieth says. “That gets tough sometimes. So it’s nice to have the off-season and play a few events. The season ending in August this year is, I think, good timing for me.” Spieth wants the new year to deliver the narrative with which he was once so accustomed. Hero MotorCorp paid for Ewan Murray’s flights and accommodation in the Bahamas