Name: Mr Clever. Age: 41. Status: Cancelled. Really? I could see this coming with Mr Tickle, but not Mr Clever. Calm down, none of the Mr Men have been #MeToo-ed yet. So why has he been cancelled? Mansplaining. That pig. I know. Tell me what happened. In the book Mr Men in Scotland, Mr Clever explains that the Forth Bridge is named after the River Forth, to which Little Miss Curious replies: “So what happened to the River First, the River Second and the River Third?”. Then Mr Clever sighs. And then what happened? A student who shared a picture of the book on social media said: “The Mr Men books are intended for children and it’s telling them, ‘Girls, you need to be stupid, and men, it’s your job to explain things.’” And I’m guessing this has caused something of an outrage? Yes, and it is long overdue if you ask me – children’s books have a long history of playing up sexist tropes, so it’s great that someone is finally calling them out. Well, this certainly sounds like the most important thing going on in the world right now. There’s no need to be rude. As the student pointed out in a subsequent interview: “It’s an example of these tiny things that build up to create a whole patchwork quilt of sexist iconography that every child of any gender is going to internalise.” That isn’t the Mr Clever I know. Oh, don’t go defending him, you patriarchal cog. No, really. Go and read the original Mr Clever book. It’s a study in hubris. Mr Clever’s intelligence has made him smug and hard to love, and we watch as he gradually alienates himself from the world with his sense of superiority. Right! So you’re saying that the character was always intended as a means to demonstrate the importance of empathy over intelligence? Yes! And you’re implying that, by making the same assumptions without having the necessary understanding of context, those now calling out Mr Clever have effectively committed the same act of hubris that scuppered their archenemy Mr Clever? Yes! And you would furthermore like to state that their real ire should be directed towards Egmont UK, the Sanrio corporation and Roger Hargreaves’ estate for removing the subtlety from the original series as part of their posthumous rebrand? Sure. Good, I’m glad we agree. I tell you who is a mansplainer, though. Don’t. Little Miss Brainy. She mansplains all the time. I mean it. Don’t. Why not? Well, how does that book end? Her intelligence sends her to Africa where she is eaten by a lion. So now you’re saying that intelligent women deserve to be eaten by lions. You’ve just made everything worse. Do say: “The Mr Men series doesn’t live up to the vigorous standards of today.” Don’t say: “#NotAllMrMen”