Greta Gerwig’s new big-screen adaptation of Little Women, the sixth about the March sisters to be made so far, starts with a scene taken from the middle of Louisa May Alcott’s second volume. Almost all the others have begun with the girls’ childhood, but in Gerwig’s film, we first meet an adult Jo March in the New York offices of the Weekly Volcano, where she hopes to place a story – thus setting it up as a film about writing. Along with all the things we expect from this story (coming of age, sibling relations, the challenge of being good), the film is about the relationship of fiction with life, and the challenges and the rewards of writing as a job. The parallels between Jo and her creator, Alcott, are also drawn out by Gerwig, and this adult Jo co-exists throughout the film with the child Jo, who is learning how to write, how to be a woman and, often, how similar these processes can be. Published in the late 1860s, Little Women, for those for whom mentions of Meg, Jo, Beth and Amy do not instantly evoke scenes known since childhood (a book-burning, the shearing of a head of long hair), tells the story of four girls whose father is away, working as a chaplain in the US civil war. They used to be well off, but he was too trusting with his money, and now they are poor; the famed first lines – “‘Christmas won’t be Christmas without any presents,’ grumbled Jo, lying on the rug” – establish how they feel about it, and some of the ways in which they will be tested. It tells a rather different story depending on whether you read it in the US or in the UK, where the second half is generally hived off as Little Women Wedded, or Good Wives, and often not read at all. It has never been a secret that Jo is a version of Alcott, who 'never liked girls or knew many, except my sisters' The girls work as governesses and lady’s companions; they mend old clothes to make them last; they make their own entertainment: plays, newspapers, books, music. When the first book opens they range in age from 11 or so (Amy) to 16 (Meg), and thus are on the brink of womanhood. This is an unusual choice, as Anne Boyd Rioux pointed out in last year’s incisive Meg, Jo, Beth, Amy: The Story of Little Women and Why It Still Matters, eschewing as it does the calmer, more “innocent” state of childhood. Little Women, she notes, is full of coded references to the arrival of puberty and the ways in which this arrival is also a curbing: don’t shake hands, take small steps, wear gloves. Meg, excited by dances, beginning to understand the power of her pretty face, tries to conform; Beth, agonisingly shy, stays at home playing the piano; Amy aims to combine feminine power and an ambition to be a great artist; while Jo, already a writer and a confirmed tomboy, struggles to be what her father calls her, “‘a little woman’, and not be rough and wild, but do my duty here instead of wanting to be somewhere else”. It has never been a secret that Jo is a tidied-up version of Alcott herself, who “never liked girls or knew many, except my sisters”, and never especially wanted to be or act like one. Rioux’s account brings out the ways in which Alcott’s life was both harder and often more progressive than those of her characters. Alcott and her three sisters were poor, and had to work – though not because her father was at war but because, as a transcendentalist teacher, he so often put his ideals of self-improvement ahead of anything as prosaic as earning a living. Those ideals, however, included an absolute belief, shared by his wife Abigail – an outspoken suffrage campaigner and one of America’s first social workers – in a woman’s right to realise her full potential; in education; and in the iniquity of slavery (the school Jo eventually sets up includes a “quadroon” even though it might lead to “ruin”; Alcott’s father did the same, and had to shut down). He was a vegan who believed in maintaining the health of the body as well as the mind (for years his daughter went for a run every day), and he banned his family from using cotton, as it was harvested by slaves. Though they often had to rely on charity from their family, who could not resist ladling a sauce of told-you-sos over their cash (echoed by the fictional irascible Aunt March), they nevertheless sheltered abused women, children with mental health issues and runaway slaves. One sister, Lizzie, died young of a wasting disease, as Beth does in Little Women Wedded; Louisa cared for her, as Jo does for Beth, and was deeply affected. Unlike Jo, however, who marries, Louisa – who also lost her long hair, but through illness rather than choosing to cut it off – remained single. Alcott was also radical in deciding to write Little Women in defiantly direct, colloquial language, so full of New England slang that Rioux’s recent edition of the book for Penguin Classics (with a foreword by Patti Smith) required a glossary. The language matched Alcott’s other departure, from the preachiness of contemporary children’s literature to the resolutely ordinary: to talk of darning socks, or cooking lunch. The book was instantly successful; 2,000 copies of the first volume were sold in the first two weeks, and millions more, in about 50 languages, have sold since. For bookish, tomboyish – or just ambitious – girls, Jo was an inspiration: writing in a garret first at home and then in New York City (echoing Alcott’s apartment in Boston), in a “funny little sky parlor … [with] a stove in it, and a nice table in a sunny window, so I can sit here and write whenever I like”. Rioux’s lists of women influenced by Jo go on for pages. Jo March was, Ursula K Le Guin once wrote, “close as a sister … I don’t know where else I or many others like me, in my generation or my mother’s or my daughter’s, were to find this model, this validation”. Caitlin Moran, who modelled Johanna Morrigan in her novel How to Build a Girl on Jo, once said: “I owe everything I am to Jo March in Little Women and Anne Shirley in Anne of Green Gables.” Alcott yearned to rival the Brontës, as well as Emerson and Thoreau, her neighbours in Concord, yet her first efforts to write a serious, ambitious novel were only published after extensive and, she felt, damaging cuts – an experience echoed in Jo’s story. (Little Women, which she did not especially want to write, was initially read and admired by all sorts of people, male and female, young and old, but as the century turned it was increasingly pushed into the cul-de-sac of “women’s writing”.) Alcott “couldn’t afford to starve on praise” and turned to writing sensationalist stories – as does Jo in Little Women: “The Duke’s Daughter paid the butcher’s bill, A Phantom Hand put down a new carpet, and The Curse of the Coventrys proved the blessing of the Marchs in the way of groceries and gowns,” as Jo puts it. Later, however, Jo intuits that Professor Bhaer, a German teacher she has begun to care for, is concerned about how these stories might affect her writing and her soul, and stops working on them altogether. This is a point that has bothered readers so much that many adaptations have taken the scene to mean that Bhaer goes on to run Jo’s career; Gerwig reads the book correctly, and instead shows Jo (played by Saoirse Ronan) in control: writing no more sensations, yes – but proceeding to discover her true metier and enjoying her successes. Not least because, as the film goes on, the Jo character begins to merge with a portrayal of Alcott. Again and again lines in Gerwig’s film are drawn from Alcott’s own life. In the novel, for instance, Jo is honest about her envy of her youngest sister, but the idea that she gets the “cream” of everything, as Jo says in the film, comes from a comment Alcott made about her own sister, May. In the book, Jo says: “I don’t believe I shall ever marry. I’m happy as I am, and love my liberty too w ell to be in a hurry to give it up for any mortal man”; in the film she says: “I’d rather be a free spinster and paddle my own canoe” – which comes from a letter Alcott wrote to a friend after visiting her just-married older sister. So many pithy statements about sexual politics are given to Amy (Florence Pugh) and to Aunt March (Meryl Streep) that the film threatens to become a 21st-century feminist lecture – until one remembers that they were all subjects about which Alcott herself was vocal. Not that she necessarily got her way: Alcott’s publisher was initially bored by Little Women and changed his mind only when his young daughters got hold of the manuscript and loved it (a similar scene appears in the film). He does not budge, however, in his demand that her female characters end the novel “married – or dead, either way”. All four girls duly marry or die, and many critics have found this a profoundly disappointing outcome. There has always been particular discomfort with Meg’s seeming subjugation, after discussions with her mother, to the sensible, “masterful” John Brooke, and with the Bhaer figure, whom Alcott supplied in order both to comply with her publisher’s wishes and frustrate the public demand that Jo do the easy, obvious thing and marry her childhood friend Laurie. But Gerwig seems to be trying to explore something less Manichean than personal fulfilment versus subjugation. “I’m sick of people saying love is all a woman’s fit for,” she has Jo say. “I’m so sick of it! But I’m so lonely.” (In the book, it is Marmee who says: “I can’t help seeing that you are very lonely.”) The challenge for Jo, then, as for all her sisters, is to find fulfilment while at the same time taking steps to be less alone. As Rioux writes, the girls navigate “a fundamental conflict for women – how to love and be loved without losing oneself”. How to have it all, as we would put it now. We may these days, Rioux argues, be surrounded by books containing extraordinary girls – Lyra, Hermione, Katniss – but it is striking that they are exceptions, and often alone; groups of girls in, say, the Gossip Girl books are toxic and destructive. Little Women is about “a world of women, of value in and of itself”. It is also, Gerwig has said, “one of the few books about childhood that isn’t about escape. There is bravery, but it’s a hero’s journey contained inside the home.” And one whose male characters are peripheral. In the first volume Jo, furious that Meg is thinking of getting married, thus breaking up the cosy family, rages that “buds will be roses, and kittens cats – more’s the pity”. In Gerwig’s film Meg replies to a similar outburst with: “Just because my dreams are different from yours doesn’t mean they’re not important.” Perhaps the truly radical thing is that Alcott tried to make space and time for all of them. • Little Women is on general release in the UK from 26 December.