England have called up the Somerset bowlers Craig Overton and Dom Bess as cover before the first Test against South Africa, as illness continues to cast a shadow over their preparations. Stuart Broad, Jofra Archer and Jack Leach missed the first warm-up match of the tour owing to the bug that has laid them low with flu-like symptoms for several days and were also absent from the ground during the opening day of the three-day match against South Africa A that started on Friday. With up to three other players also under the weather, England had successfully lobbied Cricket South Africa to downgrade the fixture’s first-class status – meaning the unwell trio can still play some part if their conditions improve over the weekend. The problem remains a major concern for England, with the key seamers Broad and Archer at risk of heading into the Boxing Day Test at Centurion with minimal match practice. Overton, who played the last of his four Tests against Australia in the summer, will provide pace back-up for Archer and Broad, while Bess will offers another spin option if county colleague Leach does not recover. Bess played two Tests against Pakistan in 2018 and may find himself ahead of Matt Parkinson in the pecking order after the Lancashire man was milked for 112 runs in 20 overs earlier in the week. Both call-ups have been preparing over the winter, Overton having joined fellow tourists Jimmy Anderson and Mark Wood in a training camp at Potchefstroom at the start of December, while Bess has just taken part in an ECB spin clinic with Rangana Herath in Mumbai. South Africa have had a setback of their own, with the batsman Temba Bavuma ruled out of the Boxing Day Test. Meanwhile, in the match itself Rory Burns’ half-century ensured an undramatic first morning. Given their depleted attack England were hoping for a day at the crease at Willowmoore Park and, having won the toss, Burns and Dom Sibley batted for an hour and a half together in a stand of 60. Burns was almost out for one when a top-edged pull just cleared mid-wicket, but soon began compiling a solid innings of 52 not out by lunch. Sibley made a secure 22 before losing his off stump to Andile Phehlukwayo’s fourth ball of the day. Phehlukwayo is part of the South Africa Test squad and in beating Sibley’s defence with a hint of movement off the pitch, he showed why. At lunch England were 91 for one, with Joe Denly partnering Burns on 12no.