Katy Balls may well be expecting Johnson to use his “newfound freedom to accommodate the Labour leave areas that have gone blue” (Johnson is able to forge a new centre ground, Journal, 14 December), but even his victory speech outside No 10 lacked any reasons for such optimism (The country deserves an end to talking about Brexit, 14 December). “Unite and level up” seems to be the next meaningless slogan, but where is the evidence that Johnson’s “one-nation Conservatism” is any different from that of his predecessors? For such a belief to take effect, Johnson would have to offend too many of his traditional supporters, like landlords and builders, but how else can lives improve for all those millions living in rented accommodation, or wanting to buy affordable homes? Even the well-publicised NHS promises of 50,000 more nurses and 40 new hospitals have already failed all scrutiny tests. “Better schools”, also mentioned in the speech, require massive cash injections, with far more than a little pay boost needed to end the teacher recruitment crisis; “safer streets” demand more than simply replacing the numbers of policemen cut under recent Tory administrations.Bernie EvansLiverpool • May I suggest that the Guardian starts a Boris Johnson “Lie-ometer”, keeping a record of every lie told by the prime minister. His speech outside No 10 is a good starting point, with two already proven lies being repeated, ie 40 hospitals and 50,000 nurses. A weekly count of untruths may help to keep this dangerous government in check. I look forward to seeing this as a regular feature.Pete BrookLlanfairpwllgwyngyll, Anglesey • Working at the coalface as a young man more than 60 years ago, an old collier told me: “The Tories can tell lies much better than Labour can tell the truth.” We now have a perfect exponent in No 10 who proves the lasting value of his words.Gren GaskellMalvern, Worcestershire • Boris Johnson could have visited any of the new Tory constituencies in the north-east, but he chose Tony Blair’s former seat in Sedgefield for his triumphalist appearance. Whatever happened to grace in victory or generosity of spirit? He couldn’t resist grandstanding at Labour’s expense.Kathy KirkbrightMarske-by-the Sea, North Yorkshire • “Let the healing begin,” says Boris Johnson. How long is the waiting list?Steve EadyUelsen, Germany • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition