I read Jane Harper’s The Lost Man (Little, Brown) in February, the height of Australia’s summer but the depths of the English winter. The central image at the heart of the novel, of a man who has perished in the punishing heat of Australia’s outback, hours from anywhere, has stayed with me ever since. Just as good – perhaps even better – than Harper’s excellent thrillers The Dry and Force of Nature, this follows a small cast in a vast, terrifyingly empty setting, as the dead man’s eldest brother tries to determine whether his sibling deliberately walked out to his death or if a malign third party was involved. Aussie noir – or as it has also been dubbed, “bush noir” – is my new favourite genre, and if you like Harper, try Chris Hammer’s Scrublands (Wildfire), in which a community permanently threatened by bush fires tries to understand why its young priest turned a gun on his congregation. Continuing the theme of thrillers that pit protagonists against the implacable dangers of the natural world, but shifting the action to the Maskwa River in northern Canada, is Peter Heller’s The River (W&N). The novel follows two students who take the summer off to canoe the remote waterway, only to find themselves trying to outrun a forest fire – “they didn’t say a word but the silence of it and the way it seemed to breathe scared them to the bone” – as a man they think is a killer follows in their tracks. The prose is glorious, Heller’s evocation of the natural surroundings stunning, but, most important, the tension is razor-sharp. Adrian McKinty’s The Chain (Orion) is an ingenious realisation of a horrible premise. When Rachel’s teenage daughter Kylie is kidnapped, the only way to get her back is to kidnap another child, with her victim’s parents then forced to abduct their own hostage. “That’s how The Chain works and goes on for ever.” McKinty explores what parents will do when a child is in danger, forcing the reader to ask at every turn just how far they’d go themselves. It’s impossible to put down until you reach the denouement, nails bitten to the quick and eyes wide in horror. Denise Mina is always brilliant, but Conviction (Harvill Secker) is, I think, her best yet – joyously dark, comic, loads of fun. The main character, Anna, is devastated when her husband announces one morning that he is leaving her for her best friend, and taking the kids too. Anna’s reaction? She gets stuck into a true crime podcast – wouldn’t we all? – and becomes obsessed with the fact that she used to know one of the victims. So begins a wild and wonderful journey to the truth at the heart of the podcast, and at the heart of the lies on which Anna has built her family life. Months after reading it, I remain obsessed with Michelle Paver’s Wakenhyrst (Head of Zeus), set in Suffolk in the early 1900s and featuring a historian, Edmund Stearne, who slaughtered “the first person he came across in the most bizarre and horrible way”. There are many layers to this thriller: did Stearne really awaken an ancient evil when he found a painted devil in the local churchyard? What is the medieval mystic Margery Kempe’s role in the affair? And what will Stearne’s daughter, Maud, a lonely child growing up between superstition and religion amid the glorious fens, that “last stretch of the ancient marshes that once drowned the whole of East Anglia”, discover about her father? Spooky, twisted and unforgettable. • To order any of these books for a special price, click on the titles or go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15