Stride by stride, second by second, Dina Asher-Smith had a 2019 for the ages. To win one world athletics medal would have been staggering enough. To become the first Briton to leave with three from the same championships was a monumental statement of intent. Best of all was her 200m gold in 21.88sec, a time so fast it smashed her national record and made her the first British woman to win a global sprint title. Further silvers in the 100m and 4x100m highlighted the potential for more glory at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics. No wonder Sebastian Coe has predicted she will be the British poster child of the Games. Incidentally there are 18 track and field athletes among the roll call of Spoty winners – 11 more than the next closest sport, Formula One. Asher-Smith or her team-mate Katarina Johnson‑Thompson would be a worthy addition to the honours board. The danger is that the athletics vote ends up being split. Sean Ingle What we wrote: “With a world title forever wed to her name and the Olympics on the horizon, there will only be more attention, more fame and more people looking up to her success as an example to emulate. But for all the fans she gains, it is telling that those who knew her first still back her all the way.” Tumaini Carayol In winning his sixth Formula One world championship, Lewis Hamilton emphatically established himself as the greatest driver of his generation. With five titles in six years he defines this era and in 2019 stood astride his sport in a manner demanding acknowledgement and no, it was not a case of simply having the fastest car. His teammate Valtteri Bottas, in identical machinery, could not hold a candle to him. Nor could rivals at Ferrari or Red Bull. On repeated occasions when his Mercedes was not the quickest in the field Hamilton emerged victorious. Better still he actually has a personality. Brave enough to speak out on his concerns over the climate emergency and take the inevitable flak that followed from someone in his profession doing so. He embraces his life with an unashamed enthusiasm and honesty that should be admired. Hamilton’s exceptional run of success has made it feel almost commonplace. It is anything but and we should revel in witnessing it. Giles Richards What we wrote: Lewis Hamilton: “There are many things to dislike about modern Formula One but Lewis Hamilton is not among them. The greatest of all time? He is a champion of champions and that is quite enough.” Richard Williams For a long time, Katarina Johnson‑Thompson’s personality was the problem. During her chronic struggles at major competitions until 2018, every mistake she made was reflected in her desolate body language and she would return to her hotel mid-competition to cry for hours. Those failures could have broken so many athletes but the 26-year-old responded by moving to France to train with her new coach, Bertrand Valcin, in 2017 and she has slowly learned how to win. This year, she won effortless golds at the European Indoor Championships and the famed Hypo-meeting in Götzis. At the world championships in Doha she demolished her great rival Nafi Thiam with four personal bests and an overall British record of 6,981pts, usurping Jessica Ennis‑Hill with the sixth best heptathlon performance of all time. Johnson‑Thompson’s 2019 is not just a simple story of dominance but in one of the most physically and mentally ruinous sporting disciplines she overcame years of frustration and mental baggage to become a champion. Tumaini Carayol What we wrote: “A few short months ago Katarina Johnson‑Thompson made a startling confession: despite being one of the best athletes on the planet she suffered from impostor syndrome. Now even she must know she is the real deal.” Sean Ingle Age has mellowed Wales’s captain but not dimmed his competitiveness. At 34, the second‑row was one of the oldest players at the Rugby World Cup but no one made more than his 79 tackles as he steered his unfancied team to the last four, where they came within a disputed penalty of reaching the final. It marked the end of an era, with Warren Gatland stepping down after 12 years. Jones was the only survivor from the coach’s first match: he was then seen as the enfant terrible because of his tendency to rile others and it was some time before he was trusted with the captaincy. This year’s Six Nations Grand Slam showed how much the side reflect his latter image: hard, resolute, driven, remorseless – and aware. Before the final championship game against Ireland in March, Jones noticed the Wales mascot, a seven-year-old boy, was shivering before the anthems. He took off his tracksuit top and draped it around the youngster. The Jones of yore would have been too self-absorbed to notice. Paul Rees What we wrote: “Heroes are for yesterday, for our long-forgotten youth, not quite the fit in cynical times. But Jones laughs at time and strikes a chord outside Wales, too.” Kevin Mitchell It is easy to push the case for Raheem Sterling on purely sporting grounds. In the second half of last season the winger was one of Manchester City’s most outstanding performers, driving them to the domestic treble. He was named the Football Writers’ Association’s footballer of the year and the PFA’s young player of the year. The goals have continued to flow this season, for City and England – he has eight in nine matches at international level in 2019. But what has set the 25-year-old apart is the courage and leadership he has shown in the fight against racism. Sterling has attacked the blight on the game and wider society with softly spoken good sense and sharp perception, shining a light on problems such as unconscious bias and the need for people, including those in the media, to think more carefully about the words they use. Sterling has become a reference point in troubled times. David Hytner What we wrote: “Sterling owes his improvement not only to his ferocious work ethic but to the little details and snatches of advice that make the good players great: when to take on his man and when to recycle, timing and positioning, composure, whether to trap a ball with the outside of a foot or take it in his stride.” Jonathan Liew Only four cricketers have won the award – Jim Laker in 1956, David Steele in his role as “the bank clerk who went to war” in 1975, Ian Botham (1981) and Andrew Flintoff (2005). Ben Stokes is odds-on to be the fifth after another Ashes summer. And I hope he does for two reasons: I think he deserves the trophy and the game needs him to win it. The award is not a flawless barometer of sporting prowess or personality but it has been going a long time; it offers some handy hints and if Stokes does not win it this year, after his efforts in England’s bizarre World Cup victory over New Zealand at Lord’s and that stunning innings at Headingley which captivated cricket fans all around the country as well as silencing the Australian section of the press box, then the game of cricket really is in trouble. Vic Marks What we wrote: “For the first time in our lives, cricket fans brought up in the belief that the golden age of their game had been and gone can finally move on. Sportswriter Rob Smyth memorably described England fans who grew up during the disastrous 90s as Generation FFS. Now Stokes has birthed Generation OMG.” Emma John