New Zealand police have launched a criminal investigation into the White Island volcano as further details emerged of the scale of the disaster, in which at least five people died and a further eight are feared to have perished. “I would strongly suggest that there is no one that has survived on the island,” New Zealand police deputy commissioner John Tims said in Wellington on Tuesday of those still unaccounted for. When asked about whether the investigation would focus on tour operators, Tims said: “So we’ll look into if there was anyone criminally responsible for the deaths and injuries. It’s early days yet. So we’re just going to have to work through the evidence, talk to people, and conduct the investigation.” Thirty-one patients were being treated for burns and not all were expected to survive, said Dr Pete Watson from the ministry of health. Twenty-seven have burns to at least 30% of their bodies, he said. “There’s many who have suffered inhalation injuries, damage to lungs, so they’re requiring airway support. At this stage, that’s the majority of the people who are in the hospitals,” Watson said. Patients have been sent to burns units across the country, which were at capacity, and some may be sent to Australia, he said. The nationalities of those on the island at the time of the explosion were confirmed on Tuesday. Twenty-four were from Australia, nine from the US, five from New Zealand, four from Germany, two from the UK, two from China and one from Malaysia. On Tuesday authorities were still unable to reach the island. Seismic activity had reduced but scientists estimated there was a 50% chance of a smaller or similar sized eruption in the next 24 hours. Web cameras on the island indicated jets of gas and steam were still being released from the area, said GNS science, the government’s research organisation. New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern, returning from the nearby town of Whakatane, told parliament on Tuesday afternoon: “The scale of this tragedy is devastating. Our hearts go out to the families of those who are injured, missing or deceased. “To those who have lost or are missing family and friends, we share in your grief and sorrow and we are devastated. To our international partners and friends, we will do everything we can to support you as you have supported us in times past. “In particular our family in Australia has been heavily impacted ... we feel the pull of our bond acutely at this time.” Ardern also praised the efforts of helicopter pilots who flew to the island shortly after the eruption to rescue people who were stranded. She said they had made “an incredibly brave decision under extraordinary dangerous circumstances in an attempt to get people out.”. On Tuesday morning Australia’s prime minister, Scott Morrison, said: “This is a very, very hard day for a lot of Australian families whose loved ones have been caught up in this terrible, terrible tragedy.” He said three Australians were believed to be among the dead and eight were missing. He said 13 more were in hospital and 11 unaccounted for. “I fear there is worse news to come,” he said. A forensics team from the Australian federal police was on its way to New Zealand to help identify victims. Laura Clarke, the UK’s high commissioner to New Zealand, said two British women had been taken to hospital and that her team were providing assistance. Every year thousands of tourists take boat trips and helicopter tours to view White Island’s dramatic landscape. Some have questioned whether the privately owned island, which is New Zealand’s most active cone volcano, should have been operating as a tourist destination. The Māori name of the island is Whakaari. Raymond Cas, emeritus professor at Melbourne’s Monash University’s school of earth, atmosphere and environment, said it was “a disaster waiting to happen”. “Having visited it twice, I have always felt that it was too dangerous to allow the daily tour groups that visit the uninhabited island volcano by boat and helicopter,” Cas told the Australian Science Media Centre.   Michael Schade, who was visiting the island with his parents, had stood at the crater 20 minutes before the eruption. He was among a boatload of tourists just off the White Island who witnessed the disaster. The vessel returned to rescue a crowd of people on the jetty. “Some people had pockets of burns, other people were fine, and others were really rough,” Schade told the Guardian on Monday. “Some were screaming, while others were in silent shock.” Passengers set up an assembly line to pass water bottles to people with burns, as well as jackets, inhalers and eye drops. About 10,000 tourists a year visit the island, which was bought in 1936 by George Raymond Buttle, an Auckland stockbroker. It is now owned by the Buttle Family Trust. The island previously experienced a short eruption in 2016, in which no one was hurt. GeoNet raised the alert level for White Island in November after noting an increase in volcanic activity, from one to two on a scale where five represents a big eruption.