The age of criminal responsibility in England and Wales is only 10 years old. This drama, inspired by several real cases, follows the story of 12-year-old Ray as he stands trial in an adult court for the brutal murder of his mother’s abusive partner. Following the lead-up to the killing, as well as the courtroom aftermath, we see the tempestuous early life of Ray (played with quiet brilliance by Billy Barratt) and the way in which the justice system fails children. Ammar Kalia Mary Berry gets regal as she goes on four visits with the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge to their supported charities, ending by cooking a celebratory feast for their workers with Nadiya Hussain. A twee treat to counter some of the recent negative press surrounding certain other royals. AK With Doctor Foster, Mike Bartlett showed that he could do intrigue on TV as well as he could on stage. While his latest thriller – focused on rapidly escalating workplace tensions – is not quite so deft, with three episodes stripped across the week, it may be brisk and disbelief-suspending enough to hook you in. Hannah J Davies R2-detour: as part of Star Wars night, David Whiteley profiles Palitoy, the Leicester company that made action figures for the UK market in the 70s. It is followed by Whiteley’s equally fun 2017 documentary about the filming of the first Star Wars movie at Elstree Studios. Graeme Virtue Damon Lindelof’s spin-off-cum-sequel, inspired by Alan Moore’s classic 1986 comic-book series, has made a run of bold creative decisions that have established it as an independent, fiercely intelligent fable. But, as Zack Snyder, the director of the 2009 film adaptation discovered, how you end a Watchmen story is key: debates about this finale could run and run. Jack Seale Diane Morgan is back as the intrepid thinker and sarcastic interviewer Philomena Cunk in this end-of-year review, which is spread across the week in five-minute segments. With Brexit, the general election and Trump all on the agenda, it will be a squeeze to fit in all the year’s chaos. AK Love & Friendship (Whit Stillman, 2016), 11.20pm, BBC TwoDirector-writer Whit Stillman’s zesty adaptation of the Jane Austen novella Lady Susan stars Kate Beckinsale as the widowed heroine, now penniless and scheming to bag a fortune by pairing her daughter (Morfydd Clark) with a rich dolt (Tom Bennett). It is magnificently cynical and hilarious. Paul Howlett Premier League football: Crystal Palace v Brighton & Hove Albion 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. It’s Eagles v Seagulls as the bitter rivals meet at Selhurst Park. FA Cup football: Boston United v Rochdale 7.15pm, BT Sport 1. Second-round replay. NFL: New Orleans Saints v Indianapolis Colts 1am, Sky Sports Main Event. From the Mercedes-Benz Superdome.