Donald Trump has lashed out at Emmanuel Macron on the first morning of a two-day Nato summit in London. At a news conference held to celebrate the success of the alliance, with the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, by his side, the US president focused his ire on his French counterpart. After Macron had tried to shake up the agenda for the London summit by calling the 70-year western alliance “brain dead”, Trump said he could see Paris “breaking away” from Nato. “Nato serves a great purpose,” Trump said. “I think that’s very insulting,” he said of Macron’s comment, branding it a “very, very nasty statement essentially to 28 countries”. He added: “Nobody needs Nato more than France. It’s a very dangerous statement for them to make.” Asked whether the US alliance with Nato was shaky, Trump denied it, but said: “I do see France breaking off ... I see him breaking off.” Trump defended Stoltenberg, boasting that Nato members had massively increased their defence spending thanks to his pressure – but then reiterated his complaints about European spending. The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (Nato) is a collective defence alliance between 29 North American and European countries. Founded in 1949, the treaty provides that if one country is attacked, all Nato members would collectively respond. Nato was set up to counter the threat of the Soviet Union. The 12 founding members were: Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, United Kingdom and the United States. Over the years the organisation has expanded to its current membership of 29. Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, North Macedonia and Ukraine are recognised as states with aspirations to join. This week's summit marks a celebration of the 70th anniversary of the organisation. London was chosen partly because it was the location of the original headquarters of the organisation when it was founded. During the two-day gathering there will be addresses by the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, a formal reception at Buckingham Palace hosted by the Queen, and a meeting of the North Atlantic Council attended by heads of state and government. The agenda features discussions about Russia, China and the future of arms control. There will also be a series of bilateral meetings between leaders - the most testing of which are likely to feature Turkey's Recep Tayyip Erdoğan looking for support for his country's recent incursion into Syria. Infighting is a major issue. For the third summit in a row, Donald Trump is expected to renew demands that European allies and Canada step up defence spending. He is also unhappy with his French counterpart, Emmanuel Macron, over a tax on American tech giants including Google, Amazon and Facebook. For his part Macron has lamented Nato's "brain death" due to a lack of US leadership, and said the organisation needs a wake-up call. He insists that strategic questions must be addressed, like improving ties with Russia and how to handle an unpredictable ally like Turkey. In turn, Erdoğan has lashed out at Macron. Their very public argument bodes ill for the summit, which is being hosted by the British prime minister, Boris Johnson. Johnson will want who to smooth things over and downplay any links to Trump, who is unpopular in the UK. “When I came in, I was angry at Nato, and now I’ve raised $130bn,” Trump said, referring to the sum Stoltenberg says Canada and European members will have added to defence budgets by next year. “And yet you still have many delinquent – you know, I call them delinquent when they’re not paid up in full,” he said. Only nine of Nato’s 29 members spend 2% of their GDP on defence. Trump cited Germany as falling short, spending only 1% to 1.3%. Leaders of the 29 allies are descending on London to lock horns over spending and how to deal with Russia in a test of unity as Nato seeks to assert its relevance.