On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert looked ahead to the House judiciary committee’s likely vote this week on the two articles of impeachment against Donald Trump. “I’m glad we’re moving forward, because we’re at a weird point,” said Colbert. “It’s like the set break at a concert. Right now, we’re just milling around hitting up the merch table deciding if 80 bucks is too much to pay for a Monsters of Constitutional Enforcement tour T-shirt.” With impeachment now on the horizon, “Trump went to his happy place: anger” on Tuesday night with a campaign rally in Hershey, Pennsylvania. Impeachment was “clearly on the president’s mind”, Colbert reported, with Trump bragging it was only, at two articles, “impeachment lite”. “Yes, it’s impeachment lite – America’s going on a diet, we’ve got to lose 239lb of dead weight,” Colbert countered. At the same rally, Trump also mocked his Democratic rivals, complaining that Elizabeth Warren “opened that fresh mouth of hers”. “Wow, ‘fresh mouth’ – that is some old-school sexism,” said Colbert. “Or maybe Trump’s just not used to women talking: ‘Why can’t they be more like my wife, OK?’” he said, imitating the president. “‘She never says a word, or makes eye contact, she just sits there staring into the middle distance, clutching a Christmas ornament until it explodes in her hand.’” On Full Frontal, Samantha Bee analyzed congressional Republicans’ defense of the president as House Democrats prepare to vote on two articles of impeachment – a strategy of “loud offense” she called “Kavanoise”, or “when white men who have done something awful shout into a camera at us until it goes away”. “My God, could you imagine if a woman tried that strategy?” Bee said. “I get accused of being shrill even when I’m sleeping. It wouldn’t work for people of color either; if any of them tried to pull a Louie Gohmert” – a Republican congressman who shouted to the House judiciary committee that “this is not about due process; this is about a kangaroo system” – “they’d get swatted by the white ladies filming them at all times.” The most “disturbing” thing about the Kavanoise strategy, Bee continued, is that “it kind of works. After [Republicans] turn hearings into 14-hour tantrums, they get headlines like ‘impeachment devolves into partisan brawl’, or ‘partisan fireworks’ – it’s not partisan if it’s pretty much all one-sided.” The impeachment process is a “slog”, Bee said, in which “the average American could easily come away from the impeachment proceedings with the impression that it’s all just a big, loud, politically tainted clusterfuck.” That’s a terrifying prospect, she concluded, because “what it actually is, is a big, loud, politically tainted clusterfuck that will determine whether or not we get to have free and fair elections from now on”. “So I am begging you: pay attention,” Bee said. “Don’t let them shout you into apathy.” On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah addressed an exposé from the Washington Post on the war in Afghanistan, which, at 18 years, is the longest in American history. The Post obtained documents demonstrating how, over the course of the war, political and military leaders misrepresented or lied about success in Afghanistan. “For 18 years, the American government has been painting a rosy picture, telling Americans everything has been going great in Afghanistan when in reality, it’s a total shitshow,” Noah explained. “It’s basically the technique every failing couple uses on Instagram.” What’s one thing Bush, Obama and Trump all have in common? Obscuring the true story of America’s war in Afghanistan. pic.twitter.com/mqT2CxXwWm The report, Noah continued, shows how the government manipulated vast details of the war to paint an untrue portrait of success. “They used numbers they couldn’t back up, they hyped small successes when they knew the big picture was getting worse, and they even tried to spin suicide bombings as a sign of success,” Noah said. The report also concludes that American military leadership felt aimless, with no idea who the enemy even was. “America sent its troops to Afghanistan for 18 years, and they didn’t even know who they were going to fight?” an incredulous Noah said. “That’s not how you do a war – that’s the strategy of a bunch of drunk dudes in Boston.” The American military didn’t have a plan, or a definition of victory, or a clear direction, but they did have money – “and as any rapper will tell you”, Noah said, “mo’ money, mo’ unnecessary expenditures”, such as $28m for forest camouflage uniforms in a country that’s almost entirely desert. “So America spent nearly $2tn on the war in Afghanistan with basically nothing to show for it,” Noah said. “Maybe that’s how you get the US government to put money into things like healthcare or teachers … just tell them the Taliban is there.” As for blame, Noah concluded, there’s plenty to go around. “Turns out that Bush, Obama and Trump all did their part to exaggerate America’s successes in Afghanistan,” said Noah, which points to his “silver lining” in this story: “In a country increasingly divided every day, it’s nice to know that there’s one issue that brings America’s leaders together: lying about war.”