One of the uniformly excellent soccer squad in The Wolves at Stratford East in 2018 (she played stoner midfielder #13), Sheehy made her RSC debut this year in King John. It’s one of Shakespeare’s most unloved, underperformed plays, but Sheehy, a Rada graduate from Port Talbot, was sensational as the unruly ruler. First seen bleary-eyed, knocking back a raw egg while in her pyjamas, she plays the first half as if the king’s simmering rage is entwined with an unshakable hangover. It runs at the Swan in Stratford until 21 March – beware the food fight if you sit in the front row. The Son, Florian Zeller’s devastating conclusion to his gripping family trilogy, gave Laurie Kynaston a role to fulfil the promise he had already shown in Jez Butterworth’s The Ferryman and (as a young Johnny Marr) in the film England Is Mine. Audiences arriving at the Kiln theatre were greeted with the sight of Kynaston writing on the walls, his scribbles as indecipherable as the depression that desperately engulfs his character, Nicolas, after his parents’ separation. His forthcoming projects include the film How to Build a Girl, based on Caitlin Moran’s book, playing the brother of Beanie Feldstein’s heroine. The new artistic director at the Unicorn started his tenure by directing a trio of tales about the trickster spider Anansi that was a masterclass in direct, no-fuss storytelling for a young audience. His opening season, loosely built around the idea of imagining new possibilities, has plenty of enticing productions to come, including Lulu Raczka’s retelling of Gulliver’s Travels in a school gym, Roland Schimmelpfennig’s characteristically knotty The Bee in Me and a collaboration by Sarah Argent and Guy Rhys, Robotology, which wonders what it might be like to be friends with a robot. When Racheal Ofori performed So Many Reasons at Camden People’s theatre at the start of 2018, her star quality burned as brightly as the show’s neon lighting design, which somehow managed to combine a vagina, a mango and the Virgin Mary. There was clearly many a reason why Ofori should be a household name: her touring one-woman show about sex and religion was full of charisma, comedic ability and candour. Currently at the National Theatre in Inua Ellams’ take on Three Sisters, Ofori takes So Many Reasons to Soho theatre in March. You’d be forgiven for expecting any debut monologue performed in a tiny venue at the Edinburgh festival fringe to be a bit rough around the edges. But Sadie Clark’s Algorithms – billed as a “bisexual Bridget Jones for the Fleabag generation” – was astonishingly assured and practically broadcast-ready. Developed at Soho Theatre Writers’ Lab, it’s sweet, sad and, as performed by Clark herself, full of heart – with more than a touch of Miranda Hart too. By rights it should have reached Fleabag-sized audiences by next summer. Triple threat doesn’t begin to cover Michelle Tiwo, the poet, actor, musician and podcaster who co-founded the Sistren broadcasting collective. Tiwo’s autobiographical work, including a contribution to And the Rest of Me Floats at the Bush theatre, often explores black queer visibility. Tiwo gave a magnetic performance as the teen uprooted from London to Margate in the raucous Parakeet at the Edinburgh fringe and in April will be co-curating Inua Ellams’ poetry night at the Barbican, riffing on John Singleton’s classic movie Boyz N the Hood. Anisha Fields is a designer whose sets keep on giving: you never know what they’ll reveal next. I Wish I Was a Mountain, an adaptation of a Hermann Hesse fairytale at Bath’s Egg in 2018, used a host of houses big and small to recreate a town’s fair. Homes popped up inside books, sand poured out of chimneys, roofs hid all sorts of surprises. This Christmas, she dreamed up a hands-on wonderland set for the Egg’s studio show Squirrel, drawing on Bauhaus designs to create a series of cones, tubes and geometric shapes that kept the young audience spellbound and created an enchanted forest scene. At the heart of Ned Bennett’s electrifying revival of Equus at Stratford East was the astonishing achievement of movement director Shelley Maxwell, who helped six actors morph into horses. Peter Shaffer, in the play’s preface, raised the danger that the performers playing the animals may convey the “cosy familiarity of a domestic animal – or worse, a pantomime horse”. No chance of that in Maxwell’s ferocious, haunting moves which stayed with you longer than any speech in the play. Maxwell, also a dancer and choreographer, went on to work on “Master Harold” … and the Boys at the National. Sarah Frankcom is a truly hard act to follow but her young successors, who now share the top job at Manchester’s formidable Royal Exchange, are perfectly placed. Both Roy Alexander Weise and Bryony Shanahan have established themselves as sharp directors – he with Nine Night and The Mountaintop, she with Bitch Boxer and Queens of the Coal Age. Together they plan to make work “with and for the people of Manchester”: Shanahan’s Wuthering Heights at the Exchange should be something special, while a freelance gig finds Weise reviving Roy Williams’ Sucker Punch in London. These two Belgian performance-makers – Brouyaux is based in Brussels, Guisset in Berlin – staged the most arresting duet I saw in 2019. De la Poésie, du Sport, etc has the pair clad in mix-and-match sportswear as they race through a number of scenarios exploring competition, fear, expectation and the difficulty of staying in sync both with those around you and with yourself. One minute it’s a track-and-field thriller, the next a Little Red Riding Hood chiller. This is a performance that’s so packed full of ideas it demands the audience keep up to speed. It’s on tour in Europe and deserves a UK date in 2020.