I suffered domestic abuse for several years when I was with my husband. The abuse would be in the house, but in front of others he would act completely differently. I was trapped, too frightened to leave, given all that he had done to me and threatened to do. He controlled every aspect of my life, including the finances. He set up a joint account, but the Jobseeker’s Allowance came in his name and only he accessed that account. I would have to ask him for money, even for basic essentials. After many years I eventually found a way to leave him. I was supported by Birmingham and Solihull Women’s Aid, who found me emergency temporary accommodation in a refuge. I had to start all over again with my kids – we had nothing. With staff support I applied for universal credit, but the Benefits Agency said they had to pay the money into a bank account. I hadn’t had a bank account of my own since I had been a child. I thought it would be easy to open an account, however I walked with the children to three different banks, both independently and with staff support and each bank said “No”. This was because they wanted the address of the refuge, but this could put me, and the rest of the families, at risk, and even though I told them this, they insisted on the address. The staff [from the refuge] also explained that I was a high-risk case and offered them the PO Box address or the main charity address, but they said no. One bank saw me three times and gave me false hope, each time saying that they would accept. Then in the final appointment they said the manager had now refused because I didn’t have an address. I was so upset and frustrated. It was like I didn’t matter, nobody cared. It was humiliating and again I had no control. I was worried how I would manage without the universal credit money. I had to feed my children. We had been surviving with support from my family and donations. Staff at the refuge then told me that HSBC UK had started a new way to open an account for women in refuges, a way in which we did not have to give the refuge address. An appointment was made and I attended a branch of HSBC UK far away from the shelter with staff support. They were patient and really kind to the kids and me. During the appointment I did think they would say no at any moment, but when they said the account was open I was so relieved. I finally had control. It was my account. I could make my own decisions, and buy the kids the things they needed, without having to beg or fear his anger. HSBC UK is working with local housing and homelessness charities to provide bank accounts to people without a fixed address, helping to break the cycle of financial exclusion. To find out more about this, and what else HSBC UK is doing to support local communities, visit hsbc.co.uk/togetherwethrive