When he arrived in southern France in March 1888, Vincent van Gogh immediately wrote a letter to his brother, Théo: “The sun dazzles me and goes to my head, a sun, a light that I can only call yellow, sulphur yellow, lemon yellow, golden yellow. How lovely yellow is!” The French historian Michel Pastoureau’s study of the colour begins with the cave art of the Paleolithic period and ends in the present day with the gilets jaunes protesters. This is his fifth book devoted to the history of a single colour. All are richly illustrated, but they are not just works of art history. As Pastoureau writes in the introduction to Blue (2001), “colour is first and foremost a social phenomenon”. It is society rather than nature that makes colour and gives it meaning, one that is constantly changing like sunlight on a landscape. Once the colour of the sun gods, yellow became the 'colour of deception' From language, medicine, heraldry, art and physics, to the making of paints and dyes, Pastoureau describes the long evolution of the uses and meanings of yellow in European culture. Yellow pigments derived from clay soils rich in ochre were used as early as 45,000BCE for decorating human bodies and cave walls. The first lexical references to yellow in the west come from the Neolithic period: “yellow as honey”, or “yellow as ripe wheat”. Yellow was also the colour of the sun and gold. In ancient Egypt, the bodies of the gods were painted in vivid yellow to resemble gold, “the flesh of the sun”. But negative associations of yellow began to dominate from the 14th century as it became the colour of “envy, jealousy, lying, dishonour and treason”. From the late middle ages onwards, yellow was regarded as “a false, duplicitous colour that cannot be trusted”. Such ideas were reinforced by the humoral medicine of the period, according to which yellow bile was associated with a choleric temperament, one thought to be violent, unstable, rancorous and hypocritical. Once the colour of the sun gods, yellow became the “colour of deception” and the chromatic signifier of those at the margins of society. Executioners were often portrayed dressed in yellow and in art Judas often wore a yellow robe. The yellow star of David that the Nazis forced Jews to wear from 1941 has its origins in the medieval cloth insignias Jews were sometimes made to wear. Lunatic asylums were painted yellow in central European countries and sex workers wore yellow items of clothing to draw attention to themselves in the dim light of street lamps. It is a colour that stands out: the colour of the lead cyclist’s jersey in the Tour de France (a tradition that began in the 1919 race because the race’s sponsor was L’Auto newspaper, printed on yellow paper). But its dubious reputation has endured. Opinion polls since the 1880s agree: yellow is one of the least popular colours (blue is the favourite). Yellow, it seems, is “forever the victim of a symbolic past too heavy to bear”. Like Pastoureau’s earlier volumes, this is a beautifully produced book and an impressive work of scholarship (though one that would be improved by an index). It is a fascinating and sensual celebration of our complex love-hate relationship with what Goethe called this “joyous colour”. • Yellow: The History of a Colour is published by Princeton (RRP £34). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.