Playwright Jackie Sibblies Drury and director Nadia Latif are about to open Fairview at the Young Vic. I’ve just told them I know next to nothing about Sibblies Drury’s Pulitzer prizewinner, and their smiles mirror each other. Latif nods and says one word: “Great!” I think I know three things about Fairview: it revolves around a black American family, there’s some exploration of class, or specifically, the black middle class, and there’s something to do with surveillance. Is that correct? What else can I know about the play? Sibblies Drury smiles. “It takes place in a theatre. And there’s going to be an audience.” Latif interjects: “Hopefully! And there’s a set.” “There’s totally a set.” The two laugh again. The media around a play typically tells a possible audience what it will be “about”. This makes sense: people want to know if a play will appeal to them, and information about characters, themes and plot can convince them to buy tickets. But Fairview bucks this trend. From the reviews of its original run in the US to the Young Vic’s website and social media channels, information about what actually happens in the play is scant. This is what Sibblies Drury wanted, and Latif (as well as most journalists) has been more than happy to get on board. “No great thing is about any one thing,” Latif says. Sibblies Drury agrees. “If you can sum it up in one sentence, it would be a lot easier to just read that one sentence.” But the silence, says Sibblies Drury, is “not for plot reasons. It’s not like you find out that someone was dead the whole time. I think that it’s more allowing oneself the ability to have your own experience watching something. The way that people process things is a really individual thing, and experience is individual in terms of your upbringing, in terms of your class, in terms of your race, in terms of the people that you’ve been friends with, the books that you’ve read, your references.” Latif agrees. “Theatre is not film, or TV, or Netflix. It’s a live art form. If you come to this show, knowing too much about it, you’re not having a live experience. You’ve in some way already processed what it’s about. So I think there’s something about encouraging you to have a live experience from minute zero to minute 100. Just come and have a collective, communal life experience, and then at the end, you can process it.” Latif herself did not watch Fairvew before agreeing to direct it. She and Kwame Kwei-Armah, artistic director of the Young Vic, were looking for plays. “He went to New York and called me on his way back, ‘I’ve just seen this play, and you need to have read it by the time I land.’ I really strongly didn’t want to do an African American play, because I was conscious I’d done quite a number of them. I wanted to find something that felt close to me. But then I read it and was like, ‘Oh, but it is!’ I think it reaches beyond an African American experience towards a black experience, or an ‘othered’ experience.” She continues: “I thought [Kwame] was asking if we should programme it. I was like, ‘Obviously’, and he goes, ‘Well, do you want to direct it?’ I was like… yes, trick question. Then I just had to do the small job of persuading this woman.” She wrote a letter explaining her reasons for wanting to direct Fairview. “When I was first told of your interest, I was a little bit afraid that it was like …” Sibblies Drury trails off. “The only two black kids in the class, so they have to date each other. You know what I mean? … But you were like, ‘I’m black, you’re black. But that’s not the only reason that I should direct this play.’ And I was like, ah, I am refreshed.” At the time, the off-Broadway production of Fairview gained a lot of buzz. But since then Fairview has shifted from “well-received” to “most recent winner of the Pulitzer prize for drama”. “Every play that I’ve ever done has sort of been about managing people’s disappointments in a way where they don’t feel disappointed at the end,” Sibblies Drury says. “That feels particularly true of this. Because I feel some people are going to come in and be like, ‘Oh, this has won a fancy award. This must be a fancy experience.’ And they’re going to come and be like, ‘What?’” Latif says that the play’s ideas are so complex that “in a way, the fourth act is what happens to you afterwards. How you process it. And I’m totally happy for there to be intellectual backlash. That’s cool, because that’s a conversation. I’m terrified of things that are universally lauded, I feel like that’s a full stop.” For now, keeping information about Fairview to a minimum is possible. But at some point, just like Death of a Salesman or Cat on a Hot Tin Roof, the Pulitzer-winning title will mean more, and more people will find out about the play’s plot. Can Sibblies Drury imagine Fairview being produced regularly, for decades to come? She pauses. “No. I hope not. I think it’s a hard play to do well. Also to me, it feels like its shelf life isn’t going to be very long. Hopefully, because of society. I do hope that part of the charm of the show is that it sort of puts together all of these stereotypes that are so ingrained into our consciousness that we like barely register them as that any more. And so hopefully pointing out those stereotypes won’t feel fresh or interesting or new relatively soon. But maybe that’s optimistic.” Fairview is at the Young Vic theatre, London, until 18 January.