I thought it was tough being young under Margaret Thatcher, but being middle aged under this shower feels so much worse. And I caught some of the sharper ends of Thatcherism – signing on, living in squats, hitching everywhere, no money at all. There was everything from war to the miners’ strike to the destruction of the north. There was plenty to complain about, and we did – at length. Yet still this feels worse. The airless finality of Brexit, austerity, the battered NHS, the rise of nationalism, and on it grinds. Maybe it’s not the times, it’s just my time – I’m older, things are hitting me harder. But I’ve got a teenager and a twentysomething. It feels like my duty to clamber out of my sour, fogey, Remainer-funk and wonder what young people must be making of their bequeathed world – as the song says, this “empire of dirt”? It would be a twisted comfort if those who wrought this destruction were central casting evil geniuses. No such luck. I’ve never had anything against Leave voters, but, guys, look at the state (the absolute state) of your leaders! Then look again through the baffled revolted eyes of the young. Boris Johnson – now so stained and corrupted, it’s like watching Macbeth gibbering at Banquo’s ghost on a permanent loop. Dominic Cummings – a Death-Eater in a crumpled hoodie. And let’s not forget that other “top Tory aide”, Jeremy Corbyn. I left Labour because of Corbyn, and now I feel so right, I wish I was wrong. (For pity’s sake, man, just go!) At least you could get your head around Thatcher as a super-villain, This feels like Judgment Day delivered by an underpaid Deliveroo guy. The worst of it is that my kids – anyone’s kids – have to live through this as actual young people. This passes for their youth. The world turning into a fireball, both literally and metaphorically. The crushing of opportunities. Demoralisation as their factory-setting. The polarised noxious slurry that passes for public discourse. Most escape routes sealed off. Perhaps there’s no “good” age for political calamity, but, for the young, their golden life-building years have been torpedoed in a way that didn’t happen in my era. Even the children of Thatcher weren’t this royally screwed; even we grew up with the sense of doors and worlds opening, not slamming shut in our faces. All that many young Britons have to look forward to is generational locked-in syndrome. I suppose, as we look at them, they look back at us. The decisions and motivations of the older adult world must look so alien and ugly right now. Maybe their chief fear is that they will grow to hate as relentlessly as we do. I hope that younger people realise that they have a precious resource – energy – it means they will survive, like the old and knackered may not. As for how tough it feels to be middle-aged right now, it’s even tougher being young. Some might see it as entirely appropriate that Taylor Swift should use being honoured as the first-ever woman of the decade at the Billboard Women in Music awards to call out a male record executive. Swift has a beef with Scooter Braun after his company acquired the rights to her early material as part of their purchase of the Big Machine Label Group in June. Furious at not being consulted, or given the chance to buy her early music, Swift revealed plans to re-record it, then clashed with Braun over her wish to perform certain tracks at the American Music awards (which was permitted). For his part, Braun said that his family had been threatened by Swift’s fans. At the Billboard event, Swift described Braun, and others who’d tried to silence her, as “the definition of toxic male privilege”. She also spoke of “the unregulated world of private equity coming in and buying music as if it’s real estate. As if it’s an app or a shoe line”. Ah, sorry, Taylor, you had me up until this point. I admire her defiance, and how she sticks up for other artists – there are times she’s akin to a vinyl Boudicca. However, “buying music as if it’s real estate. As if it’s an app or a shoe line.” Where’s the shock here? Music has long been a commodity. While musicians have always hated their art being treated like cans of beans, that’s the nature of the music business. Many huge names have seen their back catalogues fall into others’ hands – Michael Jackson owned much of the Beatles’ back catalogue for years. This doesn’t negate Swift’s point. (Surely it is the height of business bad manners not to offer an artist first refusal on their early material?) However, while I’m sorry that this episode made Swift feel that her art is a commodity, the truth is, it always has been, and always will be. Harvey Weinstein attended his civil class action hearing in New York on a walking frame, just in time for panto season. Was this sudden attack of extreme (some might say, hammy) frailty genuine? Who knows? More pertinently, if the $25m settlement is approved, and paid out to the plaintiffs (more than 30 actresses and former employees), the money would come from insurers rather than Weinstein’s pocket; nor would he have to acknowledge any wrongdoing, or apologise. Some people, including other accusers, have expressed anger and disappointment at news of the settlement. However, it must still count as a win for #MeToo. Women in these dire situations need to take whatever wins they can get. For some, the statute of limitations has expired, and this could be their sole chance to get closure. While it’s very concerning that this resolution could help shut down other civil cases, two women are bringing a criminal case against him next month. Above all, these women are not on trial – it isn’t their fault that they were (allegedly) sexually assaulted in the first place. Ideally, Weinstein would be forced to apologise, but there’s no ethical disgrace in them accepting a settlement as the next best option. Anyone who seeks to shame or question these women needs to be told that they’re looking the wrong way. • Barbara Ellen is an Observer columnist