In choosing continuity by appointing Ian Foster as All Black coach, the New Zealand Rugby hierarchy appear to have been motivated by the need for what they perceive to be a safe pair of hands. It could prove that, in selecting Steve Hansen’s right-hand man to take over, the powerbrokers have instead taken a greater risk than would have been the case in opting for the extrovert, but hugely successful, Crusaders coach, Scott Robertson. Regardless of the sport, a new coach almost always enjoys a honeymoon period. This is, at least in part, due to the optimism generated by an expectation of fresh ideas, a different voice, a different approach. It is difficult to argue that Foster ticks the box on any of those fronts. The 54-year-old brings in some fresh faces to support him, but as the front man he will be the one who is either showered with praise or the object of negativity. If there are any early stumbles, the public is unlikely to be as sympathetic as it might have been to a Robertson-led team. This was reinforced by a poll on a leading nationwide news website, prior to the announcement, which had 78% of respondents favouring a Robertson appointment, while just nine selected Foster. Such polls are hardly an exact science, and do play to the discontented, but the overwhelmingly negative nature of the response, both before and since his appointment, does highlight the credibility mountain Foster has to climb. Through no real fault of his own, Foster lacks appeal among the supporter base. Although the assistant coach received little credit for the success enjoyed by the All Blacks during his eight years on the coaching staff, critics were quick to lay a big part of the blame in Foster’s lap for the team’s failure to break down England at the World Cup. This was unfair. While the best coaches allow their assistants plenty of input, the head coach makes the final call on the strategy, and the selection of the players to carry it out. Hansen has repeatedly shown in the past that, once on a set course, that’s the way his ship is going. The failure in Japan was not met with the recriminations of failed World Cups past, but the recruitment process did underwhelm, with most of New Zealand’s best coaches giving it a wide berth. Even so, Robertson offered the freshness Foster lacked. Importantly, he also offered form on the board. Before the Graham Henry-Steve Hansen period of domination began in 2004, a three-time Super Rugby-winning head coach would have been considered a certainty to coach the All Blacks, especially given there are three national provincial championship titles and a world Under-20 crown in Robertson’s CV as well. To put that in perspective, Henry won Super Rugby twice as a head coach, while Hansen’s experience was largely as an assistant, aside from an undistinguished period as head coach of Wales. Although well and truly shaded by Robertson, who is a former All Black, Foster can at least point to a more distinguished provincial career as both a player and a coach than his predecessor, who nonetheless won a World Cup while in the job. A Ranfurly Shield-winning captain in 1997, Foster played a record 148 games for Waikato, 14 more than the province’s last All Black coach, John Mitchell. Although never an All Black himself, he played much of his career as a teammate of Mitchell’s, as well as new Chiefs coach Warren Gatland, each being part of Waikato’s maiden national provincial championship-winning side of 1992. Foster later had Scott McLeod and future professional referee Glen Jackson in the dressing room during his final playing seasons. Like Foster, defence coach McLeod will carry over from Hansen’s staff. Foster’s coaching career began promisingly, taking Waikato to the final in 2002, but semi-final finishes were the best he could do in his second and third seasons before focusing exclusively on the Chiefs from 2005. As with Waikato, Foster began well with the Chiefs, taking the side to its maiden semi-final in his first season in 2004. A first final came five years later but, mirroring much of Foster’s career, the achievement was bittersweet. The Chiefs were routed 61-17 by the Bulls. It remains a record margin in a final, unlikely to be surpassed any time soon. It didn’t help with the public perception of Foster’s work when the Chiefs promptly won back-to-back titles under Dave Rennie’s stewardship, once he had joined Team Hansen with the All Blacks in 2012. The new Wallaby coach will have another chance to make life uncomfortable for his All Black counterpart next year. It would be difficult for Robertson not to take this defeat hard. Given the scale of his success, compared to his rival, how could he not have got the job? He is not alone among Kiwis who are wondering that right now. While he will put on a brave face, Robertson will have returned to Crusaders training on Wednesday morning motivated to embarrass those who have overlooked him. He may also revisit those foreign suitors whose phones he has put on hold up until now. Although Robertson has committed to the Crusaders for the next two seasons, the knock-back could force a change of plan, as the currency of coaching has its greatest value on the back of recent success. Robertson will be aware that if he waits a further two years before seeking to cash in, his stock may not be as high, his options more limited. In choosing Foster, losing Robertson is a risk New Zealand Rugby has been prepared to take.