The perfect accompaniment to the end-of-year revelry, this year’s BBC lineup is packed with starry turns. Graham Norton’s New Year’s Eve show sees him joined by Tom Hanks to talk about his upcoming film role as Fred Rogers in A Beautiful Day in the Neighbourhood, plus actor Stephen Graham, Strictly judge Motsi Mabuse and Spice Girl Mel C. Then the UKG stalwart Craig David is at (a scaffolding-covered) Big Ben performing his easily digestible hits before the barrage of fireworks kick in over the Thames. Welcome to 2020. Ammar Kalia She has cruised through Christmas and now Jane McDonald glides into New Year’s Eve. Warm up for the bagpipes with a dose of the Wakefield whirlwind’s warmth, but beware the worst musical lineup ever, including Heather Small, the Lighthouse Family and Chesney Hawkes. Hannah Verdier Adam Hills presents a special two-hour edition of the show, in which to bury this frankly rancid year in concentrated earth and try to move on. While Johnny Vegas pours the pints, Alex Brooker aims to become the first disabled man in history to complete a high-speed lap in a F4 racer at Donington Park. Ali Caterall This dark US crime drama helmed by Liev Schreiber is a rare thing: a show that’s now on its seventh series but still flying largely under the radar. There’s much here for Donofans, though, as the always intimidating Mickey (Jon Voight) learns the truth about the heist that sent him to jail. Hannah J Davies After 50 years in showbiz, Dame Edna hung up her ballgown and retired. It turns out she’s been travelling aboard a luxury yacht ever since and she now invites us on for this chatshow special with Sharon Osbourne, Judge Rinder and Emily Atack, subjecting them to her cheeky interviewing style. AK It’s a testament to Jools Holland that “hootenanny” has now become inextricable from his chaotic new year’s specials. No doubt he’ll be wandering the studio once more, introducing the likes of Stormzy, Stereophonics and La Roux to ring in the countdown. AK Point Break, 2am, BBC One Kathryn Bigelow’s ferociously paced cult thriller (with a touch of zen) has Keanu Reeves and Patrick Swayze cresting the wave of stardom. Reeves is Fed Johnny Utah, infiltrating bank robbers the Ex-Presidents and bonding with charismatic leader-cum-surfboard guru Bodhi (Swayze). Paul Howlett Big Bash Cricket: Adelaide Strikers v Sydney Thunder 8am, BT Sport 1. More from the Aussie T20 competition at Adelaide Oval. Skiing: World Cup 11.20am, Eurosport 1. Featuring the women’s 10km freestyle mass-start event. Ski Jumping: The Four Hills 12.55pm, Eurosport 1. The qualifying session from Garmisch-Partenkirchen.