Joe Barton’s inventive, unpredictable, often hugely sad and sometimes very funny Anglo-Japanese thriller must be one of the dramas of the year. Its finale has all the right elements of surprise, victory and heartbreak, the last of those provided by Will Sharpe as we see some of how his character Rodney became such a lost soul when he returns to his childhood home to visit his mother. In the midst of it all is one genuinely extraordinary sequence that no other show in 2019 could have attempted. Jack Seale The election campaign grinds remorselessly on; like a negative advent calendar, it promises fresh and unexpected dismay every day. Tonight, one-time Glastonbury star turn Jeremy Corbyn gets the chance to make the case for his ambitious Labour manifesto. Phil Harrison Penultimate episode of the Sainsbury’s-flavoured obs doc, and it’s time to think up a Christmas advert that will leave heartwarmed audiences in floods of tears and drive sales. Easy, right? Plus, will a roaring range of fresh fruit teas and posh bar snacks make it past their trial period? Hannah J Davies Gino is back on the train, this time exploring the Italian Riviera’s most sumptuous vistas in the Cinque Terre. Dangling from a cliff edge, he meets climbing winemakers Bartolo and Lisse, whose vines hang 1km above sea level, and whips up an indulgent limoncello tiramisu. Ammar Kalia This psycho-science show probing whether it is nature or nurture that makes some of us commit extreme crimes reaches its end with the case of Anthony Powell, who was convicted in 1993 for shooting a man dead. The experts reveal how brain maldevelopment might have influenced his decisions. AK Tim Minchin’s road-trip comedy through the Australian outback continues, and there is yet more drama in store for his unruly pianist Lucky Flynn and unlikely companion Meg. Namely that the pair find themselves out of cash and out of petrol in the baking sun with only Flynn’s beloved piano for company. AK The Shape of Water, 6.50pm, Sky Cinema Greats Like any good fishing story, Oscar-laden praise for Guillermo del Toro’s romantic fantasy was somewhat exaggerated. But it is nevertheless a darkly compelling tale of mute Elisa and her amphibian beau trying to evade vicious national security man Michael Shannon and find true love. Paul Howlett Athletics: Biathlon Coverage of the opening World Cup meeting from Sweden. 3.10pm, Eurosport 2 Premier League football: Sheffield United v Newcastle Head-to-head with the Blades on home turf at Bramall Lane. 7.30pm, Amazon Prime Video Premier League football: Arsenal v Brighton & Hove Albion Another top-flight clash. 8.15pm, Amazon Prime Video