Jeremy Farrar, head of the Wellcome Trust, has a straightforward view about the way doctors and scientists tackled the current Ebola epidemic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. “In four or five years, we have taken a disease that was absolutely terrifying and which had an enormously high death rate – more than 80% – and we have turned it, potentially, into something that is preventable and treatable.” The fact this has been done in a nation in the middle of a civil war is “simply miraculous”, added Farrar, a world expert on emerging diseases. “It is a truly phenomenal achievement. If you do not celebrate that, you cannot celebrate anything else.” However, there is a sting in the tail of Farrar’s medical message. Yes, over the past four years science has developed diagnostics, drugs and vaccines that are helping to halt Ebola. But major problems still lie ahead for many nations, including DRC, which try to deploy these treatments without continued international help – because they have such fragile health services. And that is true not just for Ebola but for entire health care systems which face continued challenges from TB, HIV, malaria and emerging diseases such as Dengue or Nipah or Mers. All of these could soon become major epidemics thanks to ecological changes taking place across the planet. Ebola was first identified in 1976 by researchers sent to investigate an ailment that was killing victims in a remote part of DRC. Blood taken from patients would not clot, and poured from wounds. Nurses treating patients were also dying. The team named the condition after the local Ebola river. “We now know Ebola is triggered by a virus – probably picked up from an infected bat or non-human primate – that causes blood vessels to leak,” added Farrar. “It ends in organ failure and death.” For the next four decades, small-scale outbreaks occurred in central Africa but were contained by quarantining affected villages. Then in December 2013, a young child was discovered to be infected in west Africa, in Guinea, and because of the extensive movement of people in that area, the disease quickly spread to Sierra Leone and Liberia. Ebola became a disease of dense populations, killing more than 11,000 people between 2013 and 2016. A new threat to world health had emerged. “The transformation in the behaviour of Ebola came about because of alterations in the movements of humans, changes in human interactions with animals – which act as reservoirs of the virus – as well as changes in ecology and mass urganisaton,” said Farrar. The west Africa outbreak was eventually contained but two years later Ebola appeared again in a major outbreak, this time back in central Africa in DRC in 2018. So far about 2,200 of the 3,500 infected have died. But although the epidemic is still not over, numbers of cases are stabilising . “The world came together and over the past four years we have developed two vaccines to protect against the disease and two drugs that treat those already infected.” said Farrar. “If you can get to people and treat them within four days of them becoming infected, mortality will only be about 10%. A few years ago, it was more like 80%. And of course, vaccines stop you getting the disease in the first place.” Money for the development of these drugs and vaccines has come from the US, UK, Norway, WHO, the European Commission and charities such as the Wellcome Trust. Pharmaceutical firms including Merck, Johnson & Johnson, and Regeneron have all provided important help as well. “In addition, all those who carried out Ebola studies in west Africa and in DRC have had to do so under the circumstances of extreme violence and fear, with healthcare colleagues being killed. It is a staggering, astonishing story,” added Farrar. The success he sees in DRC over Ebola is important not just for that disease, he added. There are a number of other illnesses – including Lassa, Mers, Nipah, Marburg and Dengue – which have the potential to become widespread epidemics as a result of climate change or other ecological shifts – and changes in society – in Africa or Asia or Europe. “The lesson from Ebola is that for all these conditions we will need to create vaccines and treatments, where there are none today, over the next 10 years – and we are going to need them. Mers, Lassa and Dengue all have the potential to shift from relatively low infection rates to high ones just as Ebola did in response to ecological change, travel and urbanisation. The world is now very exposed. “Ebola shows we can respond, scientifically, to these threats. The real issue is to ensure drugs and vaccines reach those who need them. To do that we need to set up effective healthcare systems across the world. That will not be easy – but it is critical. It is an issue on which we should be judged. We will succeed, I believe.”