Hansi Flick will remain in charge at Bayern Munich until the end of the season, the defending Bundesliga champions announced on Sunday. Flick was promoted from the coaching staff to become interim manager, after Niko Kovac’s dismissal. The Croatian was sacked after the 5-1 thrashing away to Eintracht Frankfurt in November. The 54-year-old was initially brought in for just two matches: against Olympiakos in the Champions League and Borussia Dortmund in the league. After winning both, he was trusted to continue “at least until Christmas”, but not offered the role until the season’s end. Flick has now been given that opportunity, with the club issuing a glowing statement after Saturday’s 2-0 win over Wolfsburg. That was Bayern’s fourth straight win in all competitions, after back-to-back league defeats against Bayer Leverkusen and Mönchengladbach. “Under [Flick] as head coach, the on-field development has been outstanding, both in terms of the quality of our play and the results achieved,” said the club’s CEO, Karl-Heinz Rummenigge. “We set a new record in the 28-year history of the Champions League with six wins in six group-stage matches, and in the Bundesliga we have returned to touching distance of the top of the table.” “I’m happy that FC Bayern is continuing to place trust in me as head coach,” Flick said. “Now we’re recharging our batteries, and we’ll prepare ourselves intensively for the second half of the season at the training camp. Then we’ll try to achieve as many victories and titles as possible.” Bayern are four points off league leaders RB Leipzig going into the winter break, and will take on Frank Lampard’s Chelsea in the Champions League last 16. Papu Gómez scored a stunning individual goal and Josip Ilicic notched a second-half double as Atalanta thrashed Milan 5-0, equalling the Rossoneri’s worst-ever Serie A defeat. Mario Pasalic and Luis Muriel also scored as Milan lost a league game by a five-goal margin for the first time since 1998, leaving Stefano Pioli’s side mired in mid-table as Atalanta climbed back up to fifth. Gómez opened the scoring in the 10th minute, nutmegging Andrea Conti before firing a right-foot shot past Gianluigi Donnarumma. Pasalic clipped the crossbar before half-time, but diverted Robin Gosens’ cross-shot home on the hour to double the lead. Milan’s defence then fell apart with Ilicic scoring twice in nine minutes, before Muriel raced clear, rounded Donnarumma as the keeper rushed out of the area, and slotted in the fifth.