Ole Gunnar Solskjær admitted Manchester United lacked the “ideas” required to beat Everton at Old Trafford on Sunday. United dominated before and after Victor Lindelöf’s first-half own goal but could salvage only a point via Mason Greenwood’s late equaliser. The result meant United dropped to sixth and ultimately left their manager ruing a paucity of creativity. “We’re disappointed we didn’t get three points,” Solskjær said. “We didn’t have the ideas to win it towards the end. We kept them on the back foot and, if any team was going to win, it was us. “It’s easy from the outside sitting in the stands and watching [and saying]: ‘Could’ve, should’ve.’ But it was down to a lack of a bit of a calm head that maybe you’ll get with a bit more experience. The young kids want to do well and we just didn’t have that little bit of extra composure. You wanted the ball to drop to Mason because he’s so calm and composed, and when he gets chances, he takes them.” The draw followed wins over Tottenham and Manchester City and means United have still not managed three wins on the bounce in the league since mid-January. “We’ve taken a few steps forward [recently]; today is not a big step backwards, it’s more of a stand still,” said Solskjær. “We are as a team and a group going forward.” Solskjær refused to be drawn regarding reports he watched the Red Bull Salzburg striker Erling Haaland at the end of last week. “I don’t comment on those speculations, so that’s it,” he said about the player he managed at Molde. “He knows what he wants to do and what he’s going to do.” Meanwhile Duncan Ferguson explained why he took off Moise Kean on 89 minutes, 19 minutes after putting the striker on as a substitute. “It’s understandable if you’re a sub and getting subbed off [if he’s upset],” said Everton’s caretaker manager. “That’s what I was just looking for –fresh legs really. He struggled to get up to the speed of the game. I asked him to go centre-forward, then put Dom [Calvert-Lewin] to the right-hand side, then asked him to change to the right-hand side, which is unfair on him. “That’s the time I said I’m going to put on a guy who can handle it a bit better. I can see why he’s upset. But it’s for the good of the team. I’ll speak to him next time I see him.”