In turbulent political times, how can theatre respond to the turmoil? Sometimes what’s really needed is escapism and jazz hands – both of which Guys and Dolls has in spades. For those in desperate need of some warmth, wit and silliness, Sheffield Crucible’s sharp revival delivers. Frank Loesser’s musical is synonymous with a particular image of New York – all dice games, rackets and tilted fedoras. In Robert Hastie’s minimal yet bustling version, the city is conjured out of nowhere. Janet Bird’s ingenious set is a jigsaw puzzle of scaffolds that slot together on the revolving stage, forming the skeletons of buildings fleshed out by the ensemble. Against this spare, flexible backdrop, the cast generate all the energy, chaos and romance of the Big Apple, kicking and flicking their way through Matt Flint’s stunning choreography. At the heart of this giddy metropolis are the show’s gamblers and their gals. It’s not hard to believe that Kadiff Kirwan’s charismatic Sky Masterson might charm even the sternest of souls, but in this version Sarah Brown – played by Alex Young – is no gullible sap. While there’s a swoony flavour to her encounters with Sky, who woos her to win a bet, she’s never entirely swept off her feet. In the Havana scenes, which can have an unsavoury whiff of booze-fuelled manipulation, it’s clearly Sarah who decides to knock back the rum with gleeful abandon. But it’s the other couple who really steal the show. As Nathan Detroit, Martin Marquez is every inch the lovable chancer, finding any opportunity to run his crap game while peddling excuses to long-suffering fiancé, Miss Adelaide. Natalie Casey revels in the role of Nathan’s neglected sweetheart, casting wry looks to the audience and injecting comedy into each last sneeze. She never overeggs the wounded lover act, knowing when to balance the laughs with genuine vulnerability. None of the set pieces disappoint, from the thrilling dancing of Luck Be a Lady to an especially riotous rendition of Sit Down, You’re Rocking the Boat. This show won’t change the world, but it might just put a smile on your face. • At Sheffield Crucible until 18 January.