Born in Ballarat, Australia, Craig Revel Horwood, 54, began his career as a dancer in Melbourne but moved to the UK 30 years ago to work in London’s West End. He’s now a choreographer, director and stage star but is best known as a judge on all 17 series of Strictly Come Dancing. He’s appearing in pantomime at Manchester Opera House until 29 December. You’re currently playing the Wicked Queen in Snow White. How wicked is she?Very wicked but she’s funny with it. There are a lot of Strictly gags in there, where my dancing gets scored by the audience. Sometimes they shout “Seveeeeen!” like Len Goodman, other times I get a whole row of zeros. There’s lots of singing, frivolity, banter with hecklers and costume changes. It’s so full-on, I usually lose a stone-and-a-half during panto season. You should patent the Panto Diet Plan.I should. You can eat anything you like over the Christmas period and still lose weight – what’s not to love? How are you enjoying spending the month in Manchester?I adore Manchester. It’s got fantastic places to eat and great nightlife. It’s like a mini-London, except easy to get around. I’ve spent lots of time here with Annie, Sister Act and the Strictly tour. I directed the Commonwealth Games opening ceremony here too. You’re virtually Mancunian.Not just virtually. Ashton-under-Lyne is where my great-great-great-grandfather was born, so I am sort of Mancunian. You can probably tell by my accent [laughs]. When I did [BBC genealogy series] Who Do You Think You Are?, we discovered that my ancestors came from up north. There was even a champion clog-dancer in the family. Bizarre, isn’t it? This is your 12th year doing panto. Are you booked up for next Christmas?I’m booked up for the next three, actually. Hopefully I’ve got another three years in me! Next year it’s Cinderella in Southampton. I’m the Wicked Stepmother, obviously. You’re also off on your first solo tour next year, titled All Balls and Glitter. What can audiences expect?I’m really looking forward to it. I’ll showcase songs from some of the musicals I’ve been in, do a bit of dancing and tell some stories. I’ll also share some backstage gossip because I’m always opening my mouth. A bit too wide sometimes. What did you think of the standard on Strictly this year?Really high – and unpredictable, too. I would’ve put a big bet on Michelle Visage getting to the final but she went out in Blackpool. All it took was one weak routine. Head judge Shirley Ballas said she received more online abuse this year than ever…She can join my club, darling. I’ve had that for 15 years. Everyone’s entitled to their opinion, of course, but there’s never any need for that. I tend to just look at how many followers trolls have got and it’s usually about two, so please. You can’t let it bother you. There were lots of injuries this series. Is that because the dances are becoming more adventurous?That’s part of it. Because the competition is so strong, they’re pushing themselves further each year and trying harder to impress. But accidents can happen anytime. I’ve ripped my calf muscle walking down stairs and slipped a disc leaning across the bed to pick up some washing, but I’ve always been fine when I’m dancing. Injuries led to Kelvin Fletcher being drafted in as a replacement and going on to win…Well, hello. God works in mysterious ways. He’s definitely a worthy winner. He came in at the last minute but had a strong work ethic, great temperament and he can really dance. Is it true you developed your catchphrases on Strictly to save time?Yes, there’s only two minutes for the judges’ comments and Bruno [Tonioli] takes up a lot of that, so we’re often pushed for time. If I’m last to speak, they’ll come to me and say I’ve got literally 10 seconds, so it’s difficult to do a full critique. Instead I’ll just say one word, like fab-ew-lous or dis-ah-ster. You sometimes say dancers have “spatulistic” hands. Is that a word you made up?Yes! Hands like spatulas. And arm-ography – that was one of mine that is now in the dictionary, hilariously. Is it time that same-sex couples were introduced on Strictly?Yes, I’ve been pushing for it for five years, so I’m pleased it seems to be slowly happening. I’m head judge on the Australian edition and we did it there this year with [drag queen] Courtney Act and [pro dancer] Josh Keefe, who ended up coming second. I fully support the idea of two women or two men dancing together. You’ve just got to choose who goes backwards, that’s all. You used to be a drag queen back in Australia. What do you think of drag being so fashionable now?It does seem to be having a moment. It certainly wasn’t this mainstream in my day. I’d finish a theatre show, then grab my trumpet, tap shoes and backing tapes, then go off to the clubs. There’s a long history in the UK of comedy drag acts with almost clown-style makeup, but I always tried to fool everyone I was a woman. I was 6ft 5in in heels but one has fantasies when one is young. You’re celebrating your 30th year in the UK. What changes have you seen?Margaret Thatcher was still in power when I moved here, so I’ve seen huge changes politically. I lived in Camden Town [London] back then and loved how bohemian and grungey it was. Now it’s all commercialised and touristy. I’d love to see a resurgence for independent retailers, not just there but everywhere. Which celebrity would you most like to see on Strictly?Simon Cowell, definitely. I’d love an X Factor does Strictly crossover with all their judges. Sharon Osbourne and Louis Walsh would be brilliant too. Nicole Scherzinger or Cheryl Cole would probably win it, because they’re fierce dancers. Who are you looking forward to seeing back on the dancefloor for the Strictly Christmas special?I’m a great fan of Debbie McGee so it’ll be fantastic to see her again. The Christmas special is always fun. Everyone at home can sit down to watch their favourites and relax after a great big porky lunch. There’s nothing like it to add a bit of glitz and glamour to proceedings. How much time off do you get over Christmas?Just Christmas Day, but that’ll be lovely. My boyfriend’s family live in Leicester so I’m going down there for Christmas lunch, then back to Manchester that night. I’ve got two shows on Boxing Day so I can’t be too outrageous. I couldn’t do the Wicked Queen with a hangover. Will you be throwing your traditional New Year’s Eve pool party?Absolutely. Get the neighbours round to watch the fireworks at midnight, then out come the bikinis and thongs and off we go. Jump in the pool, then party until dawn. I love it. Strictly Come Dancing Christmas Special airs on BBC One at 4.40pm on Christmas Day. Revel Horwood directs and appears in the Strictly arena tour from 16 January, then embarks on his debut solo tour in May