A warning: Soundtrack (Netflix) is so “not for everyone” it could soon replace Marmite as the go-to epithet for anything divisive. This 10-part musical drama tells the schmaltzy, soapy story of residents in Los Angeles whose lives converge against a backdrop of song and dance. Each episode is called a “track”, the melodrama is so strong that you may need smelling salts, and the WTF moments come thick and fast. But in spite of feeling the puppeteers yanking every single one of my strings, I fell for its charms completely. Television musicals are few and far between, and even then, the magic of seeing a story play out in song rarely translates well to the small screen. When Prime Video’s Modern Love attempted a musical episode with Anne Hathaway, its la las failed to land. Crazy Ex-Girlfriend managed it, as did Glee, for the most part, but Soundtrack is doing something different. It is a musical, but instead of performing their own songs, or even their own versions of popular songs, the characters simply lip-sync to a familiar hit whenever something huge happens in their lives. It almost goes without saying that this is initially jarring, but it settles in far more quickly than you might expect. This does result in the curious spectacle of a character supposedly raised in LA suddenly going a bit mockney when she mouths along to Lily Allen’s Never Gonna Happen, but Soundtrack is not interested in gritty realism. If there’s a song at a party, say, the party-goers join in as backing dancers. Occasionally, everyone drifts off into a dreamlike sequence. There is a character floating away on the clouds here, a graphic novel rendered lifesize there. Most episodes end with a mashup of two tunes, announced with the word “mash-up” streaked across the screen. It is the first time I have really thought about mashups since 2004. Cooked up by the showrunner, Joshua Safran, who oversaw Quantico and the second and last season of Broadway hothouse Smash, Soundtrack is deliberately and winningly bonkers. Safran has described this as Paul Thomas Anderson meets This Is Us, and cites Pennies from Heaven as a key influence. It shows. Some of the episodes are directed by Joe Swanberg, who created Easy, another Netflix series that excelled in weaving together lives and romances, although it did so without the softness that Soundtrack cannot resist. The main thread follows the story of Nellie and Sam. Nellie is an aspiring artist, wealthy, a little snobby, and unlucky when it comes to men. (Her first number is Sia’s Elastic Heart, belted out during an early dumping.) Sam is an aspiring musician and songwriter, who is poor and comes from a different world entirely. Naturally, they butt heads, over class, privilege and entitlement. Naturally, they fall madly, deeply in love, all the while singing out their feelings, or at least miming them. This is a fantasy through and through. Nellie’s mother – another standout uppity’n’rich role for Madeleine Stowe, who honed that act in Revenge – is a movie star. Joanna, whose role in this nonlinear story (it spans several years and darts back and forth between eras) is initially unclear, is a dancer stuck in endless auditions that never go anywhere. She also loves reading, much to her judgmental co-worker’s surprise, which leads to exchanges as delightfully daft as: “What was the book you were reading last week?” “The Sociology of Human Aggression.” Everyone conducts their business with the straightest of faces. Marianne Jean-Baptiste is a knockout as Annette, Sam’s aunt, who rips through Etta James, Basement Jaxx and Whitney Houston and looks as if she was born to do it. It helps that the actual soundtrack is great. This is not a selection of castoffs that appear because it was easy to get the rights. There’s Chet Baker, Lauryn Hill, Dolly Parton and St Vincent. It must have cost a fortune. Even the mashups become more clever as the series progresses; my favourite was Joni Mitchell’s Both Sides Now, which moved from the 1969 version to the husky, smoky 2000 one, although I Will Always Love You was done with a clever touch, too, that would be a shame to spoil. Soundtrack is not subtle or quiet or low-key. It is bold, big and unabashedly soapy. It wears its emotional excesses with pride. There are twists and turns so manipulative it is almost cruel. When everything starts to fit together, when the connections start to make sense, joyfully and tragically, it is satisfying, in the same way that settling in to watch a favourite film that you’ve seen 20 times before is satisfying. Soundtrack has made a mix tape out of melodrama, and I suspect it is going to be huge, and far more than a one-hit-wonder.