With Liverpool strolling towards the title without any of their rivals being able to lay a glove on them, Sadio Mané is being sized up for an enquiry as to whether a similar experience at Paris Saint-Germain might suit him. According to France Football, the Senegal forward is prominent in the club’s thoughts, especially if Neymar stomps off elsewhere. PSG would, of course, have to reckon with Jürgen Klopp’s unwillingness to let his in-form man go, and the fact that Mané’s contract ties him to Anfield until 2023, so the sum involved would need to be colossal. But PSG do like a challenge. Despite three stunning quickfire goals on Monday night, large parts of Arsenal’s game, and matches, are still a bit rubbish and they could do with tightening up. Enter the rejuvenated Chris Smalling, who is impressing on loan at Roma from Manchester United, and who the Mirror reports is being tracked by the Gunners with a view to a permanent deal. Internazionale, Juventus, Everton and Leicester might have to be elbowed out of the way too, mind. Inter’s young striking sensation Lautaro Martínez has turned plenty of heads this season, latest among them those at Barcelona who, according to sport.es have contacted the Serie A leaders about the 22-year-old Argentinian forward, who has 13 goals in 20 matches this season. Talking of Everton, and Arsenal, the former have approached the latter’s sacked manager, Unai Emery, about their managerial vacancy, their appetite for Spanish managers unproven in the Premier League apparently not sated. But Emery wants time to think, report Sky Sports. Manchester United supposedly want to tempt James Maddison with the offer of Europa League football at Old Trafford rather than the Champions League action he looks increasingly likely to see if he remains at Leicester. The Foxes have responded by opening talks with the midfielder about a new contract. They’re doing the same with another of their sleeper hits this season, the defender Caglar Soyuncu. Ole Gunnar Solskjær might have better luck with Saúl Niguez and Mill mainstay Erling Braut Haaland. According to the Daily Mirror, Old Trafford high-ups are willing to sanction moves for the pair. There is the not inconsiderable obstacle of Saúl’s £135m release clause and long-term Atlético Madrid contract to get past, mind, though Haaland’s is as cheap as chips at “only” £17m. And finally Newcastle are leading the race for the Charlton forward Macauley Bonne, with Leicester and Fulham also showing interest. Bonne, whose 23 goals helped Leyton Orient to the National League title last season, has scored six times in his last 12 Championship matches.