José Mourinho rested key players with Tottenham already certain to finish this Champions League group in second place and the manager had wanted the club’s fringe players to show their ability; to give him one or two selection headaches for the Premier League challenges ahead. First the good news. Ryan Sessegnon, on his first Spurs start, showed flickers of his pace on the left wing, worked diligently in defensive terms, made good decisions and enjoyed a moment he will never forget when he lashed home the equaliser for 1-1. Sessegnon had plenty of time to feel the hammer of his heart but he concentrated purely on the cleanness of the finish. It flew past Manuel Neuer from 12 yards, beating the Germany World Cup-winner at his near post. Yet the positives for Mourinho were hardly abundant in supply and he could feel a small dent to the feelgood factor that had built up over the first five games of his tenure. Bayern Munich were too good, even without Robert Lewandowski, who was rested. Happily for Spurs, this was not another shellacking to follow the 7-2 in October. But there was the impression that the home team had played within themselves and still managed to highlight weaknesses in the Spurs rearguard, particularly on the flanks, where Kyle Walker-Peters and Danny Rose endured difficult evenings. Kingsley Coman, Thomas Müller, who came on as a substitute, and the excellent Philippe Coutinho scored the goals and Bayern will be intimidating opponents in the knockout rounds, despite their domestic struggles. For Spurs, the attention turns to Sunday’s visit to Wolves, which will be followed by the home game against Chelsea a week later. Mourinho made the point this was more akin to an information-gathering exercise. “Today was play and prepare a game when you put more emphasis on the players who rest than the players who play,” he said. “I try to hide that feeling but the players are intelligent guys and they understand my focus was not on today. My focus was on what next. “This team is not what I call a team. When I call a team it is when you work together and develop principles together. We organised a team so we could rest some players and have some security [in the game]. By the end of February, I understand my players better and they understand me better.” Everything was fixed beforehand in terms of the group permutations, with Spurs knowing that they will be paired with Paris Saint-Germain, Juventus, Barcelona, RB Leipzig or Valencia in the last 16. Playing the second leg away from home represents a big disadvantage in Mourinho’s eyes but if Spurs could get through to the open draw for the quarter-finals he feels anything could happen. “It was important to come here and get out with a result,” Mourinho said. “My wish is that we can be back [here] and if we can be back it will be a quarter-final or semi-final, for a proper match.” Atalanta won 3-0 away to Shakhtar Donetsk to take second place in Group C – despite losing their first three group games by an aggregate score of 11-2. Needing a win to progress with Dinamo Zagreb losing to Manchester City, the Italian side went ahead in the 69th minute when Timothy Castagne poked the ball home at the second attempt. Shakhtar's chances of an equaliser were hit by a red card for Dodo, before late goals from Mario Pasalic and Robin Gosens sealed an unexpected last-16 place in their debut Champions League campaign. PSG completed a dominant group stage with a 5-0 win over Galatasaray, with five different players finding the net. Mauro Icardi, Pablo Sarabia, Neymar and Kylian Mbappé all struck before Edinson Cavani's late penalty. Elsewhere in Group A, Real Madrid were pegged back by Club Brugge before goals from Vinícius Júnior and Luka Modric sealed an away win. Rodrygo's half-volley put the visitors ahead early in the second half, before Hans Vanaken equalised two minutes later. Juventus completed an unbeaten Group D campaign with a 2-0 win at Bayer Leverkusen. Late goals from Cristiano Ronaldo and Gonzalo Higuaín – both set up by Paulo Dybala – and Atlético Madrid's win over Lokomotiv Moscow ended Leverkusen's faint hopes of qualifying. In Group B, Olympiakos defeated Red Star Belgrade 1-0 to snatch a Europa League place in a game of two penalties. Tomané missed his spot-kick for Red Star, before Youssef El Arabi converted late on for the hosts. It was disappointing to see how flat Spurs were at the outset, how lacking in intensity they were and Bayern took a grip. They went close when Benjamin Pavard drew a sharp save out of Paulo Gazzaniga and Thiago Alcântara could not smuggle home the rebound, and the breakthrough followed shortly afterwards. Serge Gnabry’s low cross deflected off Moussa Sissoko to fall kindly for Kingsley Coman, who beat Gazzaniga with a composed finish. Coman would be forced off with an injury. At 1-0, it was possible to fear for Spurs. Apart from one Sessegnon burst and shot, they had offered nothing. But they were settled by his goal, which followed a ball from Giovani Lo Celso that was deflected on its way through. The 19-year-old, whose integration after his £25m summer move from Fulham has been delayed because of injury, felt a rush of emotion when his shot ripped past Neuer, although Mourinho would take a tough-love line with him. “He always arrives in dangerous positions and he is a good finisher,” he said. “He can improve. He lost too many individual duels. He has a lot to develop but the potential is there.” Spurs may have led on 33 minutes had Sissoko not fluffed the final ball when well placed but they always looked vulnerable at the back. They rode their luck when Alcântara missed an open goal after Gnabry’s shot had come back off the post but they were soon behind again. Gnabry’s cross deflected off Toby Alderweireld; the impressive Alphonso Davies’s shot hit the post and Müller stabbed home. The half-time damage might have been worse, with Coutinho denied by the crossbar from 25 yards. One of Mourinho’s laments has been the lack of time he has had with his players, how he must develop his style “while we are running”. It felt like that here, with Spurs lacking cohesion. Eric Dier and Sissoko struggled to set any kind of tone in possession from central midfield while Christian Eriksen only came into the game in the closing stages. Coutinho’s goal for 3-1 was a lovely curler from the edge of the box and although the Spurs substitute, Son Heung-min, twice went close following Eriksen passes, the die had been cast.