Gerwyn Price has apologised for his conduct during defeat to Peter Wright in their PDC World Championship semi-final. Scottish veteran Wright, 49, saw off Price 6-3 in an ill-tempered clash at Alexandra Palace on Monday night and will face defending champion Michael Van Gerwen in the final. Wright was unimpressed with what he saw as over-exuberant celebrations from Price, and the pair did not shake hands at the end of the match. There had been some comments from Price ahead of the semi-final which added extra needle to the contest when they faced off at the oche, with Wright tapping the Welshman on the arm and exchanging words when he took the opening set. Afterwards, Wright had been left less than impressed by the third seed, while ’The Iceman’ took to Twitter during the early hours of Tuesday morning to say it was his rival who had been “out of order”. However, following some time for reflection, former rugby player Price posted a fresh statement on social media hoping to put the incident behind him. “I’ve had time to reflect on last night’s game and personally I’m peed off with myself I let myself my fans and my family down in the biggest game of my career and for letting Peter get to me,” Price said in a statement on Twitter. “I’ve been in this position before in games, but never in a World Championship semi-final. I over reacted to what Peter did after set one. It might of been banter, but I was so in the zone and just missed a load of set darts and I wasn’t ready for what he did. I will learn and everyone makes mistakes, but I’m still new to this and still learning. “I apologise to everyone who thinks I’ve done wrong and yeah maybe I was a bit OTT. It’s a difficult place up on that stage and sometimes emotions get the better of you. I also apologise for not shaking his hand, it’s not a rule, but should of bit my tongue done it and walked off, at the time I just wanted to get off the stage and get home as you can imagine. “It’s been a tough year for me and to come out at the end of it playing as well as I have I should be really proud. I have personally apologised to Peter for my reactions. I wish Peter and Michael all the best in the final tomorrow night. Look forward to 2020.” pic.twitter.com/IrJgxbU6io Earlier in the tournament, Price accused Simon Whitlock of “pathetic” slow play during their fourth-round match. Price secured a breakthrough victory on the PDC circuit at the 2018 Grand Slam of Darts, but was later fined £20,000 for his behaviour during his win over Gary Anderson. The financial penalty was later halved on appeal, and Price also went on to lift the 2019 title in Wolverhampton where he beat Wright 16-6.