The defending PDC world champion, Michael van Gerwen, came through a big scare against Jelle Klaasen before winning 3-1 at Alexandra Palace. The world No 1 was far from his best in the second-round match and lost the first set from 2-0 up, Klaasen taking out 116 to earn a surprise lead. Klaasen then broke his compatriot to throw for a two-set lead – but Van Gerwen found a 170 checkout to turn the contest around. THE BIG FISH! 🎣WHO ELSE BUT VAN GERWEN?Michael van Gerwen fires in a 170 finish to level this match up at one set apiece! pic.twitter.com/PQbIIlpzri Van Gerwen hit his first maximum in the third set, teeing up a 130 finish to break Klaasen’s throw and move 2-1 up. The outsider had a chance to move ahead in the fourth but missed an audacious double-double 19, and Van Gerwen duly broke, sealing victory on the bull. “I played a poor game from the beginning,” Van Gerwen told Sky Sports. “Me and Jelle have a past, we don’t really like each other. I wasn’t too worried when I went behind, Jelle hasn’t been in great form. It was a tough game, but it doesn’t matter if it was close, I’m through.” Klaasen had booked his place in the match by winning his earlier first-round game, fighting back from a set down to beat Northern Ireland’s Kevin Burness 3-1. Belgium’s Kim Huybrechts also avoided an upset against Dutch youngster Geert Nentjes, eventually winning 3-2 to set up a second-round meeting with 2018 winner Rob Cross. After the first two sets were shared, Huybrechts found double 16 to break at 2-1 down in the third set, but a well-timed maximum helped Nentjes edge ahead. The Belgian hit back to level things with a 164 checkout in the fourth. Huybrechts took out 112 to take control of the deciding set, but missed three match darts in the fourth leg as nerves got the better of both men. Nentjes could not punish him and victory was eventually sealed on double two. In the other match on opening night, Luke Humphries prevailed 3-1 in a tough battle with crowd favourite Devon Petersen. World youth champion Humphries, who reached the quarter-finals here last year, took the first set as Petersen missed three set darts. The South African responded with a two-dart clearance after an unlucky bounce-out. Humphries struggled on doubles in the third set, but that changed in the fifth leg as he nailed a decisive 105 finish. There was no way back for Petersen as his opponent added a 160 finish on his way to taking the fourth set.