Boris Johnson has threatened to take the BBC’s licence fee away as a source of funding, as he came under fire over a damaging row about his refusal to acknowledge a picture of a sick boy left waiting on a hospital floor. The prime minister suggested the licence fee, which is guaranteed to continue until at least 2027, was a general tax that can no longer be justified when other media organisations have found other ways of funding themselves. Johnson’s threat to the publicly funded status of the BBC came as he faced growing pressure on a difficult day for his campaign. After an ITV journalist tried to show him the photo on his phone, Johnson refused to look at it and eventually took the phone from the reporter out of shot and put it in his own pocket. After the reporter, Joe Pike, pointed out what he had just done, Johnson took the phone out, looked at the picture and apologised to the boy’s family and anyone else suffering “terrible experiences” in hospitals. As Labour branded him uncaring, the prime minister took questions from workers at a haulier in the Labour stronghold of Washington in the north-east, arguing in favour of Brexit alongside the former Labour MP Gisela Stuart. Asked why he would not get rid of TV licence fees, Johnson said: “At this stage we are not planning to get rid of all licence fees though I am certainly looking at it. I’m under pressure not to extemporise policy on the hoof. “But you have to ask yourself whether that kind of approach to funding a TV media organisation still makes sense in the long term given the way other media organisations manage to fund themselves. “The system of funding out of effectively a general tax bears reflection. How long can you justify a system whereby everybody who has a TV has to pay to fund a particular set of TV and radio channels.” Any changes to the BBC’s funding model would require parliament to pass fresh legislation, with the broadcaster’s royal charter currently guaranteeing the existence of the licence fee until 2027. However, separate negotiations will start soon over how much the BBC can charge for the licence fee from 2022 onwards – offering an opportunity to limit the organisation’s funding. A Tory source later said that the government had been looking at two options: scrapping the licence fee or decriminalising its non-payment. The policy was not mentioned in the Conservative party manifesto but Nicky Morgan, the outgoing culture secretary, hinted last month that the days of the licence fee could be numbered. Morgan, who is standing down as an MP, had said she was “open-minded” about scrapping the licence fee and replacing it with a Netflix-style subscription service, although sources in her department later downplayed the significance of her comments. The BBC is already dealing with the aftermath of the decision to start charging most over-75s for the fee, which will come into effect this summer. The corporation was forced to make the cuts after former chancellor George Osborne pushed the BBC to take responsibility for the benefit, which was previously paid by the government. David Henderson, a mechanic at Fergusons Transport who asked about the licence fee, said he was happy with the answer and planned to vote Tory for the first time. Others at the haulier gave the prime minister a tough time over the potential impact of Brexit on jobs in the north-east and Tory disinformation during the campaign. Paige Hood, an administrator, tackled him over why the Tories had paid for a “fake news” website to be the top Google result when people search for Jeremy Corbyn’s manifesto. He declined to answer saying he “hadn’t the foggiest idea” what she was talking about and claimed it was a “media diversion”. Johnson was also pressed by journalists over his seeming lack of empathy over the sick four-year-old in Leeds. He claimed that he was investing in the NHS and turned the subject on to Brexit, saying it was necessary to get it done in order to invest in public services.