What were you hoping for?As someone who hates fish, not a fish restaurant. First impressions?Well, this fish restaurant really does smell like fish. What did you talk about?The Middle East, Northern Ireland, spooning Boris Johnson, past relationships, Savannah’s musical gift, our jobs, and how I could get her fired if I write the wrong thing here. Any awkward moments?Plenty. The awkward stalemate that preceded our discussion on what we were going to write for these questions. My inability to competently carry out the simple art of saying goodbye to another human. Good table manners?Impeccable. Best thing about Savannah?Her conversational skills and humour. Would you introduce her to your friends?Yeah, I think they would get along. Describe Savannah in three wordsFun, intelligent, witty. What do you think she made of you?Babbling Irish guy with too much to say for himself. Did you go on somewhere?A pub, for one more. And... did you kiss?A peck goodbye. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?A few things I said that, if Savannah uses out of context, may result in me receiving a lifetime’s worth of ribbing from my friends. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?Sure. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for?It was bonfire night, so fireworks. First impressions?Oh hello, he’s nice-looking. Oh, he’s my date. Oh, he’s speaking. Oh, that’s an accent. Ah, he’s really cute. What did you talk about?Work, friends, family, music, university, politics, travelling, profiteroles. Any awkward moments?Probably when he announced he was a vegetarian and aspiring vegan. We were at a seafood restaurant. Good table manners?He kept my wine glass full and hardly laughed when I dropped food. Best thing about Tim?He was just a decent guy – smiley, chatty and made me feel at ease. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes, but they’d definitely find him funnier than me, so that’s a risk. Describe Tim in three wordsHandsome, intelligent, refreshing. What do you think he made of you?He probably thought I was nervous, and he wouldn’t be wrong. Did you go on somewhere?To a pub around the corner for a pint. And... did you kiss?Tim informed me that he doesn’t kiss on the first date, but we had a peck when we parted company. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?We shouldn’t have discussed what we were going to write about each other in this piece because that added to the nerves. Oops. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?I offered to show him more of London, and we’ve been messaging. • Savannah and Tim ate at Fishworks London WC2. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com