‘I’m sorry but this is a completely dreadful way to convalesce,” says Trixie, wearing a dozen layers, while grimly peeling potatoes in a stone-cold, gloomy church. But the chill is shortlived – this is the Call the Midwife Christmas special (BBC One), after all, and you’re in for an hour-and-a-half of so much radiated warmth you may as well turn down the central heating. It’s 1964 and the nuns and midwives of Nonnatus House – all recovering from flu – have decamped. It’s Mother Mildred’s idea, or rather God’s. They are off to somewhere nursing is needed, with no doctor, an inhospitable climate and “fickle” running water and electricity: the Outer Hebrides. It’s beautiful, but no spa holiday. “I detect an animal odour underfoot,” says Mother Mildred (Miriam Margolyes) as they enter the cavernous church-cum-youth-hostel that is their accommodation. Our heroines hire bikes and open a clinic in the village hall, all to the backdrop of stirring bagpiping and stunning scenery. Mother Mildred is expecting a rush and has broken out the biscuits: “I feel that the sacrifice of the gypsy creams was warranted.” A couple, the wife heavily pregnant, have just “rowed across from the lighthouse”. Oh dear, you know that means drama ahead. “The word was you were from London,” says a woman with a pram, looking suspiciously at Lucille, one of the Windrush generation who has come to bolster the still-new NHS. “We’re all from London – including me,” replies Lucille, who regularly has to put up with this sort of thing. The hall is filling up nicely. “I think just one gypsy cream apiece, Nurse Dyer,” says Mother Mildred. But – help! – the midwives have their first emergency. A woman in a Land Rover has given birth to a lovely baby, tucked into her cardigan, but not its placenta. Behind a privacy curtain in the hall, some of it comes out. “We have a placenta but it’s incomplete,” booms Mother Mildred to Dr Turner. It’s looking bad – she won’t get to a hospital for hours. But then Trixie delivers good news, and a nugget of afterbirth. “Placenta complete,” she says, triumphantly. Then, like the waves lapping the islands’ shores, the dramas keep coming. A young girl suffers burns after her nightie catches fire; her teenage cousin, unhappy, has a drinking problem. Then Janet, the woman from the lighthouse, goes into labour and it is discovered, shortly afterwards, that she also has acute appendicitis. There’s a storm and no way to get her off the island. Dr Turner will have to operate on the kitchen table, the scalpel will be boiled and the sheets might get a hot iron if there’s time. “The last time I took an appendix out was in Italy in 1944,” says a nervous Dr Turner. It doesn’t help that the electricity has just gone out, but here’s Fred, the nuns’ handyman, with an oil lamp and a queasy look on his face. “Gently does it,” says the doctor, deep in concentration – a familiar feeling to anyone who’s just played a festive game of Operation. He pulls out a quivering, meaty slug. “Good grief,” he says, “that’s about three times the usual size and it’s full of pus.” It’s enough to put you off your leftovers. Sister Monica Joan had turned up earlier, travelling to the island on the hunt for a white stag: “She believes she might encounter Jesus Christ that way,” says Sister Frances. She makes it, via a bit of minor manipulation, a dip into the petty cash and some fare dodging. Mother Mildred is not amused. “I will decide what measures are required. First I must be fortified with scones!” Some extra cream and jam, please, for Margolyes who has heaped life and humour on the show, keeping (just) the right side of panto performance. I love her. For people who aren’t fans, Call the Midwife is still dismissed as cosy telly, but they miss how radical it is – especially at this moment. It’s an alternate universe where wise, practical (“I’ve no quarrel with a good stout gumboot”), compassionate middle-aged women are in charge, and the highest calling is to help others. It’s a love letter to the wonders of community and universal healthcare. This episode takes belonging as its overarching theme. “It’s a very great gift in life, to know where you belong,” says the soothing Sister Julienne (Jenny Agutter; I love her too). There’s a lovely scene between Phyllis and the troubled teenager Effie, who doesn’t feel she belongs on the islands. I think this is where I started sniffling, and didn’t really stop. The nuns don’t belong there (something to do with their clash with the islanders’ strict Presbyterianism); nor does Dr Turner who has a brief fantasy about applying for the GP vacancy. So it’s back to Poplar, where kind Miss Higgins wants to help Reggie break the world record for making the longest paper chain – the whole community helps out. It gives Vanessa Redgrave, in her voiceover at the end, the chance to say something about the links that bind us all. Redgrave always gets me. “Christmas is not a competition but the prize itself,” she says. “A gathering and a sharing of the things that matter most. It is of no consequence whether we’re the biggest or the brightest, whether we’re the strongest, the bravest or the most inclined to win.” Give me her benediction over the Queen’s speech any day.