“It’s now or never.” “We all need to step up.” “Elections like this come around once in a generation.” If you’re a Labour supporter, you’ll likely have been bombarded with messages like this on your social media feeds since the campaign started. And, in one sense, they’re true. Never in my lifetime has the choice between the two major parties been so stark. Never has so much been at stake. And never has history seemed so radically open-ended, the opportunity to make a difference during an election campaign so clear. But there’s one important sense in which these messages are wrong, and it’s this: our fight doesn’t end today. In fact, whatever the result, it will only just have begun. As Joe Guinan and I argue in our book People Get Ready!, vested interests in the City of London and the fossil fuel industry will not simply take it lying down if Labour forms the next government. The relentless media attacks will only escalate. And after decades of neoliberalism, the civil service is simply not programmed to deliver the kind of policies Labour is advocating. Margaret Thatcher understood that truly transforming the country demanded a sustained strategy to erode the power of dominant interests and build new powerbases to replace them. For her, this meant taking on the trade unions, shrinking and fragmenting the state, privatising public entities and building up the City of London. For Labour, it means taking on high finance and rentier interests – those who benefit from controlling resources that others need in order to live – and building our power as workers and citizens. The difference between these two agendas is that one is an elite project and the other is a democratic project. This means that Labour needs a strong, independently minded mass base to succeed. The experience of Syriza in Greece offers a cautionary tale. Although social movements in Greece were strong, they were not strong enough to shore up support for Syriza’s radical agenda in the face of the sustained battering it received from the Greek and European establishment. And when Syriza ultimately failed to deliver, so much energy and enthusiasm had been invested in it that the sense of defeat and demoralisation on the Greek left was almost total. This brings us to the second possibility. If Labour loses the election, is that it for another generation? Of course not. The conditions that make a Labour victory so necessary – a divided country, rising inequality, a climate emergency – will not go away if it loses. They will only get worse. We know that our economic system is broken and that Boris Johnson has no answers to offer. Instead, his hard Brexit will double down on everything that is wrong with that system – slashing rights and protections, making migrants scapegoats and handing more power to economic elites. Our slow-burning social, economic and ecological crises will intensify until something has to give. But the movement’s ability to drag Johnson to the left by making the political weather in which he operates – as it has done to an extent during the election campaign on issues of tax and spend – could act as the main constraint on this. Sixteen years passed between the Wall Street crash of 1929 and the election of the Attlee government in 1945. We are now 11 years on from the financial crash of 2008. I fervently hope that we are in our 1940s moment; that we can move to a new social and economic settlement without more human suffering in between. But if Johnson wins, particularly if we end up with a no-deal Brexit, it may begin to look more like the 1930s, when the breakdown of the old system led to a racist far-right interregnum. If this happens, the movement behind Labour must do two things. It must offer unwavering support and solidarity to those who will be worst affected by this politics, at home and overseas. And it must continue to build support for a progressive alternative, so that when this politics finally runs out of road, we are ready to replace it with something better. History tells us that once-in-a-generation change is never really a one-shot thing. It is messy, it is unpredictable, it never happens overnight, and it only ever looks inevitable with hindsight. Chile’s early experiments with privatisation were a total failure, to such an extent that critics mockingly referred to the “Chicago road to socialism”. It went on to become a poster child for neoliberalism. At the end of Thatcher’s first term, one of her own advisers was wringing his hands about the lack of planning for transformational change. The head of the Institute for Economic Affairs was so disgusted with her lack of radicalism that he didn’t even vote for her. The problem with being exhorted to “give it your all” until today is that it may leave us with nothing left to give when we wake up tomorrow. If the result is good, we may be tempted to sit back and congratulate ourselves on a job well done. If the result is bad, we risk feeling deflated and burnt out: we did our best, and it wasn’t good enough. But we cannot afford to succumb to either of these responses. Yes, the choice facing the electorate is historic. But history is not made in a single day – it is made by movements capable of sustaining themselves over years, even decades. Transformational change is a marathon, not a sprint. So of course, let’s do everything we can to get the right result today. And tomorrow, whatever has happened overnight, let’s pick each other up and keep on going. • Christine Berry is a researcher, writer and consultant