Democratic presidential hopeful Joe Biden has sought to capitalise on world leaders’ private ridicule of Donald Trump at the Nato summit, releasing a video montage including similar moments which soon went viral on Twitter. Within hours the video, posted by the Democratic frontrunner on Wednesday evening, amassed close to 2m views, and more than 21,000 retweets. By comparison, Trump’s video about his Nato trip had 1.4 million views and 14,600 retweets in the space of 12 hours. In a move to position himself as more respected by world leaders than the current commander-in-chief, Biden’s minute-long video plays through the recent incident at Buckingham Palace, Trump being laughed at during a speech at the United Nations general assembly and interactions with leaders such as Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron. The world is laughing at President Trump. They see him for what he really is: dangerously incompetent and incapable of world leadership.We cannot give him four more years as commander in chief. pic.twitter.com/IR8K2k54YQ “The world sees Trump for what he is,” Biden says in the video. “Insincere, ill-informed, corrupt, dangerously incompetent, and incapable in my view of world leadership.” “And if we give Donald Trump four more years, we will have great difficulty of ever being able to recover America’s standing in the world, and our capacity to bring nations together.” It ends with the written message: “We need a leader the world respects.” CNN reported Biden’s video was posted 30 minutes after Trump landed back on US soil, in keeping with Biden’s policy of not criticising the president while he is overseas. Tuesday’s hot-mic moment featured UK prime minister Boris Johnson, Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau, Macron, and Princess Anne in conversation about Trump’s lengthy press conferences. A furious Trump cut short his attendance at the summit after the footage emerged, and accused Trudeau of being “two-faced”. Trump later tweeted that “I got along great with the Nato leaders” and accused the “fake news media” was trying to “belittle my very successful trip to London for Nato”.