Caroline Flack has stepped down as host of the hit ITV2 show Love Island after she was charged with assaulting her boyfriend, in a major blow to one of the channel’s most important programmes ahead of its return next month. The presenter has fronted the programme since it was relaunched in 2015, helping to turn it into a cultural phenomenon which achieved the seemingly impossible task of convincing young viewers to watch live television – turning it into a much-needed cash cow for ITV. However, this was derailed when Flack, 40, was charged with assault by beating following an incident at her London home last week involving her 27-year-old boyfriend, Lewis Burton. She was due to host Love Island’s first winter series next month, which will be filmed in a villa in South Africa, but has now confirmed she will not be taking part. She said in a statement: “There have been a significant number of media reports and allegations in regards to my personal life. While matters were not as have been reported, I am committed to co-operating with the appropriate authorities and I can’t comment further on these matters until the legal process is over. “However, Love Island has been my world for the last five years, it’s the best show on telly. In order to not detract attention from the upcoming series I feel the best thing I can do is to stand down for Series 6. I want to wish the incredible team working on the show a fantastic series in Cape Town.” It is unclear who will host the programme, which was expected to return to air on 8 January. An ITV spokesman left the door open for a potential return, saying: “ITV has a longstanding relationship with Caroline and we understand and accept her decision. We will remain in contact with her over the coming months about future series of Love Island.” The show has become so important to ITV that they have decided to produce two series a year in an effort to boost revenues, as well as selling the format around the world. However, the show’s success has put it under extra scrutiny over how it treats contestants who appear on the programme following the deaths of two individuals who had previously appeared on the show. Reality TV shows are already facing tougher duty-of-care regulations imposed by broadcast regulator Ofcom following the death of a Jeremy Kyle Show participant, while ITV has promised that Love Island contestants will now be offered support for a year after they appear on the programme.