Birmingham-born actor Helen George, 35, is best known as nurse Trixie Franklin in BBC One’s hit drama Call the Midwife. She is currently playing the title role in Theatre Royal Bath’s touring production of Daphne du Maurier’s My Cousin Rachel. How was filming Call the Midwife’s festive special in the Outer Hebrides?Pretty spectacular. We shot it on the island of Lewis and Harris, which was so scenic and cinematic. We saw stags and eagles every day. Bloody freezing, though – I didn’t remove my long johns the whole time, but I’m a southern softie. I hear you saw a ghost as well?[Laughs] We all stayed in an incredible castle, which was supposed to be haunted by the former lady of the house. We had these grand dinners every night, and the waiting staff always left an empty chair for her ladyship at the end of the table. Through a trick of the light, or the wine, you’d sometimes feel someone sitting there. I didn’t sleep at all when we were staying there. Is it frustrating when people underestimate Call the Midwife?Slightly, but that’s also key to its success. It lulls people into a warm, cuddly trance, but the subject matter is thought-provoking. If it was purely a hard-hitting drama about social equality and feminism, it probably wouldn’t be as popular. We covered the thalidomide controversy. Our abortion storyline was on air at the same time as laws were being passed in Ireland. The NHS was a big election issue, and our show champions the NHS while also recognising its flaws. It might be wrapped in a cosy blanket and set in the past, but it still reflects modern society. Is it refreshing being part of a female-led mainstream show?Definitely. Since the #MeToo movement, there’s been a real influx of female creatives and female-led casts, but it was much more unusual in 2012, when we first aired. Our mix of younger and older actresses was rare too. It was in the midst of the BBC ageism scandal, but we had Jenny Agutter, Judy Parfitt and Pam Ferris – all fantastic actresses, back on primetime TV. The likes of Fleabag have come through in the past few years, but we were a step ahead in some ways. There’s a scene at the end of My Cousin Rachel where I channel my inner Brian Cox, and I just love it The new series features a fashion show in which Trixie wears the shortest miniskirt ever seen in Poplar…Yeah, the nuns all blush and people walk out. [Laughs] I really enjoy how Trixie is at the forefront of the sociopolitical movements within Poplar, yet she also gets her legs out and pushes fashion boundaries. She wears some interesting costumes this series. One is like a 60s sexy bishop outfit with a multicoloured pleather patchwork cloak. It’s pretty far out. Tell us about your leading role in My Cousin Rachel.It’s a couple of years since I‘ve done stage work, so it’s been bloody lovely. It’s an electricity you just don’t get with screen work. It’s a brilliant, lean adaptation by Joseph O’Connor, and Rachel’s an older character – well, 35, which doesn’t seem old to me any more but is positively middle-aged for a Victorian heroine. It’s really refreshing not to think: ‘I need to look younger and thinner’, but to play more mature and concentrate on the text. I wear a dark wig, speak a bit of Italian and have a deeper voice, so it might surprise people who think of me as Trixie. Apparently you compared Rachel’s situation to Meghan Markle?It’s always helpful to relate period characters to the contemporary world. Meghan Markle came into this ridiculously British family with all these outdated rules – you know, she got slaughtered by our media for not wearing heels the morning she gave birth. Similarly, Rachel is thrust into this uptight English world, stands her ground and refuses to just quietly fit in. There’s also something of “the other” about her, a sense of a foreigner invading our small island, so perhaps there are Brexit parallels there too. What kind of role are you keen to play next? Comedy or an action heroine maybe?Both those things! I trained in musical theatre, so I’d also love to do a Sondheim or something. As I get older, I’m finding that roles have a depth and weight to them. Even if I looked like the young ingénue in the past, that’s never been a happy fit for my personality. Playing fiery, strong-minded women is exciting for me. What’s been your cultural highlight this year?Succession. It’s so Shakespearean and riveting. It’s fascinating how it’s a mainly British writing team. And Brian Cox, my God. There’s a scene at the end of My Cousin Rachel where I channel my inner Brian Cox, and I just love it. Will you make any New Year’s Resolutions?No, it’s normally like: “Don’t drink”, and I last about a day. Because it’s the end of the decade, I’ll reflect on the past 10 years instead. Call the Midwife is on BBC One tonight at 7pm, and returns for a ninth series on Sunday 5 January, 8pm. My Cousin Rachel tours to Cambridge, Sheffield, Chichester and Richmond until 8 February