West Brom missed a chance to return to the top of the Championship when they could only draw at struggling Wigan. Sam Johnstone’s own goal five minutes into the second half put the home side ahead but Albion equalised when Charlie Austin struck from close range following an indirect free-kick. The 1-1 draw means Leeds stay top on goal difference, although both teams boast an 11-point lead over Fulham in third. “We have to be honest enough to admit we weren’t as good tonight as we’ve been so far,” the West Brom manager, Slaven Bilic, said afterwards. “We started slowly, and we have to admit we didn’t deserve anything more than a point … but we have to take this as a blessing, because we know we can’t be like this again.” Swansea manager Steve Cooper hit out at referee Jeremy Simpson after his side’s winless run extended to six with a 1-1 draw with Blackburn. Simpson waved away penalty appeals from Swansea after Bradley Dack handled in the penalty area. “I’ve seen the penalty decision back for handball and it’s just a massive error from the referee,” Cooper said. “He knew it hit his hand – he has said that to me – and his hand isn’t next to him, it’s out. He is going to be embarrassed when he sees it back on TV. He’ll probably be refereeing in the Conference.” Dack was later sent off, a decision criticised by Rovers manager Tony Mowbray: “it’s wrong to say, but it felt like he was evening things up.” Both goals came in the opening 10 minutes, Danny Graham’s strike swiftly cancelled out by André Ayew’s header. Neil Harris suffered his first defeat as Cardiff manager as Brentford prevailed 2-1 at Griffin Park. Bryan Mbeumo put the Bees ahead with a low finish after fine build-up play by Saïd Benrahma. Ollie Watkins doubled the lead on 46 minutes before Marlon Pack pulled one back with a long-range drive. Brentford climbed to seventh, leapfrogging Sheffield Wednesday, who saw Moses Odubajo sent off as they drew 1-1 at Derby. QPR forward Bright Osayi-Samuel sealed an away win at Birmingham with a terrific solo goal. The 21-year-old picked up the ball near the halfway line and surged down the left before cutting inside and finishing emphatically. “I think that goal warmed the whole stadium,” said QPR manager Mark Warburton. “Anyone who loves football would have enjoyed that goal. Osayi-Samuel showed his power, his desire and to finish that type of run with that level of quality was first class.”