Dom Sibley 3 A tough baptism for the new opener, who clipped his first ball in Test cricket for four but made just 38 runs across three innings and twice ducked into bouncers as New Zealand found ways to unpick his open-stance technique. Held one blinding catch at gully, to his credit and deserves more time Rory Burns 7 Made a slightly charmed half-century in his first innings and emerged from one of two streaky evening sessions with a competent second Test century. All three dismissals a case of giving it away slightly but has fighting qualities and appears to be settling in at this level. Joe Denly 5 Soaked up 323 balls in the first Test for scores of 74 and 35, looking impressively calm at the crease. Rather undid this good work in Hamilton, however, when nicking off early on the second evening and putting down a horror catch on the final day. Still waiting for a breakthrough performance. Joe Root 7 His tactics on the third day at Bay Oval, and two limp dismissals in the match, made England’s cast-iron certainty he will be captain for the next two years look questionable. But a determined double-century in Hamilton reasserted a degree of authority and form before the team heads to South Africa. Ben Stokes 5 Batted like a god first up, only to give it away on 91 and spark a costly collapse. Fell twice in the 20s thereafter and, despite thundering in with the ball, picked up just two wickets, looking troubled by a knee issue at times. Dropping Watling (205) on 31 and Latham (105) on 66 will bug him most and 2019 is still his year. Jos Buttler 4 It might have simply been a freak gym injury that ruled him out of Hamilton. But after a taxing return behind the stumps, one followed by an 18-ball duck, eyebrows were still raised about Buttler’s hardiness for the role. Had he shown the same confidence in Leach that Watling had in Santner, England’s 353 all out might have been greater too. Ollie Pope 5 Twice out chasing wide ones in the first Test but at least wised up, his 75 in the second putting on 193 with Root and showing his free-scoring tendencies can be reined in. Clearly loves wicketkeeping but a lack of experience – and thus a fully grooved technique – means his back-up status on tour should not repeated. Sam Curran 5.5 Ever-willing for his captain with the ball and probably emerged with the most credit after those 201 gruelling overs in the Bay Oval dirt. Leading wicket-taker for England (a low bar) but his need for swing seemed to confuse the new ball strategy. One punchy rearguard with the bat. Jofra Archer 4 A chastening first away tour with two wickets at 105 runs apiece and the venomous 90mph-plus spells seen during the summer only fleeting. No England bowler sent down more than his 82 overs – his economy was fine – and the hope is this alluring talent has learned plenty. Stuart Broad 5.5 Miserly but wicketless at Bay Oval, second time around Broad looked more the attack leader he was supposed to be with four wickets on another flat pitch and a creative ball to dislodge Watling. Hopefully more carry in South Africa gets his dander up. A second Test century continues to elude him. Jack Leach 4 Sent down 47 overs in one innings for two wickets without much assistance, was then left out for tactical reasons in Hamilton and spent the time off holed up in hospital with gastroenteritis. Talk of Moeen Ali’s possible return suggests England’s confidence in the left-armer is waning slightly. Chris Woakes 7 A fine return to the side with the ball as the pick of the England attack in Hamilton, with four wickets at 23 runs apiece and producing a beauty to remove Williamson first up. Edged behind for a duck during the hunt for quick runs but looks to have held his spot in the squad for South Africa. 7 Zak Crawley 2 Emerged on debut at an unfamiliar No 6, struck a glorious on-drive that was stopped, had to dive to make his ground for his first run in Test cricket and then defended to extra cover sixth ball to nick off. Is among the fittest in the England squad but was slightly clumsy in the field in both innings. • New Zealand player ratings to follow shortly