Lovers of rules will tell you matching your makeup to your clothes is old-school. The modern approach is to throw a mishmash of things together and adopt an “I woke up like this” insouciance. Where’s the fun in that? Matchy-matchy makeup is perfect for Christmas. The secret to a brilliant execution is in this Valentino AW19 Couture look. Go for a single statement lip or eye in a bright, jewelled colour and adapt your sartorial choice accordingly. And, for now, enjoy. 1. By Marian Newman Nail Colour £15, mybeautybrand.com 2. Urban Decay Moondust Palette £36.50, urbandecay.co.uk 3. Glossier Play Colorslide Eyeliner £13, glossier.com 4. Dolce & Gabbana The Blush £48, harrods.com 5. LA Girl Volumatic Mascara £7, beautybay.com Nude lips for Christmas Day is odd to me. I mean, as a woman of colour, the generic use of the term nude jars. Nude bra, nude nails, nude lips, nude slip… Whose nude are we talking about here? Anyway, I digress. Nude lips and Christmas Day. Not the most obvious bedfellows. A little too muted, too understated, too restrained. On this occasion, I’d rather the celebratory and joyous feel of a bright lip. But I have a checklist. I prefer a matt, but I need one that doesn’t leave my lips with more cracks than a building site. I also require an unapologetically strong pigment. One that not only shows up, but shows up correctly – it’s disappointing when what appears on your lips is totally different to the shade of the bullet. This is an issue that women of colour – many of us have dark lips – will relate to. While these sound like easy asks, the criteria is quite tricky to meet. However, this Fenty number, which glides on beautifully, ticked every box. The most startling element for me is that it lasts all day. It does not slip, it does not slide, it does not crack and I do not have to re-apply. Which is perfect because if you are going to be spending your day talking, laughing, eating and drinking, the last thing you want to do is keep rushing to the mirror to ensure your lipstick isn’t half way down your face. Fenty Mattemoiselle Plush Matte Lipstick, £16 boots.com Beauty alliance The beauty collab to end all beauty collabs. Pat McGrath has joined forces (get it?) with Star Wars to launch a range of makeup. Even if you are not a fan, it’s a canny investment. From £35, patmcgrath.com After dark Cult brand Byredo has relaunched a trio of scents that pay homage to night blooms. Sellier is a smoky leather; Casablanca Lily, a floral; Reine de Nuit, a rose and patchouli dream. £230 each, byredo.com Seasonal glow In the market for a Christmas candle? Try Cire Trudon’s six-strong collection. They all come in the famed handblown glass. Fir, my fave – a pine, fir, myrrh and incense combo – is irresistible. £85 each, selfridges.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.