This look, as seen at Helmut Lang AW19, offers something most red lip looks don’t: modernity. There is something fabulously nonchalant about wearing a red lip on a barely there face that actually isn’t totally bare. And it takes just three steps. Take a smidgen of Vaseline to a dab of an au naturel eye shadow to give you a hint of gloss on the eyelid. Mix a highlighter to a dot of foundation and apply like a serum. Finish off with a traffic-stopping red lip. Done. 1. Nars Studio 54 Audacious Lipstick in Carmen £26, spacenk.com 2. Marc Jacobs O!Mega Glaze All Over Foil Highlighter £38, harveynichols.com 3. Clarins Joli Rouge Lip Lacquer £22, clarins.com 4. Laura Mercier Velour Extreme Matte Lipstick in Dominate £16.50, johnlewis.com 5. Lisa Eldridge Velvet Ribbon True Velvet Lipstick £26, lisaeldridge.com The use of acids as exfoliators is one of the most exciting developments in skin care. Ingredients such as lactic acid (brightening), salicylic acid (declogging) and glycolic acid (refining) are so effective at giving your skin a new lease of life – which is why I am fanatical about it. Everyone should exfoliate – but not with the grainy stuff – as it stops your skin looking so grey, controls sebum production and potential breakouts and smooths the texture of your skin, meaning a half-decent makeup-free face. That said, I still meet people who are terrified of it. And I completely understand – the word acid does not stir up positive connotations. So, as much as I give my spiel about these wonder ingredients, there will be some who won’t budge. Most have sensitive skin and acids + sensitive skin often equals irritation. Well, these cotton pads are excellent exfoliators, sans grains and sans acids. They have been dipped in an acid alternative formulated using probiotics, natural extracts from yarrow and Japanese cedar buds. What this means in layman’s terms is that they remove dead skin, brighten, reduce the appearance of pores and improve texture. Easy to use, they don’t tingle so you can be assured your sensitive skin won’t feel red raw. There goes your excuse not to exfoliate. Indeed Labs, No Acid Pads, £19.99, boots.com Screen secrets Honest Beauty, Hollywood actor Jessica Alba’s clean but efficacious beauty brand, has quietly winged its way over the Atlantic. This facial oil is one of its bestsellers. Honest Beauty Facial Oil, £32, boots.com Take a long soak In her new tome, The Bath Project: the Art and Science of Bathing, Dr Barbara Kubicka is encouraging us all to unwind. Do it with Sister & Co’s bath collection. Sister & Co Bath Soak, £15, sisterandcoskinfood.co.uk Making scents Jo Malone, the nose and founder behind fragrance brand Jo Loves, has teamed up with high-street store Zara to launch a super chic range of eight eau de parfums. They are exquisite. Expect them to fly off the shelves. Zara Emotions, £25.95, zara.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.