In what has otherwise been a pretty dispiriting election campaign, we were given one bit of seemingly good news at the outset. Record numbers of female parliamentary candidates are standing for election this year. Labour had considerably more female candidates than the Conservatives – 336 to the Tories’ 194 – though, oddly, they weren’t particularly vocal about this fact. The Conservatives are standing women in a third of the seats they are contesting, and Labour are doing so in fully half. Regardless, the story largely ran as an early “good news” piece for all the parties, with even the Conservatives standing a “record number” of female candidates, we were told. But have the parties given these women seats that they actually have a reasonable chance of winning? Or have most of the plum seats, the “winnable” ones, gone to men? As research I’ve published on openDemocracy shows, the Tories are nearly twice as likely to have selected women for unwinnable seats as they have for ones that can be won (measured by the swing needed to take the seat). There may well be some very good Conservative female candidates standing in constituencies such as West Ham, Sheffield Central and Merthyr Tydfil. But these are places where, as the joke goes, they weigh the Labour vote rather than count it. Such selections might flatter the headline figures for numbers of Tory female candidates, but they are unlikely to boost the number of women in parliament. Labour’s female candidates, in contrast, are more likely to have been selected for the party’s target seats – like Telford, Mansfield and Milton Keynes – than for plainly unwinnable ones. Given the higher number of female Labour candidates to start with, this also means that nearly three times as many Labour women have been selected for their party’s top target seats as Conservative women. We’ve just finished a parliament in which the treatment of female politicians has rocketed up the agenda. As the #MeToo campaign made global waves, female MPs and parliamentary staffers spoke out about the harassment they had faced from male colleagues. Many female MPs spoke out, too, about the impact of the increasingly toxic political atmosphere. Both Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour and Boris Johnson’s Conservatives faced criticism for being slow to act against misogynist and other forms of abuse – both online and in person – by their supporters. A significant number of female MPs still seemingly in the prime of their careers announced their retirement this election. But whereas Labour have replaced eight of their nine departing female MPs with women, the Tories have replaced four of their nine with male candidates. And of three ultra-safe Tory majorities of more than 15,000 votes vacated this way (by Claire Perry, Caroline Spelman and Heidi Allen), all three have selected men. The first to Boris Johnson’s political secretary Danny Kruger, the second to Saqib Bhatti and the third to Anthony Browne, who worked for Johnson during his time both as Spectator editor and as mayor of London. Corbyn’s Labour has been criticised for selecting male cronies for the safe seats that become vacant. But in fact that appears to be a fairer criticism of Johnson’s Conservatives. Of course, what counts as a “winnable” seat is harder to call than ever in this election, with new dividing lines and alliances complicating old battle lines. But certainly in Labour’s case the analysis suggests that neither Labour HQ nor constituency Labour parties are quite so male-dominated as we’re sometimes led to believe. As well as selecting women to champion two-thirds of their must-win seats, Corbyn’s party has also given women three-quarters of the plum seats left vacant by retiring MPs (compared with just 42% for the Conservatives). The Tories, on the other hand, have perhaps still not shifted quite as far as we might hope. Predicting the outcome of tomorrow’s election is a fool’s errand – but given the polling and the disproportionate selection of Conservative men to their target seats, it seems unlikely that this election is going to see another breakthrough in the number of women who actually win. We’ve come some way from the days when women seeking their party’s nomination were asked what their husband thought about all this. But there’s a long way to go yet. • Caroline Molloy is a journalist and editor of openDemocracy UK