Nigel Pearson is going to need everything his Watford players have if he is to achieve another Premier League great escape, and if only a few replicate the type of display produced by Ben Foster here, Pearson will surely believe he has a fair chance of completing the task he has been given. Watford remain six points adrift of safety despite a hard-earned draw that made it four points from the past two games for Pearson but the psychological boost that comes with moving off the bottom of the table will offer optimism for a side who looked bereft of hope before their latest manager’s arrival. Gerard Deulofeu’s first‑half strike was vital but the heroics of Foster at the other end were equally important. Foster’s form has been a rare highlight throughout a largely miserable season and fittingly his magnificent saves – the pick a sensational point-blank effort to deny John Fleck – ensured their upturn in form continued. “You can look Ben in the eyes and know he will do what he can to deliver,” Pearson said. “For all the possession they had, we kept them at arm’s length and we made it difficult for them. We had to dig our heels in but we go away with something for our efforts.” United drop to sixth because of Tottenham’s victory against Brighton but Chelsea’s surprise defeat by Southampton at Stamford Bridge means the gap to the Champions League places is only three points. No promoted side have been fifth on Christmas Day since Ipswich in 2000 and Chris Wilder’s team – while not hitting their finest form – rarely looked in danger of a surprise defeat. “We weren’t at our best, we didn’t do enough as the home team,” Wilder said. “We couldn’t find that bit of quality and when we did, the goalkeeper has made an incredible save. We didn’t do enough.” There was a sign of what was to come when Foster produced a superb save to deny Oli McBurnie, before he turned provider for the opening goal. His direct ball downfield was flicked on by Nathaniel Chalobah and Deulofeu kept his nerve to beat Dean Henderson at his near post after the goalkeeper stalled when the Spaniard was set free. Nine minutes later, though, a needless challenge from Will Hughes brought down George Baldock inside the area and Norwood made no mistake from the spot to level. As Pearson acknowledged, Watford spent most of the second half keeping United at bay but when they were opened up shortly after the hour they were again grateful for Foster. Barely seconds after coming on for McBurnie, Lys Mousset played a crossfield ball that was met by Fleck, who looked certain to score. Foster turned the ball wide. “It was an unbelievable save,” Pearson said of the moment that ultimately earned Watford a point. You could not argue with that.