Whatever Marland Yarde goes on to accomplish in a career that has earned him 13 England caps, nothing in his mind will match lining up for Sale against Wasps in the Premiership Cup one day before the first anniversary of a knee injury so horrific he was warned he may never play again. There were five minutes to go against Newcastle when Yarde slipped and two players fell on his left leg, dislocating and rupturing every ligament in his knee. “A number of people did not believe I would play again,” Yarde says. When the now 27-year-old was operated on, the surgeon told him his chances of playing again were only 50-50 and that it would be 12 to 18 months before he returned to training. Yet on Sunday Yarde starts for the Sharks in the European Champions Cup match against Exeter at the AJ Bell Stadium, his 10th match since defying medical opinion having returned to training nine months after the injury. “It was the toughest, most challenging period of my life and there were some dark times. Getting through it is my greatest achievement. A year ago I never thought I would be back training in the summer or playing again and the real driver for me was proving that I could cut it again at the top level.” Yarde told Sale’s website in the summer that there were times in the weeks after his three operations when he would break down and cry. It is the side of a sporting professional’s life that followers do not see: success is apparent but the isolation and emptiness that follow a long-term injury, when the camaraderie of the training field and dressing room is exchanged for a long, lonely bout of rehab, can only be imagined. “There is no way you can prepare yourself for something like that and the first few months were really difficult,” says Yarde, who during his rehabilitation worked with the Philadelphia-based knee specialist Bill Knowles. “It came down to toughness and mental determination and, rather than keep looking back, I am focusing on what is to come. I am really excited about this season and expect to get back to the level I was before to put myself in the shop window.” Before his injury Yarde had set himself the goal of playing in the World Cup. It had been more than a year since he had played for England but that summer he had been named in the squad. “I want to play for England again but I cannot look too far ahead because it is a huge challenge getting into the Sale team as one of four international wings in the squad,” he said. “There is no point in trying to jump over too many hurdles too quickly and I know it will take time to get back to where I was, but I am determined to get there. “Watching the World Cup was hard because I had set myself the target of being there. I became an England fan and watched every game, getting up every morning to make sure I was there for the start of a match and cheering in front of the television. “I knew how hard the players had worked to get there and I thought they conducted themselves superbly on and off the field. They did not quite achieve their goal, but they were a credit to themselves and to English rugby.” Yarde has kept in touch with Eddie Jones but knows past performances and sentiment will not get him back into the setup. “I have spoken to him a few times,” he says of the head coach, “and he asks how things are going, but it is all about performance and consistency now. If you perform well, opportunities will follow. I want to be judged on what I am doing now.” On Sunday Yarde faces a player who did make it to Japan, Exeter’s Jack Nowell. Chris Ashton is on Sale’s other wing and Denny Solomona is on the bench, while Scotland’s Byron McGuigan is not in the 23. After a bonus-point defeat at Glasgow and victory over La Rochelle, Sale are in contention for what would be only their second appearance in the knockout stage in 10 attempts. “Consistency is the key for us,” Yarde says. “We have built such a competitive squad that it is a challenge to get into the team but now it is about winning games. We need to beat Exeter to keep our quarter-final dream alive. We know how difficult it will be because they have been at the top for a few years but, if we perform at the level we can, we can win. We will be up for it.” For Yarde merely playing again is a victory.