Often, tinned prunes are blamed, or the prunes and custard at school, or the cut-glass bowl full of them in a seaside hotel dining room with wallpaper that smelled of mince and Benson & Hedges. Yet there is no blame or trauma on my part: the tin of prunes in syrup my grandma always kept in the cupboard next to the peaches and pears; the bag of teddy bear noses (more on this later) on the shelf; or the bowls of soaked prunes, which looked like enormous sea slugs, on whatever sideboard: I liked them all. So black and thick, their sweetness concentrated and almost spicy. Then there were what I thought of as “grown-up” prunes: the tin of stuffed prunes Dad bought Mum for Christmas every year. I now know they were prunes d’Agen, named after a town in Aquitaine in south-west France and stuffed with prune cream. But back then they were simply prunes stuffed with prunes: something I liked, stuffed with more of that thing – only 10 times darker and richer than the tins or the bags. Like a spray of a friend’s mum’s perfume or a swig from a bottle of advocaat, they were even better for being taken illicitly. Like other edible gifts, the tin of prunes used to be kept under the coffee table in the living room. To take one, I would lie on the rug, which meant there was a risk that the sticky prune would, like the toffee Quality Street, collect fluff (this was never a problem). At Christmas, there were also prunes soaked in alcohol that were eaten with roast meat and prunes drowned in red wine, both of which were good. Then, in my 20s, I made Nigella Lawson’s muskily spiced prunes. Poached in earl grey tea with marsala and muscovado sugar, these prunes are, as Nigella promises, pretty damned fabulous, even if made with teddy bear noses (her words) rather than tender-bellied Agen. Nigella also notes that prunes can never win unanimous support, which made me like them even more – who needs complete agreement when you are in tune with Nigella? Today’s recipe owes a lot to Nigella’s musky prunes, and also a pudding-cake from Brittany called far breton aux pruneaux and zabaglione. The collision of these three recipes produces something between a set custard and bread-and-butter pudding, with prunes and marsala. I am a big fan of marsala, an amber fortified wine from the city of the same name on the west coast of Sicily: as a drink, but also for cooking in sauces or as the base of soups, when we don’t have a bottle of wine open. Marsala has a prune-like quality: a rich, ambivalent sweetness and 18% alcohol volume, which is why it pairs so well with prunes, plumping them up and flavouring the custard. Eaten while still warm, this pudding is a softly set custard; as it cools, it firms up and can be cut into squares (yes, it can be made a day in advance). Prune lovers: you could soak some extra prunes in more warm marsala – and maybe a spoonful of muscovado sugar, too – and leave them in a cut-glass bowl on the sideboard for those who want extra. Prep 15 minSoaking 2 hr+Cook 50 minServes 6, generously 200ml marsala, warmed20 pitted prunes4 large eggs150g caster sugar50g butter, melted900ml whole milk220g plain flourA pinch of saltButter, for greasing Pour the warmed marsala over the prunes and leave to sit for two hours or ideally overnight. Drain, keeping the liquid. In a large bowl, mix the eggs and sugar until creamy. Whisk in the butter, milk and 100ml of the marsala used to soak the prunes. Sift the flour and salt into the bowl, whisking as you go, making sure there are no lumps. Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/gas 6. Put half the drained prunes in a well-buttered deep Pyrex dish and pour in the batter. Bake for 10 minutes, then reduce the temperature to 170C (150C fan)/gas 3½ and bake for another 40 minutes. Halfway through baking, press the remaining prunes into the now-set custard. By the end of cooking, the top should be a golden crust around the black wrinkles.