A US sailor opened fire at the historic military base in Pearl Harbor on Wednesday afternoon, authorities said, killing two civilian workers and injuring a third before taking his own life. Officials at the Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickham near Honolulu, Hawaii, said on Wednesday evening that investigators were working to determine the circumstances of the deadly incident at the Pearl Harbor naval shipyard. The names of the victims will not be released until the next of kin have been notified, base authorities said. Security forces and Honolulu firefighters responded to reports of a shooting at the shipyard around 2.30pm local time. The incident took place at the vicinity of the shipyard’s Dry Dock 2. The base was placed on lockdown for part of the afternoon. Photos showed long lines of cars headed for the gates of the base. Officials at Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam report the shooting incident at the Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard has been secured. One person is confirmed dead. The shooter has been identified as a U.S. Sailor. #PearlHarbor Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickham on the Hawaiian island of Oahu is home to both the US navy and US air force. The shipyard repairs, maintains and modernizes the ships and submarines of the US Pacific fleet, which is headquartered at Pearl Harbor. It is the home port for 10 destroyers and 15 submarines. The shipyard is across the harbor from the Pearl Harbor National Memorial, which on Saturday will mark the 78th anniversary of the attack by Japan that propelled the US into the second world war. Rear Adm Robert Chadwick, the commander of Navy Region Hawaii, said the service would evaluate whether security would need to be upgraded ahead of the annual ceremony. About a dozen survivors of the 1941 bombing were expected to attend, along with dignitaries and service members. Chadwick said he didnt know the motive behind Wednesday’s shooting at the naval shipyard within the base. The sailor was assigned to the fast attack submarine USS Columbia, which is at Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam for maintenance. Details about the sailor were not immediately released. “Our thoughts are with the families of the victims and everyone involved. I can say that we are mobilizing support services for naval shipyard personnel as well as everyone else who may be affected by this tragic event,” Chadwick said. Mass shootings and gun violence are rare in Hawaii. In 1999, a Xerox service technician fatally shot seven coworkers. In 2006, a man fatally shot his taxi driver and a couple taking photos of the city lights from a lookout point in the hills above Honolulu. Hawaii had the lowest gun death rate among the states in 2017, according to the Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence. The islands have strict firearms laws, including a ban on assault weapons and large capacity ammunition magazines.