Merseyside-born Stephen Graham, 46, discovered acting aged eight, before joining Liverpool’s Everyman youth theatre in his teens. His breakthrough role was his Bafta-nominated performance as skinhead Combo in Shane Meadows’s This Is England. His film credits include Snatch, Gangs of New York and the Pirates of the Caribbean series. He also played Al Capone in HBO drama Boardwalk Empire. This year, he’s starred in The Virtues, Line of Duty, Rocketman and The Irishman. He now plays Jacob Marley in the BBC’s new adaptation of A Christmas Carol. Was A Christmas Carol a story that already meant something to you?I watched the film with my nanna when I was 10 – the black-and-white one with Alastair Sim as Scrooge – and remember thinking what a brilliant, magical story this was. So when I was offered a role in this new version, I thought: “Really? Me?” I’m the first to admit I don’t speak in a thespy RSC voice and I don’t look 76, but when Nick Murphy [the director] explained where he was going with it, I was in. Marley makes quite an entrance: lying in a coffin with something unsavoury dripping in his eye. How was that?Yeah, that was fun to shoot – lying in a box with a big burly grip dripping water on my face from a pipette. The glamour of showbiz. Are the story’s themes still relevant today?Definitely. It’s about greed, selfishness, materialism and inequality. Look at the crap going on today, with the rich getting richer and the poor getting poorer. Scrooge feels like a modern-day mogul, exploiting warehouse workers on zero-hours contracts. Society’s community spirit seems to have gone but Dickens was a great ambassador for the working classes. You seem to have been everywhere in 2019. Does it feel like a golden year?It really does. Funny thing is, I haven’t done all those things this year. Some took two or three years to make but they all seemed to come out in a row. As a viewer, I sometimes see actors and think: “He’s in everything, that fella. He’s like dogshit, he’s all over the place. Is he not going to let anyone else have a job?” This year, that was me. But I feel like I’m on the crest of a wave at the moment. All I ever wanted to do was act. The height of my ambition was to make a living out of it, so I feel very fortunate. It’s a long way from school plays to being on set with De Niro. Which brings us to Martin Scorsese’s The Irishman. How was it, starring alongside De Niro and Pacino?I don’t know if it’s quite sunk in yet. It was my Champions League final. These are the people I grew up watching, revering and wanting to emulate, so for that little kid from Kirkby to be working with them was amazing. But I still took that playfulness and eagerness into the performance. We improvised so much. I slapped an ice-cream out of Al Pacino’s hand, which he wasn’t expecting. I threw a line at Bobby De Niro and he came straight back with the best reply. Those scenes were a joy. You’ve said Scorsese and Shane Meadows work in a similar way. How so?Very similar. You have a script to work with, sure, but they create an atmosphere on set that’s very collaborative. They make you feel comfortable enough to improvise, as long as it serves the story. It’s also how they frame certain shots. They both have a beautiful vision. Improvising on The Virtues, Meadows’s drama about sexual abuse, must have taken lots of trust…Totally. We’ve built that over 14 years of working together. I’d jump off a cliff for Shane and ask no questions. I trust him implicitly, which was vital on The Virtues because the story was something he’d experienced and so personal to him. I was honoured that he wanted me to tell his story and felt a duty to do it justice. There were lots of tears on that set. Not in a self-indulgent way. I just think it was extremely cathartic for Shane to put those demons to bed. Yet we also had so many laughs because he’s a wonderfully funny man. Are you getting recognised more since ratings hit Line Of Duty?I didn’t realise quite how huge it was. Something like 12 million people watched it. I was suddenly getting recognised in the Co-op the next morning, which was mad. On Desert Island Discs recently you spoke about your depression and suicide attempt. What’s been the reaction to sharing these experiences?It’s been so positive. A million per cent. People have thanked me for raising awareness. I hadn’t planned to talk about that. Lauren Laverne is such a wonderful interviewer that I felt at ease and it just came out. Have you got some time off over Christmas?A little bit. It’s going to be lovely. My ma and da are staying at ours, then we’re all going to my brother-in-law’s for Christmas dinner. But Boxing Day’s the big one because it’s Liverpool v Leicester – my team, the Reds, against our local club [Graham lives in Leicestershire]. That’s massive in our house. It splits us right down the middle. We’ll have everyone round, get a nice takeaway in and yell at the telly. Do you cook? It says on your Twitter profile you make a mean pan of scouse stew…I do that but nothing else. My wife Hannah’s a brilliant cook and she won’t let me. Besides, I burnt some chicken kievs about five years ago and the kids won’t let me forget it. What else makes you happy when you’re not working?I help coach my son Alfie’s football team. I’m quite vocal on the touchline! It’s lovely to spend some proper quality time with my boy. My daughter Grace does dancing and singing, so I go to watch all her shows. I hang out with my dogs, Bonnie and Clyde. I’m away quite a bit, so I just love being home and immersing myself in family. You do reiki too. How did you get into that?I had a reiki massage about eight years ago which was a lovely experience, so me and Hannah went and did our Reiki master’s course in Scotland. I try and meditate every day too. My job can be quite stressful with lots of rushing about, so it’s nice to have that little time for myself to reflect and be mindful of how I’m treating other people. What’s next for you?I’ve just finished [BBC whale-hunting drama] The North Water. I’ve also got [ITV true-crime series] White House Farm coming out in the new year. Will you make any New Year’s resolutions?Just to sack the vape at some point. But I’m not putting any pressure on myself. A Christmas Carol starts on Sunday 22 December at 9pm on BBC1. The Irishman is on Netflix now