José Mourinho famously brought style to the Premier League. “Every man should have a white shirt in his wardrobe,” he once proclaimed. “Sooner or later you will need it.” It always seemed as if his perfectionism made him the sort of man who, despite his wealth, would take charge of his own wardrobe. There he would be, relaxing in front of Match of the Day, while methodically folding his charcoal cashmere jumpers and starching his blue shirts. But explaining why he chose to live in a hotel while manager of Manchester United, he revealed himself as lacking in the domestic department: “I would have to iron, I don’t know how to.” None of us do, do we? Lynsey Crombie, AKA Queen of Clean, answers some pressing questions. Always start with the collar: start in the middle and work your way out because if you iron straight across it, you can get lumps and bumps in it. I don’t use starch. These days you don’t need to, as lots of shirts have collar stiffeners in them. Next, do the yoke – the part across the upper back and shoulder – then the sleeves, cuffs and main body. As soon as you’ve ironed it, get it on a hanger and hang it up with space around it. I iron fitted sheets so they fit neatly into the cupboard. If you don’t iron them, you tend to screw them up and shove them in. The trick here is to fold the sheet in half, then into a quarter. I don’t bother to iron the elasticated bits separately; I fold it up, so the sheet becomes square-shaped, then iron it. I don’t, but if I’m away without an iron, I make a spray from white wine vinegar diluted with warm water. Spray the garment, then pull it to get the creases out. I separate my ironing pile. I do my delicates first on the lowest setting, then work my way up to the items that need the hottest setting. I iron everything. Silk is the only one you need to be careful with; I put a tea towel on top to prevent damage. Be careful with lace or a netted feature on garments; iron those inside out or put a slightly damp cloth over the top. You might not have to iron it anyway. It’s personal preference. I think an ironed handkerchief looks nicer. I do iron tea towels sometimes, because then they fit in the drawer nicely. I do. Put it on your ironing board and rotate it, pressing each pleat once. No. I used to run an ironing business and people would give me their pants to iron, and it was disgusting. But it’s a personal choice. If you want hot, steamy pants, iron them.