Duncan Jefferies and 
Mike Pattenden Homeless people are much more likely to be victims of violent crime than those of us lucky enough to have a roof over our heads. Indeed, a survey by the charity Crisis found that almost eight out of 10 homeless people had suffered some sort of violence, abuse or antisocial behaviour, while more than one in three had been deliberately hit, kicked, or experienced some other form of violence while sleeping rough. More than half also reported having had things stolen from them, and almost a quarter have had their belongings deliberately damaged or vandalised. One type of item frequently stolen or lost is something the rest of us take for granted: documentation. This can have grave repercussions for a rough sleeper’s wellbeing and ability to escape the cycle of homelessness. For example, if their ID or documents are stolen or damaged, they may struggle to access the benefits they’re entitled to, as well as banking services and accommodation. Aaron, a 22-year-old former homeless man, recalls how important ID and documents were during his time at a hostel near Old Trafford. “While I was in the hostel I met people who’d lost all their ID and their lives were a mess,” he says. “It was nearly impossible for them to find work or get benefits.” Aaron, who is now in rental accommodation and learning to be a barber with the charity Skullfades, would get his benefits paid into a bank account that he’d opened before becoming homeless. “Without it I’d have been in worse trouble. It was my lifeline. I was able to get benefits, buy food with the debit card and pay for my phone. Just enough to survive.” Likewise, the vast number of “hidden homeless” who are staying with family and friends, sofa surfing or living insecurely in cars and sheds, are also at risk of losing vital documents due to frequent moves, damage or theft. Of course, some people may not have had any ID or documents to begin with when they became homeless. “They could have fled an abusive situation where they never actually owned any documents, or they may never have been allowed to hold on to them,” explains Maxine Pritchard, HSBC UK’s head of financial inclusion and vulnerability. Obtaining ID can be a tricky and costly process that typically requires charities to step in and assist. For instance, people might have to go online to order copies of their birth certificate or replace their driving licence. Rough sleepers are also vulnerable to fraud or financial exploitation, such as criminals using their ID or bank details. Gangs and exploiters target young homeless people in particular, according to a report published by Centrepoint, which provides accommodation and support to homeless people aged 16 to 25. They reported being targeted in colleges, online and in homelessness services to take part in financial crime. Getting caught up in financial crime can lead to blacklisting and difficulties accessing financial services in the future. This, in turn, adversely affected their ability to access employment, benefits and accommodation, putting them at further risk of exclusion and financial hardship. The report added that difficulties in opening a bank could push young people further towards criminal activity. Homeless people without bank accounts sometimes end up paying their benefits into another’s bank account – but often at a price. “People latch on to them and they take a percentage. It could be anything from 10% to 50% of the benefits for letting them use their account,” says Sheena Evans, who works at HSBC UK’s Liverpool Lord Street branch, which began piloting the No Fixed Address service in mid-May. This allows homeless people to open a basic account, even if they lack ID documents, by using the address of the agency supporting them. Bank accounts opened through HSBC UK’s No Fixed Address service don’t have an overdraft facility, and the owner is unable to apply for or take out any loans – which can also protect them from other forms of financial exploitation. “That’s really important,” Pritchard explains. “We want to make sure that people are safe.” Having a bank account to pay wages or benefits into gives homeless people a secure way to look after money – while not carrying so much cash can also make them less vulnerable to physical crime. HSBC UK is working with local housing and homelessness charities to provide bank accounts to people without a fixed address, helping to break the cycle of financial exclusion. To find out more about this, and what else HSBC UK is doing to support local communities, visit hsbc.co.uk/togetherwethrive