Danielle Graph Once upon a time, our lives were full of firsts: first step, first word, that all-encompassing first love, your first car. But once you reach adulthood, life can easily become a repetitive Groundhog Day of eat, sleep, work, repeat, where first-times are rarer than a dry bank holiday weekend. Obviously, there are reasons why we sometimes shy away from trying new things – time, money and fear of failure are the usual suspects. And yet, when we do step out of our comfort zones, push our boundaries, take a risk and try something new, more often than not, don’t we find it rewarding? Exhilarating, even? And doesn’t that “first” often live on in your mind in that special folder saved for memorable achievements? Yes, it’s oh-so-easy to sink into the comforting safety of practical routines and well-trod paths – but is that what you really want? A life compiled of identical days? Of course not. So consider this your rallying cry to break free from the familiarity of everyday life and experience a new first. Not sure where to start? Here are some suggestions ... Size doesn’t matterNot all firsts have to be big, bucket list, life-defining endeavours like swimming with dolphins or scaling Everest. Because, quite frankly, dolphins are hard to come by here and Everest is already dangerously overcrowded with snaking lines of wannabe explorers. Take the pressure off by starting small. Ease yourself into the process with something low-key, like cooking a new dish; maybe you could try to recreate something you enjoyed in a restaurant, or ask a friend for a recommendation. Or, if you’ve never thought of yourself as green-fingered, grab a pot, throw some seeds in the soil, and (hopefully) watch them grow. There’s something incredibly satisfying about creating something from scratch, especially if it’s the first time you’ve done it. A meaningful firstIf you’d like to make a positive impact while trying something new, all that’s holding you back is your imagination – life-affirming firsts come in all shapes and sizes. Buying your first reusable coffee cup or metal straw are both quick and easy ways to lessen your impact on the environment. Or take a bigger stance by switching to a green energy provider or buying your first electric car. With a range of up to 245 miles* and a free home-charging point available with eligible retail purchases**, the New Renault ZOE is the ideal first electric car. When you experience its dynamic design and high-quality tech, and enjoy motoring that’s better for the environment, you’ll wonder why you hadn’t made the switch sooner. Break free from your routineObviously our routines are there for a reason – we all have to make money and step up to certain obligations. But if you want to experience a new first, interrupting the cycle of your everyday life is a great place to start. Something as simple as changing up your commute can break the monotony and help you gain a new perspective; try getting off the bus a stop early and walking the rest of the way to work, changing underground lines at a different station, or driving home via a different route once in a while. Feeling braver? Then take inspiration from the classic 1980s movie Ferris Bueller’s Day Off and book a midweek leave day – surely the ultimate middle finger to the nine-to-five. Go to a gallery, treat yourself to a fancy, boozy lunch – the opportunity for experiencing firsts are endless. New places, new facesSeeing the same places and faces is a natural byproduct of living a settled life – after all, we can’t all be Instagram travel influencers. That said, we all know that exploring new areas and meeting new people enriches our lives in a multitude of ways – so surely it’s worth making the effort to encounter the unknown on a more regular basis? Chances are, you won’t have to travel far to experience the wonder of a first-time wander round a new place. Even just exploring a nearby borough, village or town for the first time will be enough to jolt you out of autopilot. And when it comes to meeting meaningful new faces for the first time, taking up a hobby or attending a meetup is a great place to start. Join a book club, learn a new language or sign up for a cookery class, and you’ll be ticking off multiple firsts in one fell swoop. Keep the fire burningThere’s nothing quite like the thrill of a new relationship – those heady early days when you experience so many firsts together. And with a little effort, there’s no need for that to become a thing of the past with your partner. Obviously you’ll never be able to experience your first date, first kiss or first night of passion anew, but you can discover so many more firsts together. Resist the oh-so-natural urge to sink into the comfort of the familiar by seeking out new restaurants, new holiday destinations, and even new things to do in the bedroom … or, possibly, out of it. Experience the thrill of a first for yourself with the New Renault ZOE – the ideal first electric car. Find out more at renault.co.uk/zoe *The Worldwide Harmonised Light Vehicle (WLTP) figures are for comparability purposes. Figures obtained after the battery was fully charged. Actual real world results may vary depending on factors such as weather conditions. **Homecharger provided and installed by BP Chargemaster PLC and only available for eligible customers. Visit renault.co.uk for full T&Cs.