The clash of the two unbeaten teams in the group who were also leading their leagues was not as one-sided as the scoreboard suggested but it showed leading the Premiership is not a sign of arrival. Northampton had as many chances as Leinster but made mistakes under pressure, unlike last season’s beaten finalists who were at their most focused close to the opposition line. Leinster scored seven tries in taking control of the pool before Saturdday’s return at the Aviva Stadium, four of them from close range as they balanced prolonged periods in their 22 with a ruthlessness in attack that their opponents lacked. The contrast was not between the respective leagues the sides play in but the strength of the four-times European Cup winners, who sported such players as Tadhg Furlong and Rob Kearney on their bench. A week before, Northampton had demolished their East Midlands rivals Leicester. That would have been an achievement not too long ago but Leicester have little in common with Leinster nowadays. The Saints gave everything and their tactic of using their biggest runners to get over the gainline and generate quick ball yielded early rewards but, as the game went on and the physical pounding took its toll, mistakes increased and two late tries made it look like a blow-out. From the outset Leinster were on the trail of five points. It took them two minutes to score their first try and showed how dangerous they were in their own half when presented with uncontested kicks. The Ireland full-back Jordan Larmour, who all afternoon ruffled Northampton with his deceptive pace and balance that allowed him to accelerate smoothly through the smallest of gaps, broke from his own half and set up the equally threatening James Lowe and it was Larmour’s run after 15 minutes that set up the position for their second try, scored by Rhys Ruddock. Northampton were by then in the lead. Teimana Harrison took out three defenders in Leinster’s 22 to create the space that swift passing exploited for Ahsee Tuala to score in the corner. Leinster reacted to the pace the Saints were playing with by trying to slow the ball down at the breakdown, prepared to concede penalties. Dan Biggar’s three penalties gave Northampton a two-point lead three minutes from the break having had first use of the slope and, if it did not look enough, it did not last. Leinster went into the interval ahead after turning down the chance to kick a penalty. They preferred a lineout which, after a series of drives, was turned into a try from Andrew Porter, one of four they manoeuvred from close range. Northampton’s director of rugby, Chris Boyd, said he feared the worst at half-time when he looked at his players and questioned how much “petrol they had left in the tank”. He did not have long to wait for the answer. Two tries in five minutes after the restart put Leinster 31-16 ahead and all but out of sight. Larmour was again at the heart of the first, gliding into Northampton’s 22. He was hauled down by Rory Hutchinson but Leinster moved the ball left and Cian Healy scored. Northampton messed up the kick-off and Caelan Doris exploited an absent sentry at a ruck to set up Ross Byrne, a replacement for Jonathan Sexton. Sexton was taken off after suffering a knee injury after looping round his midfield to free Larmour in the build-up to Healy’s bonus-point try and he is due to have a scanon Sunday. Northampton were down to 14 men with Alex Waller sent to the sin-bin for his team’s serial offending at the breakdown but he was soon joined by Garry Ringrose for a dangerous tackle on Biggar. Northampton rallied. Tom Collins caused problems in broken play but, for all the pressure they exerted, they were undone by basic mistakes with handling errors abounding on a mild, dry day. Leinster soaked it all up before reaching for the salt with tries from Luke McGrath and Ed Byrne in the final five minutes. Boyd reflected that there were not many teams of Leinster’s standard in the Premiership, only Saracens and some want them ejected. He was less upset at losing to better-equipped opponents than reports linking the Saints with the Leicester and England scrum-half Ben Youngs. “We are after younger players,” he said. “Sounds like an agent is looking for another £100,000.”