Twinning the winged eye and dark lip, as per Louis Vuitton AW19, is a nonchalant, sparkle-free antidote to a “festive look”. But it requires a level of mastery. The oxblood lips and matte skin (minus comatose finish)? Pah, easy. The winged eye? Different story. The best faff-free route is to pull taut the corner of your eyes, draw a line from the inner corner and work outwards. For mistakes, keep cotton buds dipped in micellar water handy. And remember – a longer thicker line plus jet black ink equals dramatic wing. Go big or don’t bother. 1. Burberry Matte Glow Foundation £40, feelunique.com 2. Smashbox Photo Finish Fresh Setting Powder £29.50, johnlewis.co.uk 3. Huda Beauty Life Liner £22, cultbeauty.co.uk 4. Fenty Pro Filt’r Primer £26, boots.com 5. Chanel Exclusive Creation Rouge Allure in Rouge Noble £35, chanel.com Even when they were far from fashionable, I loved bar soaps. Old school bars are comforting and dependable – unlike their wishy-washy liquid compadres that feel relatively flighty and fleeting. (For the longest time I couldn’t get my head around shower gels.) Soaps are making a comeback. There now exist thoughtfully formulated options that won’t make your face fall off, shampoo bars that actually clean, and exfoliating bars sans the mess of a body scrub. Then there are those that fall under the ‘luxury’ banner. These are purely indulgent and smell utterly divine. Like this Hermès offering. One sniff and you find yourself making bliss-infused sounds that are probably inappropriate in public. The colourful, art-inspired packaging is the first thing to ensnare you. Then the actual soaps. There’s. Eau de Pamplemousse Rose for rose lovers, Eau d’Orange Verte and Citron Noir for the freshness of a cologne, and then the different but equally divine Eau de Rhubarbe Ecarlate – a juxtaposition of fresh, crisp rhubarb with the depth and creaminess of a musk. It is one of the most captivating scents I have come across and is completely gender neutral. I say all this because if, like me, you haven’t even begun to consider your present-buying strategy, this is a good place to start. Or just buy it for yourself. Hermès soap, from £22 hermes.com Hats off First came the award-winning body-care line and, now, scalp care. Chock-full of actives, acids and hydrators, this clinically proven range will nourish and restore your scalp. Ameliorate Scalp Care Range, from £16, victoriahealth.com Matt demon A matte lipstick that delivers punch without drying the life out of your lips is still a tall order, but Gucci’s new range is spot on. It has a hydrating wax base, an intense pigment, glides on like silk and stays put. Result. Gucci Matte Lipstick. £34, net-a-porter.com Soft cell For her skincare debut, Victoria Beckham teamed up with expert and game-changer Augustinus Bader. This multi tasker repairs, primes and gives you a glow. Cell Rejuvenating Priming Moisturiser, £92, victoriabeckhambeauty.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.