Stephen Colbert kicked off Monday’s Late Show with an update on the road to impeachment: last Friday, the House judiciary committee approved two articles of impeachment against Donald Trump by a vote of 23 to 17 along partisan lines. “That’s right, not one Republican evidently has a problem with the president blackmailing a foreign government to get dirt on a political opponent,” Colbert said. “In a related story, the GOP has changed its mascot from an elephant to an ostrich,” he added over a graphic of an ostrich with its head in the sand. The Democratic-majority House will likely pass the articles this Wednesday, thus sending the task of impeachment up to the desk of the Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell, who will be in charge of organizing a trial for the president. “In an impeachment trial, the Senate is the jury, so it is their constitutional duty to be impartial,” Colbert explained, although “McConnell sees that just slightly differently.” He pointed to McConnell’s comments to Fox News last week: “Everything I do, I’m going to coordinate with the White House counsel,” and “I’m going to take my cues from the president’s lawyers.” “How is that OK?” asked Colbert. “That’s like one of the jurors standing up at the beginning of a trial and saying: ‘Your Honor, we think the defendant is a really good guy and we’re going to be coordinating with him throughout the trial. We’d also like to give him his knife back – there you go Jack, keep on rippin’, brother.’” McConnell also told Fox News “there’s no chance that the president’s gonna be removed from office”. “Uh, spoiler alert.” Colbert panned, “Don’t tell me how democracy ends!” McConnell is not the only Senator to flout partisan intentions, Colbert continued: South Carolina senator Lindsey Graham told a crowd this weekend that he’s “not trying to pretend to be a fair juror here”. “Really? You should at least pretend,” Colbert exclaimed. Noting the oath of impartiality one must swear, under God, at the start of the Senate trial, he addressed Graham directly: “So, to cover up for Donald Trump – a man you loathe – you’re going to raise your right hand and lie to God? You’re going to betray the man upstairs for a man who’s afraid to walk down stairs?” On Late Night, Seth Meyers broke down the president’s smear tactics against the upcoming House vote on articles of impeachment. Trump has called the process a “sham” that “started a long time ago, probably before I came down the escalator with the future first lady”. Meyers had numerous bones to pick with Trump’s words. “Don’t say ‘I came down the escalator’ like you were George Washington crossing the Delaware,” he said. “It wasn’t noble or cool – you rode an escalator to announce your campaign for president like you were at a Macy’s looking for men’s underwear.” Also, “you think Democrats were secretly plotting to impeach you before you announced that you were running for President?” Meyers continued. “You think President Obama, Hillary Clinton, and Nancy Pelosi were all in a secret room together, saying ‘OK, you know that famously dumb game show host, you know, the one who spends most of his time yelling at Meat Loaf?’ Well, he’s about to ride an escalator down to announce his campaign, so here’s our plan to bring him down: we’re going to win the popular vote by 3m votes but then we’ll lose the electoral college because it’s a dumb, antiquated system, and then we’re going to wait three years until he calls the president of Ukraine and ask him to dig up dirt on Joe Biden, who will announce that he’s running for president, and also Rudy Giuliani’s going to go on TV and confess to everything.” “Actually, the last thing right there is probably the only thing they could’ve predicted,” Meyers added. Perhaps also predictable is the partisan response from Republican members of the Senate, such as Mitch McConnell and Lindsey Graham, who are “supposed to be the jury, and they’re literally going on TV admitting they’re not going to be impartial and they’re going to take their orders from the president,” Meyers explained. “Only in the Senate can you openly brag that you’re not pretending to be a fair jury.”