The Duke of Edinburgh has spent the night in hospital after being admitted for treatment relating to a pre-existing condition. He is expected to spend the run-up to Christmas in the care of medical staff after being admitted to the King Edward VII’s hospital in central London. Buckingham Palace described Prince Philip’s planned admission on Friday to the private facility, which has been treating members of the royal family for decades, as a precautionary measure. Uniformed police officers stood guard outside the hospital entrance on Saturday morning alongside a doorman wearing a top hat, and camera crews were set up across the road. A Buckingham Palace statement on Friday said: “The Duke of Edinburgh travelled from Norfolk this morning to the King Edward VII hospital in London for observation and treatment in relation to a pre-existing condition. “The admission is a precautionary measure, on the advice of His Royal Highness’s doctor.” The duke, 98, was not taken by ambulance and is expected to be in hospital for a few days. Buckingham Palace would not give details about his pre-existing condition or the nature of his treatment. Aides said the Queen had travelled to Sandringham by train on Friday morning, and that her plans remained unchanged. Philip escaped with minor injuries in January after a car crash near Sandringham. He has also been admitted to hospital with various complaints over the past decade. He was taken to Royal Papworth hospital in Cambridgeshire as the royal family gathered for Christmas in 2011 after suffering chest pains. He underwent the “minimally invasive” procedure of stenting to unblock a coronary artery. He missed the Queen’s diamond jubilee concert the following year after being taken to King Edward VII’s hospital with a bladder infection, and was kept in under observation for several days. In June 2017, after a day in sweltering conditions at Royal Ascot, he was admitted to hospital as a precautionary measure for treatment for an infection arising from a pre-existing condition. He was discharged after a two-night stay. He also underwent a hip replacement operation in 2018.