Sam Curran is an effervescent cricketer but a measured, mature speaker. He almost sounded like an old pro when asked to assess an intriguing day’s play at Centurion, during which he was England’s most effective bowler with a career best four for 57 as South Africa finished on 277 for nine. “It’s been a tough week as a squad and we’re pleased how we’ve stuck together as a group,” Curran said. “It was tough out there, warm with not much breeze. “Of course we would like to have bowled them out by the close [South Africa were 111 for five at one point]. But I would say it’s been an even day. [Quinton] de Kock played beautifully, yet all in all we’re pretty pleased.” At the moment no English press conference is complete without a medical bulletin. Curran reported that the two recent flu casualties, Stuart Broad and Jofra Archer, had survived the day. “There’s been a bit of cramp but that’s natural. I think all four seamers are good.” Ben Stokes was not one of the bowlers on Thursday. He left the field throughout the afternoon but returned late in the day to the slip cordon. “There’s been some dehydration issues,” Curran said. “But we all know his character. He is very strong.” The assumption was that Stokes was not likely to be another victim of the flu bug since England did not put him in quarantine alone in the outfield; instead he was surrounded by colleagues in that slip cordon. This is Curran’s first Test in South Africa and he was obviously excited by the experience in front of a large, noisy crowd. “There was a special atmosphere out there with the band and the Barmy Army. It was pretty cool and I’ve heard a lot of great things about Cape Town [where the first three days of the second Test are sold out],” he said. The cricketing challenge is also different from the one England encountered in New Zealand. “There is some nice carry here so you can nick the batters off and there is a bit of variation in the bounce,” Curran added. This was reflected by the fact that seven of the nine wickets to fall came from catches by the keeper or slip cordon. “Maybe we will need some different plans for Quinton in the second innings.” De Kock’s assessment of the state of the game echoed that of Curran. “It’s not a bad score, and anything over 300 would be challenging,” he said. “We know the nature of the wicket here and it will get more difficult.” He had raced away at the start of his innings and reached his half-century in 45 balls. As is often the case with De Kock, he explained this was not planned. “I wasn’t trying to go fast but it just happened.” Like his peers De Kock spoke glowingly of the new regime running the South Africa team. “It feels like my debut again. There have been lots of changes and lots of talk and I have felt re-energised going into this series. The guys are very happy.” So at the end of the first day both teams were upbeat. This state of affairs cannot last.