The imminent arrival of Mikel Arteta might not do much for Mesut Özil, who is supposedly set to turn his back on Arsenal and jet off to Fenerbahce on a six-month loan deal. Give Mikel a chance, mate, he might be good for the club and make you popular once again. Arteta’s in-tray at Colney is going to be bulging, as Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, Alexandre Lacazette and Granit Xhaka are all considering their futures at the Emirates and could force a move out. Having seen how successful Danny Drinkwater’s loan from Chelsea has been, Burnley are wanting to bring in Conor Gallagher from Stamford Bridge until the end of the campaign. The midfielder has impressed at Charlton this season, so could be upgraded to Premier League action, which would force Sean Dyche to send Drinkwater back to London. Alternatively, the former Leicester man could head off to Turkey where he is wanted by Besiktas. After all his injuries and recent illness, there is worse news to come for Paul Pogba who will not be allowed to depart Manchester United in order to join Real Madrid in the new year. United also had an interest in Takumi Minamino who has now joined Liverpool but failed to spot that he had a release clause in his RB Salzburg contract that meant he was really cheap, so did not follow it up. Chelsea are keeping tabs on at Real Madrid’s Vinícius Júnior, who is yet to get up and running in La Liga and could be made available by Zinedine Zidane after scoring twice in 14 appearances for the club. Carlo Ancelotti’s plan to reinvigorate the Everton squad will start by signing 38-year-old Zlatan Ibrahimovic after he left LA Galaxy at the end of the MLS season. Manchesters City and United both want to sign Kai Havertz from Bayer Leverkusen. They are so keen to bring in the Germany international that they held “concrete” talks, which sounds more like a mafia threat than transfer business.Everyone (three clubs) wants to sign Emmanuel Dennis from Club Brugge but he will cost £25.6m if Leicester, Southampton or Brighton actually bring the Nigerian striker to the Premier League. Crystal Palace have a plan to end their goalscoring issues: sign Fabio Borini from Milan, who has scored twice in 22 appearances in Serie A since 2018.