Victoria Coren Mitchell is an author, broadcaster and former professional poker player and is married to the comedian David Mitchell. She started writing a weekly column for the Daily Telegraph aged 14, and has since published a number of books including For Richer, for Poorer: Confessions of a Poker Player (2009). Seasonal specials of the quiz show Only Connect, which she has presented since 2008, will be running on 30 Dec and 1-3 Jan at 8pm on BBC Two. Only Connect: The Difficult Second Quiz Book is out now. Yes. DVD. Save your scorn for the next bit: we still have a VCR as well. And when we settle our little daughter into bed, we put on a nice CD of Puffin bedtime stories. (If that breaks, we arrange for a troupe of strolling minstrels to perform some up-to-the-minute pieces on the lute.) Anyway, we’re currently working through the American series This Is Us. Any plot summary might spoil the first, wonderful episode, so I’ll just recommend it very highly: this is truly great. The best TV I’ve seen since Our Friends in the North. As a “proper” play, I adored Laura Wade’s The Watsons, which has just finished at the Menier Chocolate Factory and will be in the West End next summer: it’s so funny and clever, original and delightful. But since it’s Christmas, my theatrical pick is the current show at the London Palladium. I hadn’t seen a proper panto for years and this has made me resolve to go every year. This one is vastly entertaining and all the cast are great, but Julian Clary is absolutely different class – a performance of genius. He plays a circus ringmaster. (He makes some jokes about this.) We rarely get out to the cinema these days and when we do, as fearful middle age sets in, it is preferable to see something that might have been on television anyway. What better than Downton, the drama so flexible that a whole episode could just as easily be about an aristocrat humping a Turk to death or a shortage of chairs for the village fete. The film was brilliantly performed by most of Britain’s favourite actors, and so relaxing that my husband got up halfway through, thinking he could put the kettle on. Ben Elton does about 12 different things and all of them successfully, so it’s easy to think of him as a TV scriptwriter or a novelist or an author of stage musicals. He is all those things (as well as writing Upstart Crow, which David is doing on stage next year, just to save Twitter cynics from pointing that out for me) but watching his return to standup this autumn after a 15-year absence, I knew I was watching his most blazing vocation. It was so sharp, brave and helplessly funny, I can’t swear it wasn’t the greatest thing I’ve ever seen on stage in any medium. In some ways, this children’s museum is very London. You come out of the tube, cross a vast polluted road, pass the tent city of freezing homeless people and you’re there. But in other ways it’s not like London at all: it’s got a lot of space (two big floors of book-themed adventure and play areas, plus a sizable garden) and it’s reasonably priced: £6.50 before concessions and £0-£1.50 for special exhibitions. I only just found out about it; our four-year-old loved it and I’ll now be taking her there a lot. I’ve been going to a reading group at our local library, run by the Royal Literary Fund. (My life is so respectable now, I’m starting to wonder if I really did spend 20 years gambling and chain-smoking or if I only dreamed it.) Anyway, the great thing about this group is they do short pieces rather than whole books, so you can actually get somewhere in a discussion. The people are so eclectic, it’s like doing jury service. We take strange routes to a hopefully correct reading. I didn’t like this poem on first look, but by the end of the hour I realised it’s terrific.