Charles Leclerc has signed a new long-term contract with Ferrari, committing him to the F1 team through to the end of the 2024 season and raising further questions regarding Sebastian Vettel’s future with the team. Leclerc, a former Ferrari Academy driver, joined the Scuderia at the start of last season, after a year plying his trade with Sauber, on a deal believed to be to the end of the 2021 season. However, following a successful maiden campaign with the team he has been rewarded with a new and improved contract. Leclerc said: “I am very happy to be staying on with Scuderia Ferrari. This past season, driving for the most illustrious team in Formula 1, has been a dream year for me. I cannot wait to enjoy an even deeper relationship with the team after what has been an intense and exciting 2019. I’m keen to see what the future holds and I can’t wait to get going again next season.” He went into 2019 as teammate to Vettel, who was given No 1 status by team principal Mattia Binotto due to his experience as a four-time drivers’ champion and four years with Ferrari. Yet Leclerc quickly established himself, claiming race wins at Spa and Monza and seven pole positions, compared to the one victory and two poles for Vettel. Leclerc finished 24 points ahead of his 32-year-old teammate in the drivers’ standings. With the new deal, Ferrari are making clear they see 22-year-old as their long-term future, compared to Vettel whose current deal expires at the end of 2020 and amid news that Lewis Hamilton has held talks with the team about switching from Mercedes. For now Binotto expressed confidence that Leclerc can bring Ferrari success as they prepare for next season, which will be the 13th since Kimi Raikkonen was their last drivers’ champion. They last won the constructors’ championship in 2008. Binotto said: “With each passing race this year, our wish to extend our contract with Charles became ever more self-evident and the decision means he will now be with us for the next five seasons. It demonstrates that Charles and the Scuderia have a firm future together. Charles has been part of our family since 2016 and we are more than proud of the results we are achieving with our academy. “We are therefore very pleased to be able to announce that he will be with us for many years to come and I’m sure that together we will write many new pages in the history of the Prancing Horse.”