Forest Green Rovers have launched an investigation and promised to take stringent action following a reported incident of racial abuse during Saturday’s home game with Scunthorpe. The referee, John Busby, was forced to halt the League Two match midway through the second half after reports of a racist comment directed towards Scunthorpe defender Jordan Clarke. Busby spoke to both managers before an announcement was relayed to the crowd at the New Lawn. The fan involved was quickly identified and the club investigation immediately launched, with that person set to be handed a lifetime ban by the club if found guilty of the offence. Forest Green’s director of communications, Will Guyatt, said in a statement: “We can confirm we are currently investigating a report of racist abuse from a single fan towards an opposition player. “We will be talking to that person as soon as possible. We would like to make clear that the club does not tolerate racism, and the ongoing investigation will end with a lifetime ban if found guilty.” The Scunthorpe manager, Paul Hurst, praised Forest Green for their handling of the incident after the game. “I wondered what was going on initially and then the referee came over and said the fourth official had been made aware of a racist comment towards Jordan Clarke,” Hurst said. “The referee said there was no plans to stop the game at that time. I mentioned about an announcement, which later followed, and helped everyone in the stadium. There was then a lot of sympathy and understanding about halting the game. Some of the Forest Green fans were singing towards the individual who made the comment, [saying] it is unacceptable, and we all know that. “Forest Green have been very good after the game, and reported it to the FA and if they find the individual he will be dealt with. They have had a lot of press for the way they do things. There is a lot of good that goes on here and I don’t think one individual reflects Forest Green. They have been excellent with their help and dealing with the situation.” The anti-discrimination group Kick It Out also praised Forest Green, saying on Twitter it was “glad to see the swift and proactive action taken” by the club and offering its support to both teams. The Forest Green manager, Mark Cooper, declined to comment on the incident. Scunthorpe won the game 2-0 to continue their recent revival, with goals from Alex Gilliead and Abobaker Eisa securing a win over third-placed Rovers.