A government-backed review into Britain’s audit sector has recommended it breaks away from the accounting profession and disclose auditor profit and pay, as part of an industry overhaul meant to prevent further scandals. Sir Donald Brydon, a former London Stock Exchange chairman and the author of the report, said the sector was in need of “urgent reform” to increase confidence in business and prevent corporate failures. It follows high-profile collapses of the construction company Carillion, the retailer BHS and the travel firm Thomas Cook , which fuelled calls from British lawmakers for a shakeup of the audit market to spot problems earlier and avoid thousands of job losses. The Brydon review, comprised of more than 120 submissions and content from more than 150 meetings with various stakeholders, called for a redefinition of auditing and its purpose, reinforcing its role as a public interest function. Auditors should be prepared to be more transparent about their work, publishing profits gained from clients and offering shareholders the ability to pose questions to them at company meetings. Annual pay for senior auditors should also be disclosed. The big four accountancy firms – KPMG, EY, Deloitte and PwC – have been criticised for prioritising profits over proper scrutiny of companies during their audits. MPs accused the firms of “feasting” on the carcass of Carillion after banking £72m for work in the years leading up to the construction firm’s collapse. It said auditors should be “suspicious and sceptical” in their work, focusing on detecting fraud and ensuring companies could afford shareholder dividends. Carillion, for example, paid out £55m in shareholder payouts just months before its collapse. Brydon recommended that auditors undergo training in forensic accounting and report annually on the actions they have taken to prevent and detect material fraud. The report also said auditing work should reflect the wider interests of everyone who relied on a company staying in business, including staff. “The current audit framework is made up of a mosaic of legislation, statutory and self-regulation and formal and informal guidelines developed over a century. It is no longer capable of fully supporting the expectations of the users of audit,” Brydon said. “Audit is in need of urgent reform if we are to increase confidence in business and increase the chances of preventing unnecessary corporate failures,” he added. A spokesman for Britain’s accounting watchdog, the Financial Reporting Council (FRC), said the recommendations will have “significant implications” for the regulator if they are adopted by the government. “We have already implemented a number of the recommendations of the independent review of the FRC and anticipate being involved in delivering the broader reforms to the UK audit market that the government has initiated.” On Tuesday, the FRC said it was introducing a ban on firms providing recruitment and remuneration services to auditing clients to combat conflicts of interest.