To the relief of a nation whose cricket has been in crisis South Africa defeated England by 107 runs at Centurion. By definition miracles do not happen very frequently and, while England’s upper order ensured no one was taking a South African win for granted throughout the first three hours of play on Sunday, cricketing logic was eventually satisfied. So, too, was the new regime running South African cricket, which is now headed by Graeme Smith. This is a win that should help to regalvanise the game here. In fact England did not lose this match on the final day. It was their batting on the second afternoon and their bowling on the third morning that handed the initiative to the South Africans, who held their nerve and discipline thereafter. Losing seven wickets for 39, conceding 124 runs in a session, many of which were scored by a true No 11, is a guaranteed recipe for defeat unless the game is taking place at Headingley. On Sunday the wickets were shared among the South African bowlers but maybe the decisive contribution on a bowler-friendly surface came from Quinton de Kock, the highest runscorer in the Test. In total his forthright approach produced 129 runs, which was more than the margin of victory and he received the man of the match award. England were badly handicapped by the flu bug rampaging through their ranks, which affected not only their preparations but also the wellbeing of some of the players during the game. Afterwards they announced they were taking the precaution of keeping Craig Overton and Dom Bess in their party in Cape Town. Chris Woakes and most worryingly of all, Jack Leach, who has been suffering for a fortnight, are still laid low. Even so the England camp acknowledge they were fatally inconsistent, especially in the first half of a contest that was always captivating since batting was never a straightforward operation. They need to recover fast physically and mentally before the Cape Town Test on 3 January. For all their battling England never managed to get their noses in front on the final day after beginning on 121 for one in their chase of a record 376. The South Africans remained patient and took their chances. On Sunday morning 50 runs were scored for the loss of two wickets, quite a contrast to the 124 conceded by England in the first session on Saturday. Vernon Philander began with a string of maidens and there were only two scoring strokes in the first half-hour, both from the bat of Joe Denly, a glide for four and a magnificent pulled six off Kagiso Rabada. Rory Burns could not rediscover the fluency of the previous evening. His first single was perilous, a push to short-leg left him out of his crease and the throw from the substitute, Rudi Second, missed the stumps and produced an overthrow. There would not be many more runs for Burns. Perhaps relieved that the drip-drip torture of facing Philander had come to an end, Burns attempted to pull the second delivery of the day from Anrich Nortje and could only splice it gently to mid-on. Denly played two more eye-catching pull shots but then departed lbw to Dwaine Pretorius when attempting to drive on the leg side. As is increasingly the case Denly had looked the part, technically sound, temperamentally composed without being able to produce a really significant innings. Admittedly it was not straightforward out there, as Root was about to discover. He was hit on the hand and the wrist by lifters from Nortje as England crawled to the interval. The tempo increased in the half-hour after lunch. Keshav Maharaj was summoned and his first over yielded three boundaries as Stokes came out of his shell via a sweep and a lofted extra-cover drive. Thirty runs came in five overs but then Maharaj struck, which prompted an Imran Tahir style celebration from him. The dismissal of Stokes now triggers such a reaction. Stokes had tried to late-cut a ball that turned before hitting the stumps via a thin edge. Now the South Africans began to breathe more easily, even though Root was still displaying great judgment at the other end. Jonny Bairstow survived until Rabada took the second new ball. He clipped the first delivery from Rabada majestically to the square-leg boundary; the next was a wide, swinging half-volley, which attracted Bairstow’s attention. He sliced it hard but straight into the safe hands of Zubayr Hamza in the gully. Soon the South Africans were entitled to scent their first victory in six Tests. Root may not have been 100% fit but he had battled with much skill and resolution. But on 48 he pushed forward to the unrelenting Nortje and edged to De Kock. Now England resorted to Plan B, which was to hit and hope. That did not work terribly well. Sam Curran sliced a couple of boundaries but was then caught behind. Jofra Archer may have an eye for a white ball but not yet a red one in Test cricket. Jos Buttler was stranded and kept swinging as the game raced to a close. This unprecedentedly unhealthy England squad fly to Cape Town at 2pm on Tuesday. All followers are now checking their schedules in the hope they are on a different flight.