This year’s instalment of BBC Four’s A Ghost Story for Christmas comes courtesy of MR James’s 1911 tale of an upper-class young man on trial for the murder of a poor young girl, adapted with characteristic black humour by The League of Gentlemen’s Mark Gatiss. Peter Capaldi stars as Dolben, the dour barrister for the prosecution, while Elliot Levey is the joyfully irreverent “hanging judge” George Jeffreys. Running at only a swift half an hour, this cuts through the customary Christmas Eve merrymaking. Ammar Kalia Judith Kerr’s much-loved picture book comes to life in this beautifully hand-drawn special, featuring the likes of Tamsin Greig as Mummy, Benedict Cumberbatch as Daddy and David Oyelowo as the titular tiger, who eats Sophie and her mum out of house and home. AK Not quite slow TV but not a standard documentary either, this feature-length film makes extensive use of drone footage to immerse us in the routine of an Inuit hunter in Greenland. The melting of Arctic ice caused by global heating means that all of the landscapes shown here are under real threat. Jack Seale David Walliams reimagines the classic fairytale post-wedding, replete with a self-centred Prince Charming (played by Walliams himself), meddling wicked stepmother (Celia Imrie) and bumbling king (Tom Courtenay). The tropes are gently upturned with raps and gags in this panto-fuelled hour. AK As formulaic as they are, Gareth Malone’s specially assembled choirs still pack an almighty emotional punch. Particularly when, as here, they involve poorly children and the routinely heroic staff of an NHS hospital. As ever, Malone’s secret is to take everyone seriously – often far more seriously than they take themselves. Phil Harrison This sitcom has long delivered strong festive episodes, and this year’s is no different. It should have been a simple Christmas Eve shopping trip to buy an inflatable Santa. Instead, it turns into an endless shaggy dog story, involving petty theft, an aggressive bull, a sinister truck driver and a cargo ship. Can Lee save the day? “That man has kidnapped Christmas, and I’m the SAS!” Ali Catterall Beauty and the Beast, 5.30pm, BBC OneDisney’s classic 1991 animated musical fairytale comes to deliciously ornate, live-action life, with Emma Watson playing the incarcerated beauty Belle. There is a bit of a can-do mickey-taking feminist edge about her as she confronts the grumpy beast (Dan Stevens, behind the furry face). Paul Howlett Formula 1: 2019 Season Review 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. In the absence of live sport today, a look back at Lewis Hamilton’s triumphant season. Cricket: Ben Stokes Special 8pm, Sky Sports Main Event. English cricket’s poster boy ponders his amazing year. Boxing: Fights of 2019 9pm, Sky Sports Main Event. The most memorable tear-ups of the past 12 months.