A first goal in a Chelsea shirt against Manchester City from Beth England and her assist for a Maren Mjelde second, helped the Blues come from behind to earn their first Women’s Super League win against their title rivals in five years. The Women’s Super League may be increasingly competitive but Arsenal, City and Chelsea are still stretching their legs at the top. As a result, the head-to-heads between the two teams matter more. With Chelsea the last remaining undefeated team in the league, and a unbeaten run stretching back 11 months, a win for the visiting team would have meant that by the end of play each of the trio would have chalked up one loss to a title rival. The home side have already beaten Arsenal at Kingsmeadow, but Manchester City were a more solid beast, one that has haunted manager Emma Hayes. Since their first WSL game against City on the 20 July 2014, Chelsea had gone 1,967 days without a league win against Nick Cushing’s team – with five defeats and five draws until their turnaround in front of 3,498 fans. The mountain shifted slowly but with four of those draws in their last four league encounters the signs that Chelsea were edging towards flipping their fortunes against Cushing’s teams were there. In the early exchanges Chelsea looked the brighter side, the chance to go above City with a game in hand over their opponents a tasty carrot dangling in front of them. With the South Korea captain Ji So Yun at the heart of Chelsea’s midfield pulling the strings, City sat deep. City seemed happy to ride the wave of pressure, having conceded once in the league this term (only the magic of Arsenal’s Dutch striker Vivianne Miedema has broken through their resilient backline) they are used to holding their composure during tough periods. After the half-hour, with the game a little flatter, they had their sole on-target chance of the half. A short corner was played to Ellen White who swivelled and snapped a shot from a tight angle forcing a strong save from Ann-Katrin Berger. A spell of Chelsea pressure led to Guro Reiten’s flick to England but Gemma Bonner nipped a foot in to nick the ball away before she can swipe a shot at goal. Back-to-back Chelsea corners forced Man City to scramble the ball away with Mjelde then cracking a shot against the bar from 25 yards on the stroke of half-time. With Hayes barking orders, pushing her team to up the pressure when out of possession, she looked the more anxious at not having made the most of their first half edge. She was right to be concerned. Shortly after Ji rattled the post having cut onto her left foot on the edge of the box, and just before the hour mark, City punished their profligacy. Kiera Walsh pickpocketed Ramona Bachmann before looking up, ignoring the chance to play in England and Bachmann, instead choosing to send a sweeping ball over the Chelsea defence to an onrushing Caroline Weir who swept in at the far post. Chelsea pushed for the reply, Bachmann immediately forcing a diving save from Ellie Roebuck. But Hayes’s team were not about to give up their 11‑month unbeaten league run in a hurry and with 11 minutes left they finally broke past the excellent 20-year-old shotstopper, England poking home the rebound after a Ji effort was palmed away. Three minutes later and they doubled the lead, Roebuck only able to punch a cross to England who diverted it goalward and Mjelde was on hand to slam it in the back of the net. The win put Chelsea back at the top of the WSL, albeit potentially briefly with Arsenal the later kick-off. The Blues, though, have a game advantage over both City and the Gunners and will be brimming with confidence having battled from behind against both to take six points.