What were you hoping for?The loss of my boxers at a yet undisclosed secondary location. First impressions?Oh Christ, he’s cute. Are we wearing the same outfit? What did you talk about?I knew we were off to a good start when I confessed to having a tinnie of rose on the tube before the date, and he said he’d been to a Spoons alone. Any awkward moments?We drunkenly lost each other after the third or fourth bar, so I spent 20 minutes stumbling around Soho listening to Madonna deep cuts trying to find him. Good table manners?Impeccable, he was great with his hands. Best thing about Matt?He’s kind, but still has a filthy sense of humour. Would you introduce him to your friends?I already did, in the morning. Describe Matt in three wordsFunny, handsome, messy. What do you think he made of you?I reckon he would probably place me somewhere between Boris Johnson at a Jennifer Arcuri business launch party and Miley Cyrus at the VMAs. Did you go on somewhere?I think the order was: pub to see his friend, pub to see his flatmate, gay bar, gay bar, gay bar, Uber, bus, Uber, undisclosed secondary location. And... did you kiss?What do you think? If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?One of us got stopped by a police officer, that probably could have been avoided. Luckily, the only charge was having too much fun. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again?Seeing him on Sunday. Blind date is Guardian Weekend magazine’s dating column: every week, two strangers are paired up for dinner and drinks, and then spill the beans to us, answering a set of questions. This runs, with a photograph we take of each dater before the date, in Guardian Weekend magazine (in the UK) and online at theguardian.com every Saturday. It’s been running since 2009 – you can read all about how we put it together here.What questions will I be asked?We ask about age, location, occupation, hobbies, interests and the type of person you are looking to meet. If you do not think these questions cover everything you would like to know, tell us what’s on your mind. Can I choose who I match with?No, it’s a blind date! But we do ask you a bit about your interests, preferences, etc – the more you tell us, the better the match is likely to be. Can I pick the photograph?No, but don't worry: we'll choose the nicest ones. What personal details will appear?Your first name, job and age. How should I answer?Honestly but respectfully. Be mindful of how it will read to your date, and that Blind date reaches a large audience, in print and online. Will I see the other person’s answers?No. We may edit yours and theirs for a range of reasons, including length, and we may ask you for more details. Will you find me The One?We’ll try! Marriage! Babies! Can I do it in my home town?Only if it’s in the UK. Many of our applicants live in London, but we would love to hear from people living elsewhere. How to applyEmail blind.date@theguardian.com What were you hoping for?A laugh and a free meal. First impressions?I thought he was handsome. What did you talk about?Our most embarrassing stories, travel and our shared love of Berlin. We had a lot in common; we’ve lived in the same places and worked for very similar organisations. Any awkward moments?We were wearing the same shirt. Good table manners?Terrible. But so are mine, so it took the pressure off. Best thing about Jonathan?He’s just a really lovely human being. Would you introduce him to your friends?I did, and they loved him! Describe Jonathan in three wordsKind, fun, cute. What do you think he made of you?He probably thinks I’m bat-shit crazy. Did you go on somewhere?We lost each other at 4am. My phone had died, so I got the bus home, got undressed and got into bed. When my phone charged, I phoned Jonathan and we decided I should get an Uber to his house. I ran out of the door, forgetting to put on a T-shirt. And... did you kiss?Yes. Loads. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?We should have treated the meal as a meal, not as pre-drinks. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again?Definitely. I need to give him back the T-shirt he lent me to go home in. • Jonathan and Matt ate at Casa Pastor, Coal Drops Yard, London N1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com