I won’t deny it, I am terrified. We’ve just had a massive majority for the Conservatives, here in Scunthorpe. I get it, people want Brexit over and done with. I appreciate that, but we have years of Tory rule to deal with after. I’ve dealt with nine years of Tory rule. They’ve ruined me. Let me tell you about disability benefits. They’re supposed to be a support network. Something to help people get better and back into work. Instead, Tories push people to work, to get them off the books, so to speak. That means people such as me, with severe mental health issues, have a battle for around three to six months a year where I have to convince an untrained physiotherapist or nurse that my condition is as severe as my trained doctor and psychiatrist say it is. I know Labour [party] members have lent their votes to Conservatives, and I know in the next election they will lose. All I can do now is hope and pray that, knowing they have gained from Labour safe seats, and given the vote of the real lower working class, they will show compassion to people like me, and take some of the pressure off, in an attempt to keep that vote. Aaron 26, living on disability benefits, voted Labour in Scunthorpe It is the least worst option for the country, at least I hope so. My instincts are Labour but the present party is unrecognisable. Its descent into far-left identity politics has left the working class disenfranchised. It is no surprise that so many of us held our noses and voted Conservative. The reasons I voted for them is because of reasonable certainty over Brexit; rejection of unpatriotic far-left politics and rejection of antisemitism. I want Brexit completed and a recognition of the views of the working class; a reinvigoration of the economy outside the metropolitan areas and an improvement of our standing in the world. David, retired teacher, voted Conservative for the first time in Bolsover My family, boyfriend and I watched the first results come in but went to bed as soon as Blyth Valley was announced. We knew then it was all over. My ex-mining constituency, which I have always been so proud of, has let me and so many others down. As if Margaret Thatcher’s legacy wasn’t hard enough on us. I’m also sad for Durham, home of the miners’ gala, which from now on will simply be a farce. I now need to decide if the town I grew up in and always thought I’d settle down in will actually be safe to raise a family in. I’m considering a permanent move to Scotland, especially if it gains independence, or farther afield in Europe. If the election’s done anything, it’s highlighted how better off other countries already have it. We’re a laughing stock. Charlotte, 24, voted Labour in Blyth Valley This is a very depressing, if expected, result. Coming from the north-east of England I simply can’t understand how any working-class person can have voted for a party that has systematically decimated the unions and public services in this area. If people here think that the likes of Boris Johnson, Michael Gove et al care one iota for them then they’re even stupider than I thought. Since getting into power the Tory party has waged an ideological war. Its whole plan is to take this country down the road of low standards on workers’ rights, food and the environment. In other words, they want us to follow the American model rather than the European. This will work out fine for their mates in the City, but God help the rest of us. When we sit across the table from the likes of the US, China, Japan and the EU, trying to get a decent trade deal, we’ll find out what a small country this really is. But Johnson and his millionaire mates won’t suffer, they never do. It’ll be the ordinary working people who’ll feel the effects. Chris, works in computing, voted Labour in City of Durham I’m absolutely devastated. Every election and referendum that we have gives me hope that society will change and our most vulnerable will be provided for. But this election has resonated more than ever, as I now have a disabled son whose life I feel will be adversely affected by another Tory government. I chose to vote for those who don’t have a voice. I felt that the Labour party’s policies would benefit everyone, especially poor, disabled, homeless or jobless people. I feel betrayed by family, friends, neighbours and strangers, and I can feel a slow anger beginning to burn. I’m very despondent but wouldn’t rule out moving to Scotland. It’s always been a strong possibility for my family as a result of my son’s health. It’s a real possibility now. Ellen Moor, 34, nurse and mother, voted Labour in Newcastle-under- Lyme 