“There is no escape from this dilemma – either all matter is conscious, or consciousness is something distinct from matter”: Alfred Russel Wallace put the point succinctly in 1870, and it is hard to see how his colleague Charles Darwin, the great evolutionary gradualist, could disagree. Wallace, however, wanted us to have souls; he believed that consciousness was indeed distinct from matter. Darwin was a staunch materialist; he had no doubt that consciousness was wholly material. As early as 1838 he took it for granted that thought is “a secretion of brain”, using the word “thought” in Descartes’s way to cover any conscious experience. He wondered why people found this harder to believe than the fact that gravity is a property of matter. Darwin didn’t explicitly endorse panpsychism – the view that there is an element of consciousness in all matter, or, somewhat more cautiously, that consciousness is one of the fundamental properties of matter. But he saw the force of the position, and saw that it implied our profound ignorance of the nature of matter: “What is matter? the whole thing a mystery”. Certainly he understood the point that William James made in 1890: “If evolution is to work smoothly, consciousness in some shape must have been present at the very origin of things. Accordingly we find that the more clear-sighted evolutionary philosophers are beginning to posit it there.” Philip Goff’s engaging Galileo’s Error is a full‑on defence of panpsychism. It’s plainly a difficult view, but when we get serious about consciousness, and put aside the standard bag of philosophical tricks, it seems that one has to choose, with Wallace, between some version of panpsychism or fairytales about immaterial souls. This is of course too simple; Galileo’s Error lays out many of the complexities. It’s an illuminating introduction to the topic of consciousness. It addresses the real issue – unlike almost all recent popular books on this subject. It stands a good chance of delivering the extremely large intellectual jolt that many people will need if they are to get into (or anywhere near) the right ballpark for thinking about consciousness. This is a great thing. Goff’s historical remarks about panpsychism are misleading, however, in giving pride of place to Arthur Eddington and Bertrand Russell with no mention of Alfred North Whitehead’s panpsychism, or of WK Clifford, or the American panpsychists CA Strong and Durant Drake, whose writings from 1918-1925 were certainly known to Russell and Eddington. He also perpetuates the myth that David Chalmers “swept away decades of evasion” of the question of consciousness in 1995 and “forced us to confront the real mystery head-on”. This is wholly untrue in philosophy (as has been said before), and it’s a weird kick in the face to all those who thought so very hard and well about the problem for several centuries before 1995. There was a great surge of outstanding work in precisely the decades Goff dismisses, including Thomas Nagel’s article “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” (1974), John Searle’s “Chinese room argument” (1980), Frank Jackson’s parable about Mary and the black and white room (1982) and Robert Kirk’s 1974 revival of Descartes’s “zombie argument” (in philosophy, “zombies” are imaginary creatures who seem just like us but lack consciousness). Goff testifies to its importance by devoting a considerable part of Galileo’s Error to it. The illusionists sail off the edge of the world in the great Ship of Fools, crewed by Flat Earthers Goff is also wrong to identify materialism, the ancient and overwhelmingly plausible view that everything in the universe including consciousness is wholly material, with the obviously false and hyperscientistic view that everything in the universe, including feelings of pain, sexual joy, experiences of colour, and so on, can be “exhaustively described” (ie described in such a way that its nature is fully conveyed) in the language of the physical sciences. I don’t know any materialists who think this, and it’s certainly not true of Thomas Hobbes in 1651, or the electrifying materialist panpsychist Margaret Cavendish in 1666, or Joseph Priestley in 1777, and thousands of others since. Panpsychism is a wholly materialist view in almost all its versions, and Goff himself recommends the materialist panpsychist view that “consciousness is located in the intrinsic nature of the physical world”. There are, to be sure, people who think materialism requires them to deny the existence of consciousness, “illusionists” who are adamant that our brains are machines and there is really no feeling, no pain, no joy, no sensory experience. They are, however, a recent and wildly anomalous group among materialists, and this is unsurprising, because illusionism is the silliest view about reality that has ever been held by any human being. (No one has ever really suffered in any way!) The illusionists sail off the edge of the world in the great Ship of Fools, crewed by Flat Earthers, under the command of Rear Admiral Daniel Dennett, and we must let them go. I don’t know why Goff calls their view a “beautiful, elegant solution to the problem of consciousness”, because you can’t solve the problem of consciousness by denying its existence – and he himself says that illusionism is certainly false. This is one of a number of wobbles in an otherwise admirable book. “First, you know, a new theory is attacked as absurd,” William James once remarked; “then it is admitted to be true, but obvious and insignificant; finally it is seen to be so important that its adversaries claim that they themselves discovered it.” Panpsychism is not a new theory, but it is newly popular, and it is still widely held to be “absurd”. It remains to be seen whether it will ever advance to “obvious”. Certainly it seemed obvious to three winners of the Nobel prize for physics interviewed in the Observer in 1931: Ernst Schrödinger (“the material universe and consciousness are made out of the same stuff”), Louis de Broglie (“I regard consciousness and matter as different aspects of one and the same thing”) and Max Planck (“I regard consciousness as fundamental”). But they could see further than most of us. • Galileo’s Error is published by Rider (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.