A lucky bounce and a flash of class made the difference for Tottenham. Yet unease diluted the euphoria of a triumphant fightback. Do not be fooled by the score: this was another disjointed display from Spurs and there were times when it was hard not to wonder how much longer José Mourinho can maintain the ever‑so‑humble act he has taken into his latest job. In the end, with Spurs struggling for a collective rhythm, Mourinho could simply be grateful that his attack contains a finisher as unforgiving as Harry Kane and a player of Dele Alli’s imagination. Belief was low after the shocker against Chelsea last Sunday and ultimately the contest hinged on the randomness of the ricochet that led to Kane’s clinical equaliser and the beautiful improvisation of Alli’s late winner. Defeat felt harsh on Brighton, who rued Aaron Connolly wasting a chance to double their lead early in the second half. Equally there is a reason why Graham Potter’s side have only one win in their past eight games. Brighton’s football was easy on the eye but conviction eluded them in attack. Alli and Kane gave Spurs a sharper edge and there was also an impressive cameo from Christian Eriksen, reminding Mourinho that it will not be easy to replace the Dane if he leaves in January. This was a big win for a team chasing Chelsea in the race to finish in the top four. It had been a difficult few days for Spurs, who are still conducting their investigation into the racial abuse of Chelsea’s Antonio Rüdiger, and their play was littered with errors from the start. There was no flow, even though Harry Winks came in for Eric Dier in midfield and the suspension of Son Heung-min meant Mourinho turned to Ryan Sessegnon, who was replaced by Giovani Lo Celso 56 minutes into his first league start since his move from Fulham. There was intrigue in the Spurs lineup. Eyebrows were raised at the omission of Tanguy Ndombele and it was hard not to see the decision to start a player of Sessegnon’s inexperience over Eriksen as an indication that Mourinho is planning for life without his most creative player. The manager said of Ndombele, the record £53.8m signing: “Yesterday he told me he was not feeling in condition to play the game. Not based on injuries, based on fears of previous injuries that he has had since the beginning of the season.” Mourinho offered less clarity over Eriksen. “I know his future,” he said. “His communication with me is completely open. We trust each other. I am not going to be the one to speak about his future. It has to be him. My feeling is he wants to help us and that’s the reason why when I am in trouble, when I need a player with his qualities, I play him.” Brighton, slick in their 3-4-2-1 system, were impressive during the opening period. Spurs were stodgy, even though VAR denied them the lead in the 24th minute. Winks lifted a fine pass over the top and Kane finished smartly, only for replays to show he had strayed offside. The Spurs fans howled in frustration and danger beckoned when Winks fouled Ezequiel Schelotto on the right. The delivery from Pascal Gross was potent and Adam Webster, more assertive than anyone in white, headed past Paulo Gazzaniga. “You need to start well to get back good feelings,” Mourinho said. “We spoke about the emotional side of it and the second half was really good.” Spurs, who will be without the suspended Winks and Moussa Sissoko against Norwich City on Saturday, were fortunate not to fall further behind when Connolly fluffed a free header. It was a big miss. Kane would soon show the Brighton forward how to finish. Even then, however, the Spurs captain’s equaliser was entirely down to rare Brighton carelessness. Webster’s heavy touch bounced off Dale Stephens and ran to Kane, who slammed home the rebound after his first effort was saved by Ryan. Brighton, who were without the unwell Lewis Dunk in defence, almost restored their lead when Gross tested Gazzaniga with a thunderous free-kick. Yet Spurs belatedly discovered their poise when Winks made way for Eriksen, who could soon be seen dropping deep and picking out Serge Aurier. The right-back cushioned the ball down, Alli used the inside of his right foot to lift a delightful finish over Ryan and Mourinho could relax.