As a new immigrant to this country in 1972, my mother, Nita, never inherited the idea that sprouts were a mandatory, and sometimes unloved, part of Christmas dinner. She just thought of them as tiny, beautiful cabbages, and Gujaratis are famous for currying cabbage. Hence, sprout curry has always been on the Sodha family menu since our lives here began. This is a slight variation on Mum’s recipe – I’ve added all the classic achari pickling spices to make this a perky and enlivening dish, and an antidote to Christmas Day feasting. I like this with just some hot chapatis and a big dollop of non-dairy yoghurt, but you might prefer it as part of a bigger meal with something else, such as a dal or another vegetable curry, alongside. Prep 10 minCook 40 minServes 2 as a main (or 4 as part of a main meal) 750g brussels sprouts 1 tsp black mustard seeds 1 tsp cumin seeds 1 tsp coriander seeds 1 tsp fennel seeds 1 tsp nigella seeds Rapeseed oil1 onion, peeled and diced2cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and finely grated 3 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed 2 green finger chillies, very finely chopped 1 x 400g tin chopped tomatoes 2 tbsp tomato puree1½ tsp salt1-2 tbsp lemon juice Tail the sprouts, remove any blackened, spotted leaves, then cut the large ones into quarters and halve the small ones. Put the mustard, cumin, coriander and fennel seeds in a mortar, bash as finely as you can, then stir in the nigella seeds. Heat two tablespoons of oil in a large frying pan for which you have a lid. When hot, add the onion and fry, stirring, for five minutes. Add the spice mix, and cook for another five minutes, until the onions are soft and browning. Stir in the ginger, garlic and chilli, and cook for three minutes more. Add the tomatoes, tomato puree and a teaspoon and a half of salt, stir to combine, then cook for 15 minutes. Add 400ml water and the sprouts, pop on the lid and leave to simmer for 10-12 minutes, or until the sprouts are just tender. Take off the heat, season with lemon juice and serve.