It didn’t take long. One of Boris Johnson’s first acts on being returned to Westminster with a thumping majority was to announce that his old pal Zac Goldsmith, turfed out by the voters of Richmond Park just days before, would be appointed to the House of Lords. There’s nothing new about prime ministers handing out peerages like baubles to their supporters, but eyebrows were raised at such a blatant use of patronage. Surely this ran contrary to the declaration in the Conservative manifesto that the party will “continue to support the first-past-the-post system of voting, as it allows voters to kick out politicians who don’t deliver, both locally and nationally”? Unless, of course, they happen to be dear friends of both the PM and his partner, Carrie Symonds. Tory outrage directed at unelected placemen making our laws seems to stop at the Channel. Those who rail against the Brussels gravy train seem to have a blind spot when it comes to the tax-free £305-a-day attendance fee paid to peers. With almost 800 members – the largest legislature in any democracy – the House of Lords is estimated to cost the taxpayer some £20m a year in allowances and expenses. It was somewhat surprising, then, to read this week that aides to the prime minister are considering radical plans to reform the upper house. It would be nice to think that the proposed changes were motivated by a commitment to democratic principles, such as those that led Tony Blair to slash by 90% the number of hereditary peers sitting in the Lords. Given that this initiative appears to have emerged from the busy brow of Dominic Cummings, however, it is much more likely to be his latest attempt to subvert the constitution. A second chamber is crucial to a functioning democracy. Not only does it offer an opportunity to revise legislation, it also plays an important role in helping the primary chamber to hold the executive to account. It’s this latter role that may have drawn the attention of Cummings. Having delivered a majority for his boss, the new power behind the throne is eager to usurp any forces that might curb his aspiration to move fast and break things. The Tories have no majority in the Lords. Their 242 peers are heavily outnumbered by Labour and the Liberal Democrats. Even if the crossbenchers vote in a manner broadly supportive of the Conservatives, the Lords is capable of doing something that Cummings abhors: subjecting the government to scrutiny. It’s hard to see how the Tories could engineer a majority in the upper house without changing the way it is composed. As peers can’t be removed, the Electoral Reform Society estimates that, under the existing system, any attempt to replicate the current balance of power in the Commons would necessitate the appointment of hundreds of new peers. If, as reported, government insiders are instead considering an elected second chamber, reformers will have to ensure that the primacy of the Commons is not undermined. When we put a cross against the name of our chosen candidate to be an MP, we are giving that person a primary mandate to govern. If the upper chamber is to retain its revising role in our constitution, reformers will have to devise a means of giving its members a secondary mandate, which ensures they cannot overrule the will of MPs. A simple way to achieve this would be to divide all the seats in the upper house in direct proportion to the votes cast in the general election – what I call the “secondary mandate” method. Under first past the post, votes for failed candidates go in the bin. But if the secondary mandate method was introduced, all votes cast would be tallied in each of the 12 regions and nations of the UK and 25 members elected in each, in a manner that reflected all the votes cast. This method of indirect election would require some democratic input, in the form of local primaries. The end result would be an upper house of 300 members that represented the will of people as expressed at the general election. Crucially, their legitimacy would be one step removed from that of the Commons, preserving the principle of primacy. Under Blair, Labour made the running, not just on Lords reform, but on a whole range of issues designed to devolve power away from the centre. Sadly, he lost his appetite during his third term and the party has since paid only lip service to constitutional issues. While the Tories threaten to dismantle the checks and balances that prevent them from acting with impunity, the new Labour leader should take the initiative by convening a constitutional convention – inviting political parties, local authorities, civic groups and faith communities to come together to build a consensus for a new settlement between the people of the UK and their government. At its heart should be a series of citizens’ assemblies whose recommendations guide the process. By putting constitutional reform on the agenda, the Tories are offering us a chance to reinvigorate our democracy. If Labour can rediscover its tradition of devolving power, the drive to give people greater agency over their lives could form the basis of the party’s revival. • Billy Bragg is a singer-songwriter and activist