First released in 1982 – hot on the heels of its rival, Sinclair’s ZX Spectrum – the Commodore 64 became one of the most popular home computers of the 1980s. It was far from user-friendly by today’s standards – even demanding some code be entered just to load games – but it inspired a generation of future programmers and designers, many of whom went on to be influential game makers. At the peak of its popularity, factories were building 400,000 units a month to meet demand. In 2018, it made a comeback, reborn as a “microconsole” preloaded with games. A charming, half-scale replica, the C64 Mini could be plugged into a modern TV, providing access to 64 games. Unfortunately, it lacked two things so important to the Commodore 64 experience: a working keyboard and a decent joystick. Now the the C64 Mini has returned, inflated to a full-size facsimile of the Commodore 64 and rebranded as the C64. This time, it features a functional keyboard and upgraded stick. As a replica, it is captivatingly precise. Placed alongside an original unit, only the logo and USB ports tell you that this isn’t a carefully preserved 1980s model. The new mechanical keyboard is a little softer to use than the original, but it’s an impressive reproduction nonetheless. Even before it is powered up, the C64 is capable of delivering a powerful hit of nostalgia. The Mini was delightfully tiny, but there is something much more evocative about holding a 1:1 scale remake. Once again, a generous 64 games are included, though the list of titles has been revised since the Mini. You won’t find a library of back-to-back classics, but the spread does a superb job of capturing the diverse range of games that made the Commodore 64 so popular. Sports releases Speedball II and California Games, the shooters Paradroid and Uridium, platformer Impossible Mission and puzzler Boulder Dash are among the more celebrated titles included, each bringing entirely solid gameplay. It’s the host of less well remembered gems that bolster the variety, though, including maze game Hover Bovver, ball roller Trailblazer, puzzlers Spindizzy and Chip’s Challenge, and adventure Sword of Fargoal. There is also an engrossing 2017-developed release on board: Galencia, which plays homage to the formative arcade shoot ’em up Galaga, as well as the vintage text adventure Planet of Death, providing a chance to put that keyboard to use. There are a handful of misses too. Alas, Pitstop II really hasn’t aged well. Regardless, the C64 is remarkably easy to use, thanks to the modern interface which lets you select games, adjust display settings to imitate old tube TVs, and save and load titles. Or, you can boot the machine as a classic C64 or Vic 20 and code simple programs. You can also add game ROMs via USB to load new titles into the machine. Securing ROMs of classic games is legally complicated, but the C64 provides a fantastic – if fiddly – means to access the numerous contemporary homebrew games made for the Commodore 64. The joystick, meanwhile, has been upgraded to include microswitches. That means plenty of noisy, nostalgic clicking as you play. More importantly, though, the stick feels responsive and precise. It’s a marked improvement on the Mini’s offering. Take away nostalgia, however, and the C64 is a reminder of how different gaming was on 1980s home computers. Many of the titles may be charming, but they can feel a little stiff and clunky. A good number are demanding not necessarily because they are hard but because they are very counterintuitive. Thirty-something years ago, picking apart how a game worked was so often a part of playing it. Indeed, including digital game manuals would have been a considerable boon to the C64. And while the joystick feels good, it pales compared to modern arcade sticks. The C64 certainly delivers authenticity, but it does so warts and all; it even seemed as if Planet of Death misloaded a couple of times. Still, The C64 is a function-rich, well made, handsome reproduction and includes a diverse and upgradable spread of games. From the colour palette to the crunchy audio, everything is in place to return you to a golden era of home computing.