Mary Delany didn’t experience her big breakthrough until she was 72. This would be an achievement for any artist, but for one living in the 18th century, when lives and careers generally stopped at 40, it was extraordinary. Delany had spent decades being competent at all the usual “accomplishments” required of a genteel Georgian woman: embroidering napkins, sketching landscapes and, oddest of all, sticking sea shells to mantelpieces to make them look like plaster stucco. But at some point, sitting out in the garden in the golden late summer of 1772, she felt inspired to pick up her scissors and start snipping into coloured paper to see if she could recreate the shape of the plants spread out before her. Thrilled by the results, Delany wrote cock-a-hoop to her niece a few weeks later: “I have invented a new way of imitating flowers.” Delany’s productions remain hard to place and difficult to decipher. But they are gloriously easy to enjoy Actually, she had done a lot more. Far from making simple cut-outs, Delany had created a new kind of art (pictured right). Over the top of her petal template she would typically paste a multitude of smaller cuts to create shading and depth, which she then touched up with watercolour. One flower alone could easily contain more than 200 bits of paper. She called her work “mosaiks”; we might describe them as mixed-media collage. More than mere botanical description, they function as a kind of floral portraiture, designed to show off a plant to its best advantage. Untidy leaves have been lopped off, droopy petals edited out, and the stamens sing with such hallucinatory colour that it feels as though they have transcended naturalism and now exist in a world of pure form. By the time of her death at the age of 88, Delany had produced almost a thousand flower images that were the delight and wonder of her smart social set. It had been in the magnificent gardens of the Duchess of Portland’s Bulstrode estate in Buckinghamshire that she had experienced her eureka moment. Joseph Banks, the celebrity naturalist, was an early fan of her work, while her later specimens were provided by no less a cheerleader than Queen Charlotte. Meticulously organised into 10 handsome albums, the Flora Delanica was bequeathed by a great-niece to the British Museum in 1897. Far from languishing in a dusty drawer along with all those other indecipherable traces of the vernacular past, Delany’s flowers remain some of the most visited works in the museum’s department of prints and drawings. The irresistibly odd shape of Delany’s life and work has previously attracted both popular and scholarly biographies, but Clarissa Campbell Orr hits the sweet spot between rigour and readability. In particular, she wants us to understand how the blazing serenity of Delany’s late-blooming art was born from decades of personal and political turbulence. At the age of 17 Mary Granville, the daughter of a disgraced minor Jacobite aristocrat, was married off for cash to a lechy 60-year-old called Alexander Pendarves, who had nothing but his profitable Cornish tin mine to recommend him. Released by his death after a mercifully short six years – gout galloped through Pendarves – Mary now embarked on a careful widowhood that lasted two decades. Campbell Orr is good at making us see why young Mary, who had missed out on becoming rich as a result of her rotten husband failing to update his will, nonetheless chose to turn down no fewer than eight proposals of marriage. There was a toxic bachelor called Lord Baltimore, whom she dubbed “the Basilisk”, and another man with a big fortune who struck her as simply “silly”. The offer from a widower with five young children naturally appalled her, as did a proposal from the doomy religious poet Edward Young, who, despite living in an age of Augustan wit, resorted to teasing her about her spider phobia. Rather than marry one of these buffoons, Mary carved out for herself a much pleasanter life as a free agent. She was careful to avoid any suggestion of being “light” by shunning gaming tables and keeping her friendships with men – John Wesley, Jonathan Swift, Horace Walpole – strictly platonic. Only when she was sure that her fertile years were behind her did she take a second husband, a nice Irish cleric called Patrick Delany, who soothed her soul even if he did not enrich her coffers. Quite why Mary turned, four years after Delany’s death in 1768, to cutting flowers out of coloured paper remains a mystery. And it is a great strength of Campbell Orr’s book that she doesn’t pretend to solve it. Nor does she insist on squeezing the Flora Delanica into a grand theory about the suppression of female artistic practice in the 18th century. Indeed, she admits that Delany’s productions, which straddle devotion and decoration, kitsch and craft, remain hard to place and difficult to decipher. But they are nonetheless gloriously easy to enjoy, and it is that sense of Delany’s life and work as a pleasurable puzzle that makes this exquisitely illustrated book such a treat.