Shares in Tullow Oil more than halved after the company slashed its production forecast, scrapped its dividend and announced the departure of its chief executive and exploration director after problems at its fields in Ghana. The London-listed oil and gas explorer said the chief executive, Paul McDade, and the exploration director, Angus McCoss, had resigned by mutual agreement. The firm will be run by the chair, Dorothy Thompson, a former Drax boss, until a new chief executive is found, while Mark MacFarlane, its East Africa chief, becomes chief operating officer. Thompson said: “The board has been disappointed by the performance of Tullow’s business and now needs time to complete its thorough review of operations.” Tullow’s FTSE 250-listed shares crashed nearly 60% to 57.08p in Monday morning trading, wiping more than £1bn from the company’s stock market value to about £800m. It was founded in 1985 in Tullow, near Dublin, by the Irish businessman Aidan Heavey, and was promoted to the FTSE 100 in 2007. Its shares reached a peak of £13.70 in 2012 but the oil market collapse led to the debt-laden firm’s ejection from the blue-chip index three years later. Heavey left last year and recently announced a new oil venture, Boru Energy. Tullow has been plagued by problems in Ghana, Uganda and Kenya. Demand for Jubilee field gas from the Ghana National Gas Company has been much lower than expected and Tullow has run into mechanical problems on two new wells at one of its other fields. It also warned last month that two discoveries off the Guyana coast contained heavy crude oil, which cast doubts on their commercial viability. It expects to produce between 70,000 and 80,000 barrels of oil a day next year, down from about 87,000 barrels this year. From 2021-23, it expects production to remain at 70,000 barrels a day. The company has suspended its dividend and said it would be open to offers to acquire it “at the proper value”. Russ Mould, the investment director at stockbroker AJ Bell, described the production downgrade as a “real disaster”. He added: “You know an update is bad when it is accompanied by the immediate departure of senior management. The news represents a continuation of the problems which have dogged the company ever since its share price peaked more than seven years ago. “The company’s skillset was in exploration – it enjoyed notable discoveries in Ghana and Uganda in the mid-noughties – and it has clearly found the transition to being more of a producer and developer of hydrocarbons more difficult.” Mould notes that Tullow has debts of nearly $3bn (£2.3bn).