So this is how the 16-year Eli Manning era ended in New York: with Manning standing on the sideline, wearing a ski cap pulled low and a half-zipped soaked blue jacket, watching an injured teammate on the 4-12 New York Giants being carted off the field as happy Philadelphia fans chanted, “E-A-G-L-E-S, Eagles!” It was a forlorn scene. And after Philly wrapped up a 34-17 victory and the NFC East championship on Sunday, Manning traded handshakes and best wishes with the Eagles at midfield, then jogged off the field on his own, trailed by photographers. It was raining steadily as he ran up the tunnel and disappeared into the Giants’ locker room. When reporters were allowed in, his locker was empty. Manning, 38, was so ineffective that he lost his job as the Giants’ starting quarterback to the rookie Daniel Jones two games into the regular season, getting it back three months later for two games only because Jones got hurt, then giving it right back when Jones got healthy. This is now Jones’ team; the Giants won’t pay Manning to serve another year as Jones’ mentor. Manning, who did not want to be interviewed last week, becomes a free agent, and he has told friends he would like to play at least one more year somewhere else, perhaps as a bridge to a younger quarterback. When he led the Giants to a 36-20 victory at home on 15 December over Miami, his parents and brothers attended, as if they knew this would be his valedictory. At the post-game news conference that day, he said: “Obviously, I don’t know what the future is. I don’t know what lies next week, let alone down the road. Obviously, the support and the fans, their ovation, chanting my name from the first snap to the end, I appreciate that. I appreciate them always and all my teammates coming up to me. It’s a special day, a special win and one I’ll remember.” He sat out the Giants’ last two games of the season, ending as the franchise leader with 8,119 pass attempts, 4,895 completions, 57,023 passing yards, 366 touchdown passes and 51 300-yard games. Manning is the longest-tenured player in franchise history. And, oh yes, he led the Giants to two upset victories over the New England Patriots in the Super Bowl. So, if he has really played his last NFL game, or even if he still has a few more to play, how do you measure his accomplishments? No one will wear the No 10 again for the Giants. He and his older brother, Peyton, are the only two brothers to play quarterback in the Super Bowl – let alone lead their teams to two victories each. Is Eli worthy of the Hall of Fame? It is open to debate. For example, the website pro-football-reference.com has determined that Eli Manning’s career has been of “similar quality and shape” of these 10 quarterbacks: Ben Roethlisberger, Warren Moon, Terry Bradshaw, John Hadl, Bob Griese, Drew Bledsoe, Donovan McNabb, Joe Montana, Carson Palmer and Jim Kelly. Five of those 10 are in the Hall of Fame, and five are not. Peyton Manning, his older brother, won two Super Bowls in 17 NFL seasons, the last four with the Denver Broncos after he missed the 2011 season with a neck injury. But Peyton threw for 71,940 yards and 539 touchdowns. On the other hand, Eli played in a tough market; he was unquotable by design, but he also never got into trouble. Or hurt, starting 210 straight regular-season games. Giants fans hung signs reading “THANK U ELI” and “SALUTE #10” at MetLife Stadium on Sunday even though they knew he was unlikely to play. He had given them more to cheer for than other sports teams in the area; the Giants, in fact, were the only New York team to win a championship in a major sport this decade. Saquon Barkley, the elite running back who ended his second season with the Giants, said Sunday of Manning: “He helped me, not only as a player but as a person. He helped develop my game to another level. Seeing the field differently and just how he comes to work through the ups and downs, you respect that. Not only as a player and a person but as a man. I’m really thankful to have Eli in my life.” Really, these guys don’t hold back. Golden Tate, a wide receiver who joined the Giants this season, said Sunday: “It was truly my honor just to be around Eli.” It was a shame that Manning went out playing for Giants’ teams that had losing records in six of their last seven seasons, making the playoffs only once (and getting routed by Green Bay that day). Their latest coach, Pat Shurmur, has won only nine games in two seasons and sounded after the game as if he would not be surprised if he were fired on Monday. “This is a ‘wins’ business,” Shurmur said Sunday. “I get it.” Shurmur’s plan was for Manning to start the season and for Jones to pay close attention. Manning had 556 yards passing in his first two games, but the Giants lost both, badly. After Jones took over, it was clear what the Giants were missing: a young arm and legs. Jones, the first-round draft pick, had trouble hanging onto the ball at times, but he had a strong arm and was no slowpoke, like Manning. “Eli was huge for my growth, my development,” Jones said Sunday. “Obviously, he’s a legendary player, and there’s a reason, because he understands the game. He’s done it for a long time, he’s seen a lot. I’m lucky to be able to learn from him and just spend time with him. I’ve been fortunate with that.” Jones moves ahead without Manning to tap for advice, and Manning moves into an uncertain future. If he ends up retiring, he can make more of those funny commercials with his older retired quarterback brother. But maybe another team gambles on a 39-year-old quarterback who played in only four games this year. Peyton Manning was 39 when he won a Super Bowl in his final NFL game, you know.