Panto season is under way and Pinocchio is on stage in front of a packed crowd, plucking up the courage to tell his first whopper. But since this is a panto for the over-18s, it isn’t his nose that grows. “The minute we told people we were doing the show,” says Jon Bradfield, who co-wrote Pinocchio: No Strings Attached!, “everyone said, ‘I bet I can guess what happens when he lies.’” Bradfield and Martin Hooper’s adult pantos have been a seasonal fixture for over a decade at London’s Above the Stag theatre combining bushy-tailed innocence and gleeful filth in such shows as Jack Off the Beanstalk and Treasure Island: The Curse of the Pearl Necklace. Strip out the profanities and some of the gags in Pinocchio wouldn’t sound out of place in mainstream panto, especially the increasingly near-the-knuckle Palladium spectacular, where last year Julian Clary informed audiences of all ages that he had woken that morning to eight inches (of snow, that is). So how does adult panto differ? “There are two things it allows you to do,” says Bradfield. “The most obvious one is to be ruder.” If some of the tension in family panto comes from pushing against the limits of good taste within the protective sheath of innuendo, it’s different in the adult variety where anything goes. Here, as in X-rated animated movies such as Fritz the Cat or Jungle Burger, the thrill is in the contrast between child-friendly form and scabrous content. There are jokes in Pinocchio that are both ingenious and supremely disgusting, including one involving Panini football stickers and the phrase “nut butter”, but Bradfield is aiming for more than just the gross-out factor. “What we try to do is make the romantic relationship in our shows more complicated than usual. So we’ll have the two central characters be attracted to one another, then be pushed apart by internal forces.” In the new show, this takes the form of Pinocchio’s slow-dawning realisation that society disapproves of his love for a dishy footballer. “You can be more grownup about that than you could in a family panto,” says Bradfield. “It’s not standup. You’ve got the audience there for over two hours, so you’ve got to tell a story, and it’s important that at the end people still go, ‘Ahhh.’” Adult panto has blossomed into a lucrative industry since the mid-1990s, when Jim Davidson mounted Sinderella and paraded his Boobs in the Wood. Among the titles competing this year to be filthy for lucre are Dick Whittington and His Pussy, Merry Poppers and A Pissedmas Carol. Looking further afield for inspiration is Kevin Quinn, who has adapted Jane Austen into Pride and Prejudice: The Gay Panto. “I thought it was going to be a lot harder,” he says, displaying a firm grasp of the double entendre. “But 95% of the show is Austen’s words and we’ve just shifted some of the emphasis.” That means turning Lady Catherine into a dominatrix and putting a saucy spin on a line assessing the shrubbery in a woman’s garden. There's a wet shirt scene in the gay Pride and Prejudice. But it's not water it's drenched with Most of the plum details, he says, were there for the seizing – such as Austen’s mention of two locations that are now renowned as gaybourhoods. “Mr Bennet goes to find Lydia in Brighton of all places,” says Quinn. “And then he goes to make inquiries in Clapham. It’s all in the book!” The wet-shirt scene invented for Andrew Davies’s TV adaptation also features in Quinn’s version, though now Mr Darcy’s garment is drenched in something other than water. A gay sensibility dominates adult panto but other brands are available, as demonstrated by the Market Theatre Company in Hitchin, Hertfordshire, which has spent more than 20 years producing shows so successful that they outlast panto season. The group’s latest production, Peter Panties, is touring until March. Time Out has called them “lone heterosexual interlopers in the thoroughly gay world of adult panto” – a description with which Glyn Doggett, the company manager, has no issue. “We’re not doing out-and-out camp,” he says. “We’re touring regionally, so we want something that will appeal to the masses.” The three-strong cast, including Pippa Johnson, take multiple parts. Some of the fun comes from the chaos as they scramble around to fill every role, some from the script’s prurience. “One of my characters is Wendy, who’s usually very prim and proper,” says Johnson. “But in our version, she’s absolutely sex mad and is after everyone.” Bradfield believes there can be pitfalls for an adult panto that doesn’t identify as LGBT. “In a non-queer adult one,” he says, “it might be a challenge not to stray into potentially homophobic or misogynistic humour. If the people who are making the crude sexual jokes, as we do, are already marginalised then that isn’t such a risk. It’s the old rule about not punching down.” Jim Davidson’s panto Boobs in the Wood featured comedy Asian accents and a hostile musical number called The Shirt-Lifters’ Song. It’s quite something to mock gayness from within one of the few genres in which it has historically enjoyed impunity. Davidson’s last panto, Sinderella 2: Another Scottish Romp, closed mid-run in 2015 when he was accused of bullying theatre staff (which he denied) and sneaking off to the pub mid-performance (which he admitted). Johnson is confident that even as a non-camp “heterosexual” panto, Peter Panties is respectful to all its audience members. “Sometimes we’re redoing shows from 10 years ago,” she says, “and there’ll be lines or attitudes that aren’t OK any more, so we change those. But as one of two women on stage, what I like is that it’s usually us in control. I make a complete dick of myself and take the mickey out of the way women are often used as sex objects. I find that I’m more annoyed by the traditional pantos than by anything in the adult ones. I mean, why does the woman always have to be rescued by the prince?” Pinocchio: No Strings Attached is at Above the Stag theatre, London, until 11 January. Pride and Prejudice: The Gay Panto is at the White Bear, London, from 19 December to 4 January. Peter Panties is touring until March.