Borussia Dortmund’s Bundesliga title hopes suffered another blow as two late Hoffenheim goals condemned Lucien Favre’s side to an away defeat. The hosts struck through Sargis Adamyan in the 79th minute and Andrej Kramaric in the 87th minute, as Dortmund were made to pay for failing to close out a match they had dominated. The visitors took the lead after 17 minutes through Mario Götze, as the midfielder squeezed his shot over the line from Achraf Hakimi’s cutback. Hoffenheim hit the bar from a free kick but struggled to create other clear-cut chances, and Dortmund looked set to go into the German winter break on a high. That all changed when substitute Adamyan took advantage of a defensive lapse to stab the ball home with just over 10 minutes to go. The Armenian winger then turned provider, crossing for Kramaric to power his header beyond Roman Bürki. The dramatic comeback boosted Hoffenheim’s own top-four ambitions, as they climbed the table to sixth. “It’s not going to killl us, but it’s tough to accept,” Dortmund’s Julian Brandt said afterwards. “We played well and somehow let this game slip through our hands … we should have scored more and cut out the mistakes we made.” Dortmund stay in fourth, four points behind leaders RB Leipzig, who host Augsburg on Saturday. Second-placed Mönchengladbach visit Hertha Berlin, while Bayern Munich entertain Wolfsburg. After the weekend, the league goes on a winter break until 17 January. AS Roma kept in touch with the leading pack in Serie A with a 4-1 victory at Fiorentina, extending the hosts’ winless run to seven league games. Early goals from Edin Dzeko and Aleksandar Kolarov put Roma 2-0 up before Milan Badelj pulled one back, but late strikes from Lorenzo Pellegrini and Nicolò Zaniolo secured victory for the visitors. Roma are now within a point of third-placed Lazio, who will face leaders Juventus in the Italian Super Cup in Saudi Arabia on Sunday. Fiorentina remain four points above the relegation zone after a disastrous run of form.With 19 minutes played, Pellegrini set Zaniolo away on the right and he crossed into the area for Dzeko to net from close range. Two minutes later, Kolarov curled home a trademark free kick to double the lead. Badelj pulled one back in the 34th minute to make the match a contest, but Pellegrini turned in Dzeko’s pass from the edge of the area in the 73rd minute. Zaniolo then finished off a counter-attack for the fourth with two minutes to play. Reuters