The last time England set off on a winter tour at election time they were also heading for South Africa – in October 1964. On that occasion the political contest had rather more impact on the tour party. Ted Dexter, who had been England captain throughout the Ashes summer of 1964, stood for the Conservatives against Jim Callaghan in Cardiff South East, an undertaking that meant that he was replaced as captain by MJK Smith. Dexter mustered 22,288 votes in Cardiff but – fortunately for England’s middle-order – Callaghan polled 7,841 more than that and he would go on to be appointed the chancellor of the exchequer in Harold Wilson’s Labour government. So Dexter soon caught up with the tour party in South Africa and became Smith’s vice-captain as well as averaging 57 in the Test series, rather than taking a place in the House of Commons. Joe Root has managed to avoid such distractions. Indeed, he and his tour party have been spared much exposure to the election campaigns. They were in England for just nine days after their return from New Zealand and in that brief period of respite they may have been too preoccupied to wade through the manifestos. They have now arrived in Johannesburg on a tour that bears very little resemblance to that of 1964-65. Smith’s side arrived in southern Africa on 16 October; they embarked on their first Test match in Durban on 4 December. After two hurried practice matches in Benoni in 2019, England begin their four-Test series at Centurion on Boxing Day. Smith’s team won their five-match series 1-0 after victory in Durban (where there is no Test this time) and 42 of the 69 wickets taken by England in the series fell to spinners, with Fred Titmus and David Allen to the fore. This time the England spin bowlers will not be so busy and the chances of so many drawn Test matches have greatly diminished unless monsoon conditions prevail. Runs were not such a problem for the England team back in the winter of 1964-65. In the first four Tests the first three comprised Geoff Boycott, Bob Barber and Dexter; they were followed by Ken Barrington at four, who averaged 101 in a series where the batsmen generally prevailed. In 2019 the game moves faster even though the over rates are slower and somehow we don’t expect such a feast of runs from whichever combination of Rory Burns, Dom Sibley, Joe Denly, Zak Crawley and Jonny Bairstow occupies the top three places for England when the teams meet at Centurion. Beyond the political landscape or the fact that he has just been omitted from England’s T20 squad for the three matches at the end of the tour, Root has plenty to exercise his mind before the series starts. Not for the first time he will be contemplating what to do with his Yorkshire colleague Bairstow. He returns to the squad but not as the first-choice wicketkeeper. Along with Chris Silverwood, Root must decide whether to pitchfork Bairstow straight back into the Test team, presumably in the top order at the expense of Sibley. That initial choice for the first Test is crucial given that there are no opportunities for batsmen on the sidelines to play any cricket once the series has started. As a general rule it is not a great idea to have a much-travelled cricketer with 69 Tests to his name mooching around on the sidelines on tour. Somehow those bibs do not fit so comfortably in the second half of an international career. Root will also be aware of his own form. Until his double century at Hamilton in the second Test against New Zealand, albeit on the type of dead track that does the game few favours, the pressure was mounting because of his failure to produce the big scores as captain. He could do with a consolidating hundred early in the series to send that argument into the long grass. He must also consider the juggling of his pace attack. Here there will be fine selectorial judgments to make regarding his illustrious senior citizens and their fitness or potency, depending on whether the conversation relates to Jimmy Anderson or Stuart Broad. Root will have plenty of options, especially if Mark Wood can prove his return to fitness (though this is not expected to be the case at the start of the series), but no easy choices. All this takes place against a chaotic backdrop in South Africa, which suggests that by comparison the management of the game by the England and Wales Cricket Board here verges on competency. The administration of South African cricket has been in turmoil with the chief executive, Thabang Moroe, suspended and the players’ association demanding a major overhaul. The South Africa Test team have lost their last five matches, two at home against the Sri Lankans in February and, less surprisingly, three away to India in October. Jacques Faul is now the acting chief executive and he has persuaded their former captain Graeme Smith to become the acting cricket director for three months. One of his first acts has been to appoint Mark Boucher as head coach. In England, Smith was ever-present as the leader of the opposition when three captains were moved to resign: Nasser Hussain in 2003, Michael Vaughan in 2008 and Andrew Strauss in 2012. One assumes that Smith will be too preoccupied with his finger-in-the-dyke duties to focus much on the reign of England’s current leader.