Occasionally I will get a nagging sense that I am missing a fundamental piece of me. It’s as if I have misplaced a crucial something along the way, but I’m not quite sure where, or how far back, I dropped it. Weeks will pass until eventually I find myself engrossed in a face-to-face catch-up with a friend; a conversation that bypasses pleasantries and verbal backfill, where new worlds and possibilities seem to open up and schedules slip away. So that was what was missing, I think in those moments. When I was a young adult, I took these connections for granted. They were all around me; my life brimmed with brilliant, interesting and curious friends, and our days intersected effortlessly. Back then it felt as if friendship extended beyond more than just catching up. It involved wholehearted investment, hours of emotional commitment and it certainly wasn’t something to be shoehorned between the gaps in our lives. It’s hard to pinpoint the exact moment our friendships became more transactional, less intimate and more closely aligned with the fundamentals of late capitalism, but at some stage it shifted. Perhaps it was when my generation, Generation X, had children, married or put down roots. Our worlds became less porous and more inflexible, and we began to cram each other in between appointments. Our hectic lives, we seemed to be saying, exist outside our friendships, which are an adjunct to the main game of whatever our vision boards proclaimed we smash that month: personal bests at the gym, booking the Bali holiday we “deserve”, making acquaintances jealous on social media, while denying quality time to those we truly love. It’s not that we stopped communicating with friends. In fact, we’re all in constant contact, if that is what you would call it, promising to create windows to catch up in, texting questions that go unanswered and failing to respond to texts about how we pulled up, and what was the name of that bar we ended up in? As our lives became busier, Silicon Valley technology promised to make it easier, more expedient, to connect. No more of that pesky face-to-face stuff or picking up the dreaded phone. Instead communication devolved into a truncated, paradoxical form of disconnected connection, as befitting the socially awkward tech bros who invented the dominant platforms for staying in touch. Another way to describe it is as a digital shouting match that replaces actual dialogue with non sequiturs, memes and emojis that ping relentlessly and forever around our devices, awaiting their “seen” receipt, but rarely eliciting a substantive response. The way we text each other is often alarmingly unhinged, unfolding at a rapid pace one minute and ending abruptly without sign-off, when one person gets bored, can’t think of a good response or is called back to the world. Landlines faded away, but we baulk at taking calls on mobiles as well. After all, the only people who randomly call are scammers and sales reps from utility companies, so no wonder we no longer pick up the phone. Yet we upturn our bags to locate a ringing phone in the middle of a catch-up with a friend – odd that – and still many people struggle to put away their mobile phone for the length of a dinner party, which, unless you’re waiting on a genuinely important call, is akin to giving your date the middle finger (placing phones face-down on the table does not make its presence less intrusive, either). Then there is the modern cancel culture, which in this case has nothing to do with being trolled on Twitter but refers to our tendency to pull out on our friends for Netflix. It’s easy to let someone down when you’re not there to see the disappointment cross their face or hear it in their voice, and instead you just text them that you can’t make dinner – soz – because you have the plague. In treating our friends so shabbily we are saying that we are OK with being treated this way, too; that we don’t mind last-minute cancellations or being interrupted for a ringing phone, or worse, the possibility of a ringing phone through its portentous presence at the table. Think about that dehumanising demotion: you are less important than the mere possibility of another person calling or texting. Sometimes, when I deactivate or limit my profile on yet another social media platform turned hell site, I wonder briefly how some of my older friends, people overseas, for example, will contact me now that I am no longer so available. How will they reach me? Then I realise that those who truly care about the friendship, the people who matter, will find a way. • Johanna Leggatt is a Melbourne journalist