When Susie* was placed in a privately run children’s home at 16, it marked the beginning of a traumatic experience she is still recovering from today. “It was more of an institution than a caring environment,” she said. “There was no one to really look after us in a way that family should.” During the year she spent at the house, which accommodated more than a dozen 12- to 18-year-olds with mental health and other complex needs, Susie, who is now 21, claims she was never given sufficient support for her autism. She instead recounted being “yelled at a lot” by staff, which triggered sensory overload, a condition often experienced by people with autism that causes hypersensitivity to things such as sights and sounds and can make them feel as if they are in physical agony. “They called me stupid and retarded quite a lot,” said Susie. “Whenever I tried to speak they always got angry at me, but they never explained why so it was really scary.” Other factors, including thin walls and loud laminate floorboards, and staff constantly keeping the lights on throughout the house, meant that Susie was constantly in pain. At times, she said, some of the untrained shift workers at the home – of whom four would usually be working at any time – would also hit her. Furthering her isolation was the fact that Susie’s placement was about 80 miles outside of her local authority. It meant that contact with her mother, whose neglect had led her to be taken into care, was infrequent. Her only constant point of contact outside of the children’s home was a social worker. “I tried to tell her what was going on. I think she didn’t have any autism training so we really struggled to communicate with each other,” she said. Just four months into her placement, Susie reported a male care worker to police after claiming he had sexually assaulted her on two occasions. “The police told my social worker and he was moved to a different group home, but everyone just got mad at me instead and blamed me for it,” she said, adding that she believed staff at the home were lying to her social worker to cover their own backs. After withdrawing her complaint due to the pressure, Susie did not trust her social worker enough to tell her about the other abuse she was experiencing within the home. Since leaving care, she has begun regular visits to a mental health professional, who recently diagnosed her with a trauma disorder. “She said it’s to do with the stuff that happened then because I have flashbacks a lot about it,” said Susie. “I’d never felt safe enough to tell anyone else about what was happening because they never really gave me the opportunity.” Feeling confused about the diagnosis, she told a trusted adult working in autism advocacy about her experience. “I thought I was really bad because there were dozens of adults who were paid to make sure I was OK, and instead they hurt me. So I thought that there was something really wrong with me,” she said. “But she called it serious child sexual, physical and emotional abuse and said that that wasn’t good. When she said that, it made me wonder if maybe what had happened wasn’t my fault. I thought that was quite nice of her to say.” *Name has been changed.