If there were ever a blockbuster film to evoke unparalleled horror and disbelief at first glance, it must be Cats. It was never going to be easy to adapt Cats for the screen – even when you have pedigree stars like Dame Judi Dench, Sir Ian McKellen, Idris Elba and Taylor Swift in tow. TS Eliot’s 1939 Old Possum’s Book of Practical Cats was flippant and lolloping verse, loosely adapted for the stage by Andrew Lloyd Webber in the late 70s and early 80s. Since the film’s trailer was released in July to a universal caterwaul – and a lot of questions – critics and audiences alike have approached its premiere with increasing trepidation. Its director, Tom Hooper, has said that he finished editing the film in a 36-hour sprint the day before the premiere. But now that reviewers have seen the finished product, the more pressing question seems to be: why was he doing this at all? With critics now able to give their opinions freely after the embargo expired, it is impossible to go past the Guardian’s own Peter Bradshaw, who has paid homage to Eliot by delivering his firmly one-star review in verse. But he is far from alone in his scorn. “A doctoral thesis could be written on how this misfire sputtered into existence,” writes Manohla Dargis at the New York Times. She notes Old Possum’s origins in a kind of “literary minstrelsy” between Eliot and a fellow poet, Ezra Pound, the character of Eliot’s verse and its development into a “money-printing” stage show, before finally turning to the film itself. Hooper, she says, is “nowhere near vulgar enough” to direct something as preposterous as Cats. “Hooper’s mistake is that he’s tried to class up the joint. What a blunder! In feline terms, this is a movie without epic hairballs, without rear-end sniffing, without a deep, wounding scratch. Instead the movie tamps down and tidies its innate strangeness, cutting carefully loose only in its more comic numbers.” In an article titled A Tragical Mess of Mistoffelees, Richard Lawson from Vanity Fair admits that he didn’t entirely hate the film, calling it “an existential quandary, this 110-minute journey into a computer graphic phantasmagoria, revolting and briefly alluring, a true grotesque that sings, in fits and starts, a faint siren song”. “It’s by no means a good movie,” he says. “[But] I don’t want to outright hate it. It’s an ugly stray who smells bad and should not be invited into your home, certainly. And yet it is its own kind of living creature, worthy of at least some basic compassion.” Still. Jonny Oleksinski at the New York Post called it a “huge failure”, arguing that’s primarily due to Hooper having “completely abandoned the fundamentals of what made Cats a terrific show: sublime music, captivating dance and an intoxicating atmosphere.” Alissa Wilkinson at Vox delivered her thoughts in some minimally edited and self-confessed disorder, but she is quite clear about her position on the film: “It’s literally incredible. I hope I never see it again.” The greatest moment of ‘Cats’ was when noted thespian Ian McKellen shouts, in Gandalf’s voice of power and gravitas: “MIAOWMIAOWMIAOW!!” Kevin Fallon at the Daily Beast is not the first to ask some critical questions, though he does seem to become increasingly distressed about the film’s baffling incongruities: “Is there a rhyme or reason to when the cats crawl on all fours versus when they walk on two feet like humans? How is it that nearly every character makes a reference to their private parts, yet there were no private parts to speak of? Will I make it to this end of this paragraph with my sanity intact?” The Gizmodo review by Alex Cranz is titled simply: “I have seen sights no human eyes should see.” David Rooney at the Hollywood Reporter wonders how it all managed to get so far. He compares it to Sidney Lumet’s The Wiz from 1978, a film that he says shares Cats’ “stubbornly unmagical handle on fantasy material”, arguing: “It’s almost unfathomable that this one made it through all the preliminary production meetings without someone sensibly calling a halt to the process by saying: ‘Wait a minute, those kitties are damn creepy!’” The Guardian’s Catherine Shoard has written about the film’s “seething sexuality”, describing the response at the film’s UK premiere: “One critic described proceedings as permanently on the brink of a sex party. Other reviewers were struck by Cats’ visual and tonal similarity to The Human Centipede, a horror film in which kidnap victims are stitched together mouth to anus.” “Is this a sex thing?” asked Alison Willmore at Vulture. “Look, it is not not a sex thing.” But it’s Matt Golder at Collider who really grabs the, um, cat by the tail: “Tom Hooper’s direction to his actors for this semblance of a plot was to act it super horny. That doesn’t give Cats a raw sexual energy as much as it makes everything incredibly uncomfortable like when Rum Tum Tugger (Jason Derulo) is dumping milk into cats’ faces or Macavity just seems more nude than other cats even though technically all the cats are nude … Cats always feels like it’s two seconds away from turning into a furry orgy in a dumpster. That’s the energy you have to sit with for almost two hours.”