‘It’ll have them singing and dancing in the aisles!” That may be the kind of blurb you’d splash all over a poster for a musical, but it’s not actually what every theatre wants to happen. Back in October, a family left a production of Motown the Musical at Sunderland Empire after being asked to refrain from spiritedly singing along to its Berry Gordy hits. Your thoughts on that probably depend on whether you, too, can’t help belting out a big chorus, or whether your worst nightmare is an off-key hum coming from the seat behind you. The urge to join in is definitely getting stronger. After the success of singalong cinema events – The Sound of Music, Grease, The Greatest Showman – you can now go to special karaoke versions of hit musicals Six and Waitress, where you can sing along during the show, or get on stage afterwards with live musicians and belt out your favourite tunes. In the West End of London, feelings about more ad-hoc participation are mixed. I’m at the Aldwych theatre for Tina, the brilliant rollercoaster life story of Tina Turner pinned to infectious songs such as Proud Mary and Private Dancer. The pre-show welcome announcement reminds the audience to switch off their phones, then follows that by asking them to refrain from singing during the show. The man in the seat next to me groans. “You come to a show like this because you like to sing along,” he tells me. A woman in front turns around to say that she was nearly thrown out of another musical for singing. A coach party from Hayling Island in Hampshire have come on their annual trip to let their hair down. “This is the first time we’ve been told not to sing,” says Beverley Donaldson. “At We Will Rock You, everyone was singing along. It’s a shame really.” But Janice Esteban, queuing for the ladies’ in the interval, thinks differently. “I want to hear the performers,” she says. “If someone sings as badly as I do, it would ruin it. I wouldn’t inflict that on anybody. And if everybody stands up – my husband can’t stand up so he can’t see anything. You go to a concert to rock,” she says, “you go to the theatre to watch.” Another woman in the queue says she thinks the pre-show announcement has made people reserved and unsure whether to clap. Nonetheless, “A guy next to me is desperate [to join in],” she says. “He’s already gone to get up and his wife’s pulled him back down.” Back in the auditorium, as Tina’s second act ramps up with more 80s hits, I hear pockets of humming every time a chorus comes, and when the intro to Simply the Best kicks in, and Tsemaye Bob-Egbe appears as Turner in that red leather dress, the coach party can’t hold back. It’s only a minute later that the show turns into a mini-concert, and Bob-Egbe launches us all to our feet, now sanctioned to belt and bop freely. Maybe all the better for having had to hold it in. Up the road, the auditorium of the Shaftesbury theatre is packed for & Juliet, a larky, high energy, occasionally lame but massively fun Shakespeare spinoff. It’s a jukebox musical based on the songs of Swedish pop maestro Max Martin. Even if you think you’re not a fan of ’NSync, Backstreet Boys, Britney Spears and the rest of his roster, you somehow know all the songs – this is perfect singalong territory. Behind me in the stalls, Brian Westbrook, in town from the US for a conference, is clapping, laughing and having a great night. “You have to be respectful of everybody else, and if you’re singing off-key maybe keep it down,” he says. “But if you’re having fun and enjoying it and the crowd’s going with it, I don’t see a problem.” “Part of theatre is what happens on stage but it’s also what happens in the audience,” he says. “A show like this was clearly written to be enjoyed. I think it’s completely appropriate to be dancing and having a good time.” Charlotte Bamford and David Bishop, in the bar in the interval, agree that the show itself sets the tone. “They interact with you from the beginning,” says Bamford. “I sang along the whole way through,” admits Bishop. “Sometimes I feel a bit nervous about participating, I don’t really like those audience engagement-type shows, whereas here I actually was singing along. We’re in the back row but I felt like I was in the front row.” The back row may offer some anonymity. In the actual front row, Anna Levanen and her friends are sticking to lip-syncing. “I wouldn’t sing along,” she says. “I think it’s disrespectful to the performers. It is a bit different in this kind of event where you really know all of the songs, but we are here to hear their voices.” Although the volume coming out of the speakers is so high, she points out, you probably wouldn’t hear her if she did sing. As we get to the finale, the crowd are revved up, and for the last couple of numbers the performers start egging us on to get up and join in. But now you can feel that stubborn English reserve. Even with so much energy buzzing in the auditorium, some bottoms take a long time to leave their seats. At which point I think: perhaps rather than sanctions on singing, it’s permission to let loose that we really need.