Mitchell Starc avenged his Ashes disappointment to put Australia within touching distance of a big second Test win over Pakistan, before rain curtailed play in Adelaide. Starc took six wickets in the first innings, adding two more to his Saturday total of four, and then dismissed Azhar Ali in the second after Pakistan followed on. The tourists were on 3-39 when the rain came, still needing 248 more to make Australia bat again in the day-night Test. Pakistan were knocked over for 302 in their first innings, 287 runs behind – allowing Tim Paine to become the first Aussie captain to enforce the follow-on in four years. Further rain is forecast for Monday morning, but the afternoon and Tuesday are expected to be dry, and a 2-0 series win for Australia now appears a mere formality. After Starc ripped through Pakistan’s top order on Saturday night under lights with the pink ball, he took the key wicket of Babar Azam for 97 on Sunday afternoon. His first-innings figures of 6-66 were the second-best of his career, and the best since he skittled Sri Lanka in his dominant 2016 series on the road. Josh Hazlewood then stood up in his 50th Test, removing Babar in the second innings for nine and Imam-ul-Haq caught behind for a duck. The hosts were far from perfect on Sunday, missing six chances to remove spinner Yasir Shah in the field. The 33-year-old spinner went on to score 113, becoming Pakistan’s oldest player to score a maiden Test century before Pat Cummins had him caught out. Pakistan added 206 to their overnight total of 6-96, allowing them to keep the match alive for one more day. Two Yasir edges bounced marginally in front of Steve Smith at first slip off the spinners, while Marnus Labuschagne also grassed two chances to remove him. Matthew Wade should have had him run out, while Paine missed a stumping chance off Nathan Lyon that bounced and turned between bat and pad. Cummins finished with figures of 3-83, becoming the first bowler to reach 50 wickets this year – but Starc was by far and away Australia’s best with the pink ball. Picked for just one Test during the Ashes after a poor home summer last year, the 29-year-old bowled with pace and discipline in Adelaide. Six of his seven wickets across both innings have come from edges outside off-stump, while his other was an lbw that would have cannoned into middle and off. He went within a whisker of a Test hat-trick, when he followed up his dismissal of Babar with another one of Shaheen Shah Afridi the next ball. But he was then denied when Mohammad Abbas (29) had a leading edge fall safe.