Scott Morrison has apologised for going on holiday while Australia is in the grip of an extended bushfire crisis and a record-breaking heatwave. In a statement on Friday morning the prime minister explained he had brought forward his leave with his family due to the need to travel to Japan and India in January. “I deeply regret any offence caused to any of the many Australians affected by the terrible bushfires by my taking leave with family at this time,” Morrison said. Morrison later confirmed the holiday was in Hawaii, seeking to explain the trip’s secrecy by suggesting he had tried to give his daughters “a bit of a surprise” despite several reporters stating the prime minister’s office had denied reports he was in Hawaii after he and his family had arrived. The holiday – which was due to conclude on Monday – will now be cut short, with Morrison expected back in Australia on Saturday. “I have been receiving regular updates on the bushfires disaster as well as the status of the search for and treatment of the victims of the White Island tragedy,” Morrison said in the statement. “The Commonwealth’s responsibilities have been well managed by the Acting Prime Minister, Minister [David] Littleproud and Minister [Marise] Payne. In a separate statement, Morrison expressed “sincere condolences and sympathies” to the families of two volunteer firefighters killed when a truck near the town of Buxton late on Thursday hit a tree and rolled off the road. “Our hearts go out to their families, friends and colleagues who have been working tirelessly beside them, particularly during this Christmas period,” he said. “Given these most recent tragic events, I will be returning to Sydney from leave as soon as can be arranged.” Michael McCormack has served as acting prime minister since Monday, declaring his hometown of Wagga Wagga was the nation’s capital, while Morrison copped bad press for an international holiday in Hawaii. Morrison told 2GB Radio although he did not normally announce when he was going on leave “or say where we’re going”, he accepted that in the circumstances it had “understandably caused a lot of anxiety and I deeply regret that”. “I know Australians understand this and they’ll be pleased I’m coming back, I’m sure, but they know I don’t hold a hose, I don’t sit in a control room.” Morrison said his wife and two girls “like holidaying in Hawaii so we’ve had a few nice days here”. “It’s just unfortunate that it’s come at such an awful time, particularly for those living in and around Sydney and New South Wales. And it’s just devastating to be here and seeing what’s happening there.” Reporters including the BBC’s Frances Mao and The New Daily’s Samantha Maiden were advised by Morrison’s office earlier in the week that reports he was in Hawaii were incorrect. So the PM confirms he was in Hawaii. Earlier this week his office told me reports of Scott Morrison holidaying in Hawaii were "incorrect". https://t.co/LQc6dQfy9C On Monday night PMO said claims PM was holidaying were “wrong”. Airport sources claim he boarded a business flight to Honolulu an PMO now says won’t comment on that. Naturally I’m happy to correct record if we can work out #WhereTheBloodyHellAreYou pic.twitter.com/wcNrUVCV3y The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, has declined to criticise Morrison for his holiday, although Labor MPs have continued to target him for knocking back calls to pay volunteer firefighters and declining to meet former emergency services chiefs who have demanded more action on climate change. On Friday Albanese suggested the government should look at options to compensate volunteer firefighters such as tax breaks, one-off payments, or support for employers that allow workers to take leave. In a TV interview from Kurrajong Heights, north-west of Sydney Albanese said volunteers “still had to put food on the table, they still have to pay their mortgage” and the nation should repay their commitment to their communities. On Thursday the Greens senators Sarah Hanson Young and Mehreen Faruqi attended a protest at the prime minister’s Sydney residence, Kirribilli House, targeting Morrison for his absence during the crisis.