Watching the lottery on television these days may bring the minimal chance of becoming a multimillionaire, but for American men born between 1944 and 1950, the numbers that were nationally broadcast either quickened or distanced the possibility of violent death. The order in which eligible males would be conscripted to fight in the Vietnam war was decided by random picking of capsules containing all 366 possible birthdays (the army had spotted the loophole through which leap year men might have escaped). In the bravura opening scene of Richard Russo’s ninth novel, three 19-year-olds at a Connecticut arts college watch a tiny black-and-white TV in December 1969, as the first draft ballot unfolds. What steady Lincoln Moser, arty Teddy Novak and rock music-obsessed Mickey Girardi see will shape their fates. Readers know from the outset that none of the trio died in ’Nam, as the lottery scene is a flashback from the summer of 2015, when the men, now 66 and burdened with medical and financial urgencies, reunite for a weekend at a Cape Cod holiday home belonging to Lincoln’s family. Their survival, though, is the point. Russo, born in 1949, dedicates this book to all those listed on the Vietnam Veterans memorial, and the story feels informed by a strong sense of fortune in having his name on dust-jackets rather than the long granite wall of mourning in Washington DC. The heroes’ professions of real estate, academic publishing and sound engineering – sketched in with small but resonant details – might be thought boring in ordinary times, but for their generation represent a glorious escape. Russo’s subject is the guilt and responsibility of having fallen on the better side of fate. From its title (taken from a 1950s hit single by Johnny Mathis) through recurrent references to “luck”, Chances Are examines the balance between decision and destiny, choice and providence. Lincoln, Teddy and Mickey went to their college because they failed to get the grades for fancier campuses, and became friends when they all happened to take jobs as waiters at a snooty sorority house. While students they also all have the bad luck to be drawn to the same young woman, Jacy Calloway. Her tragic misfortune is to go missing, in 1971, during a summer weekend at the Martha’s Vineyard house with the three buddies, each of whom hopes to have a chance with her. Russo is known for novels about babyboomer blue-collar men, such as 1993’s Nobody’s Fool and the Pulitzer prize-winning Empire Falls in 2001. His stories are omnisciently narrated in a tone of sardonic understanding of human folly, which places him in the house of American style on a polished mezzanine between the poetic complexity of John Updike and the gentler observation of Anne Tyler. The smart, fast chat among his characters, meanwhile, reflects Russo’s parallel career as a screenwriter. The central presence of a police chief in 2016’s Everybody’s Fool, which 23 years after Nobody’s Fool was also the author’s first formal sequel, suggested an engagement with fiction publishing’s hungry demand for sequences and suspense. In featuring the cold case of Jacy’s disappearance, Chances Are includes an antagonist of the sort known, since Gillian Flynn’s 2012 super-seller, as a “gone girl”. Following the rules of the genre, by page 60 Russo introduces a juicy suspect who is surely too obvious to be the perpetrator, and also deftly accommodates a retired detective, a mysterious postcard and an ominous reference to the island’s landfill site. However, around the shivers and guilts of a missing person story, Russo ultimately remains loyal to his previous mission to represent realistically the textures of average lives. The impeccably delayed revelation of what happened to Jacy is satisfying, but more Russo than Ian Rankin. The gone girl turns out to have been caught in the novel’s twin undercurrents of Vietnam and the hands people are dealt: she has been very unlucky, but in a way that few will guess. Though the solutions lie in the 1969 and 1971 insets, the main time frame of September 2015 is politically timely. Barack Obama must leave the White House in 16 months’ time, and even the Democrats among Russo’s men can’t bring themselves to vote for Hillary Clinton as his successor. The Obamas and Clintons summered on Martha’s Vineyard, but as the election approaches “Trump for President” signs are going up on the island, though even Lincoln, a Republican, is sure the outsider has no chance. Russo’s acute novels will help historians to understand how Trump, who had a medical deferment from Vietnam, garnered support among those unable to vacation on Cape Cod. Chances Are, a rare mix of the tense and tender, should gain Russo further literary acclaim. • Chances Are is published by Allen & Unwin (RRP £15.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.