Jane Rogers has written some highly regarded literary fiction, not least her fine historical novel Mr Wroe’s Virgins in 1991. But she’s no stranger to science fiction, either: The Testament of Jessie Lamb, about a near future in which a virus is killing off pregnant women, won the 2012 Arthur C Clarke award. Her new novel is another sci-fi dystopia, set in a Britain in which the bulk of the population are stuck in mega “estates” (“81% of children born on estates have never been off them”, we’re told; “90% have never seen the sea or a live animal”), living hardscrabble lives, addicted to immersive virtual reality games and pornography. Into this grimly plausible extrapolation from today, Rogers drops the novel’s main premise. A scientist called Luke Butler has come up with a way of uploading the consciousnesses of dead people into the bodies of the young. This technology has revolutionary potential, although Luke develops it both secretively and recklessly. He is, we’re told, “on the spectrum” personality-wise, which seems an odd explanation for his positively Frankensteinian disregard of consequences. Indeed, to get her story moving, Rogers has to indulge in a certain amount of bodging. Despite widespread poverty, it is commonplace for dead people to have their heads frozen. A machine that can upload not just consciousness but all of a dead brain’s memories into a living body is more magic than science. The “body tourists” enjoy their new life for a mere two weeks before disappearing again into oblivion. Why only a fortnight? Because, is why. Hosts are unaware of the tourists inhabiting them; they are paid £10,000 to go to sleep and wake up two weeks later none the wiser. So rich old men and women get to enjoy again the intensities of life as the young experience it – adrenaline, sex, every meadow, grove and stream apparelled in celestial light, and so forth. Body Tourists is assembled from various first-person narratives: tourists and hosts, rich and poor. There would be no story if things went smoothly, and the plot hits exactly the Black Mirror-ish beats that you expect. Rather than return willingly to nothingness at the end of her allotted fortnight, one tourist runs off with her host’s body. People die and Luke covers up the deaths with increasing incompetence. A wealthy rock star pays to have his dead father brought back, only for his trophy wife to start getting overfriendly with the old geezer – because, of course, said geezer is now wearing a handsome young body. Rogers touches on some pressing contemporary issues: body dysmorphia, gay and trans rights, child abuse and social immiseration. But too many targets mean that none gets properly developed. Luke’s backer, an elderly billionaire called Gudrun, is a cartoon villain, blithely unconcerned at the deaths Luke’s clinic keeps having to sweep under the carpet – “Whoever made an omelette without breaking eggs?” she sneers. Luke himself never comes alive as a character. A good portion of the story is devoted to Paula, a working-class young woman from the estates, and the novel ventriloquises her voice vividly and without condescension. More problematic are the sections narrated by Mary, the African-born mother of one of the hosts (“sometimes I think of the mzungu who inhabited my boy’s body for two weeks, eh-eh”), which come uncomfortably close to narrative blackface. The handling of race seems not only derivative but thin compared with Jordan Peele’s terrifying 2017 movie Get Out A bigger issue is sheer belatedness: Body Tourists’ premise is an old chestnut of genre SF. This doesn’t have to matter, of course; it’s possible to create a new spin on even the most hackneyed fictive notion, but this novel struggles to find novelty. The handling of race seems not only derivative but thin compared with Jordan Peele’s terrifying 2017 movie Get Out, for instance. Robert Silverberg’s To Live Again (1969) anticipates much of Rogers’s story. There’s a Red Dwarf episode that plays the premise for laughs. HG Wells was writing the idea into fiction as early as 1896 (“The Story of the Late Mr Elvesham”). To be clear, the issue is not plagiarism, but the difficulties any creative artist faces working in so heavily overcrowded a field. Body Tourists can’t make up its mind whether it’s pitching its story as pathos or satire. Rogers has a surer touch with the former, particularly a moving strand about a woman who dies after being accused of paedophilia, whose wife wants to bring her back to let her know that the law has posthumously cleared her name. But more of the novel is occupied with broad-brush outrage at social inequality, sometimes over-obvious and forced. Readers unfamiliar with SF may enjoy the thought-experimentation, but for SF fans Body Tourists will be more Torremolinos than fantastic voyage. • Body Tourists by Jane Rogers is published by Hodder & Stoughton (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.