Michael Gove has declined to rule out the possibility of a no-deal Brexit as he was challenged over the government’s decision to make it illegal to request an extension to EU alignment beyond 2020. In its first major announcement since securing its majority in the general election, the government said it would enshrine in law a ban on extending the transition period on a Brexit deal with the EU. This is being seen as an attempt to push the European Union to give Boris Johnson a comprehensive free trade deal in less than 11 months by presenting the bloc with a new cliff-edge. The new Brexit deal is essentially the old Brexit deal with a new chapter on the protocol on Ireland and Northern Ireland and a few key tweaks to the political declaration. Here is a link to the full text. The backstop has essentially been replaced by a full stop whereby Northern Ireland remains aligned to the EU from the end of the transition period for at least four years. A change can only happen if it is voted on by the Stormont assembly. Stormont will have a key role in future Brexit arrangements. And if there is cross-community support to remain aligned to the EU rather than the UK the consent will hold for eight years. The arrangements in this deal will automatically kick in for a mandated four years if there is a breakdown in trade talks, so it remains a “backstop” but with a permanent tinge. That four-year period will start at the end of December 2020. Two months before the end of the four-year period, that is October 2024, Stormont will be asked to vote on whether to remain aligned to the EU in ways outlined by this deal or not. Under the deal, the UK and the EU are “underlining their firm commitment to no customs and regulatory checks or controls and related physical infrastructure at the border between Ireland and Northern Ireland”. The EU and the UK will aim for a zero-tariff deal with unlimited quotas. The entire UK, including Northern Ireland, will be free to sign trade deals. The line in the political declaration that “the United Kingdom will consider aligning with union rules in relevant areas” in any future trade talks has been ditched. Northern Ireland will remain legally in the UK customs territory but practically in the EU customs unions. There will therefore be no customs checks on the border but tariffs will be payable on certain commercial goods. No customs duties will be payable on “personal property” being transited from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. That protects online shopping and all items bought for personal rather than commercial use. Customs duties will be payable on goods imported from the UK for commercial use unless it can be demonstrated that the goods remain in Northern Ireland or are for personal use, as above. A system of rebates will allow importers to be reimbursed. The commitment to frictionless trade between Northern Ireland and Great Britain is restated. EU law on VAT will apply in Northern Ireland. The island of Ireland is considering a single market for electricity so homes in Northern Ireland can get their energy from a supplier in Northern Ireland or the republic. There were fears this could be disrupted by Brexit. Under the Johnson deal, the provisions of union law remain so nothing will change. This guarantees that the UK will remain in line with EU conventions on climate, environment and workers rights in a future trade agreement. Lisa O'Carroll Brexit correspondent The extension ban will be written into the withdrawal agreement bill, which is due to have its second reading in the Commons on Friday. However questions have been raised over what happens if an agreement is not struck with the EU by the end of 2020. Appearing on BBC Breakfast, Gove, who has been in charge of no-deal planning, was asked four times if the new arrangement means there is still a possibility of a no-deal hard Brexit, which MPs tried to prevent happening repeatedly in the Commons through legislation enacted by Labour MP Hilary Benn. He said: “No, the Brexit we are committed to delivering is the one in our manifesto. We need to make sure we honour that. That is a commitment we have to keep.” Currently, the UK is due to leave the EU’s institutions on 31 January, subject to parliament’s approval, and enter a transitional phase where it will remain aligned to the EU’s single market and customs union until other arrangements are in place. During this time it will not have any voting rights. The transition period comes to an end on 31 December 2020. It was possible to extend it by up to two years by making a request by July but the government is scrapping that option. Gove was asked again if the UK would still formally leave the EU if no agreement had been reached with European leaders, and said both sides know they had to reach a deal. He said: “We are going to leave the European Union on 31 January because of the withdrawal agreement. And then the political declaration, which goes alongside the withdrawal agreement, commits both sides to making sure that the follow-up conversations are concluded by the end of 2020.” Asked if the government could miss this timescale with no deal in place, he said: “No. We are going to make sure we get this deal done in time.” Accused of avoiding the question, he said: “We will get a deal and the political declaration commits both sides to that.” Shadow Brexit secretary Keir Starmer, who is expected to run for the position of Labour party leader, criticised the government’s decision to ban another extension because it risks the UK leaving without a deal. He said: “This is typical of the reckless and irresponsible behaviour we have come to expect from Boris Johnson’s Government. “The Tories have shown once again that they are prepared to put people’s jobs at risk in pursuit of a hard Brexit. Gove told Radio 5 Live that their plan to legislate for Brexit to take place by the end of 2020 was a way of “keeping faith with the British public”. He said a deadline would “concentrate minds” among the EU leaders to try and secure a trade deal.