Security arrangements for the UK’s biggest new year street party are in disarray after police revealed they are not legally enforceable. The organiser of Edinburgh’s Hogmanay, which is expected to attract 70,000 visitors over four days, is at the centre of a row with disgruntled city residents over what they perceive to be unreasonable restrictions. The events specialist, Underbelly, has been accused by residents of effectively imposing a social curfew on private party plans. Homeowners already had to apply to the firm for access to their own homes, with some claiming they are being limited to a maximum number of guests they can receive. Now Police Scotland has stated that any such restrictions are not legally enforceable and are strictly a matter for the event organiser and council authorities. Superintendent Stevie Dolan said: “We are aware of the plans for wristband access to the Hogmanay street party, following an expansion of the event arena. This is not a policing decision.” This is not about one incident but the whole relationship between the city, its residents and this company It remains unclear how security arrangements will work. Under data protection laws, there is no legal requirement for people seeking to bypass security to hand over names and details of intended destinations. Underbelly insisted it never intended to impose party limits on permanent residents. “We would never prevent residents and their guests from accessing their homes,” it said. “The arena area needs to be secure, which is why, for many years, there has been a system in place for residents to get access passes which ensure them quick and easy access past security to their homes. We are sorry if this has been misunderstood, but we want to be clear that our intention was never to prevent access.” Underbelly was unable to provide details of how it would deal with people seeking access to attend private parties, but said it would “strive to provide a safe and secure solution”. Mike Small, a writer and activist in Edinburgh, believes Underbelly, which organises other city events, and operates a venue at the celebrated international festival, is unregulated and has been given too much power by the council. “Underbelly seems to be spinning desperately,” he said. “At first it was all fine, then it was that this had been the arrangement for years and now it’s all a terrible misunderstanding. The reality is that this is not about one incident but the whole relationship between the city, its residents and this company. One of the key unanswered questions is how this company secures long-term contracts with the city to provide events which many people believe are poorly managed and badly conceived.”