Without doubt we’ve dipped below the standards we set over the last two seasons, but there’s no panic. Our (relative) woes can be attributed to an accumulation of a few separate problems: Laporte/Sané’s injuries, the Bernardo Silva saga, no new centre-half, and certain players’ decline. It’s not a structural issue. Hopefully we can recover our level in the second half of the season – though losing Mikel Arteta is a concern. 7/10 Stars/flops Some of De Bruyne’s performances have been incredible: his assists against Spurs, his all-round performance against Watford, that goal at St James’ Park and his showing at the Emirates. The best player in the league is back. Sterling started the season on fire but his level has dropped a little of late. The other bright spark has been Phil Foden. Flops? John Stones’ downward trajectory is a big concern. Happy with the manager? Of course. He’s still the best manager around. City fans calling for his head need to be careful what they wish for. My main two criticisms are the decision not to replace Vincent Kompany, and that he’s had too much faith in the old guard. Foden and Eric Garcia haven’t been used enough. 7/10 Moment of 2019? Kompany ripping the ball into the top corner against Leicester in May. What a moment. I haven’t celebrated a goal like that since Agüero in 2012. The perfect way for an icon to bow out. Top bins. • Lloyd Scragg NinetyThreeTwenty.com @lloyd_scragg Frustrating. We’ve beaten top teams but been turned over by Palace, Bournemouth, Newcastle and West Ham. We’ve also gone ahead in six out of the seven games that we have drawn: we can’t kill off teams or defend a lead. Aside from that, though, you can see green shoots: this team have potential. If the board supports Ole in next couple of windows while getting rid of the deadwood, we wont be far away from competing again. 6.5/10 Stars/flops McTominay has really grown in stature: you can see he has the character and potential to be our captain. Rashford has been in a rich vein of form and Daniel James has exceeded all our expectations out wide. As for Paul Pogba, though: Reds are convinced he has gone into some sort of witness protection scheme. He’s a big-name player with a poor attitude who José described as a virus. He needs to go. Stars/flops Ole clearly has a plan in how he wants to his build his team and how he wants them to play. What he doesn’t have is a plan B when we are struggling to break teams down. His substitutions can be slightly baffling. He’s still cutting his teeth, though, and needs a couple more windows to shape his team. 7/10 Moment of 2019? I’ll never forget the way Pep celebrated Sterling’s goal in the Champions League quarter‑final against Spurs, only to sink to his knees after it was ruled out for offside. Football can be so cruel, can’t it? • Shaun O’Donnell The negative style and lack of threat is frustrating the hell out of most fans – as is the all-pervading dearth of ambition from the owner. That said, the predicted post-Rafa implosion, at least on the pitch, failed to materialise. Our team can deliver gutsy performances: they seem to play for each other and the fans. 5/10 Stars/flops Allan Saint-Maximin is one of the few in our squad who can excite the crowd, but there have only been rare glimpses of end product. It’s great to see Andy Carroll back and if he can stay injury free (here’s hoping) he might become a talisman for better things to come. Steve Bruce seems to have revitalised Ciaran Clark and Jonjo Shelvey, and you also have to give credit to defenders Jetro Willems, Fabian Schär and Federico Fernández. Unfortunately Joelinton hasn’t yet lived up to his price tag – the position of lone striker doesn’t exactly suit him – while new right-back Emil Krafth has failed to establish himself. To add to our worries, Sean Longstaff hasn’t been the same player after coming back from injury. Happy with the manager? Nobody can say Steve Bruce’s heart isn’t in it, and he gets some sympathy for having to work under Ashley. Unfortunately, his record so far is consistent with his reputation as a journeyman manager who has had little success at average clubs. Trying to win games with more than a 30% possession rate might help his approval ratings. 5/10 Moment of 2019? Matty Longstaff’s screamer against Man United – oh joy! To see a young Geordie lad mark his debut with a match-winning thunderbolt brought a tear to the eye. • David and Richard Holmes Considering we’re 19th, we’re reasonably OK with how things have panned out. Expectations were always realistic given our financial limitations, but we hoped we could surprise one or two with our pleasing-on-the-eye football and doggedness. As it’s transpired, we’ve struggled with both to varying degrees, but we have had a few notable successes along the way – notably the home win over Manchester City. 6/10 Stars/flops Teemu Pukki has been the undoubted star with his clever movement and clinical finishing. He’s basically carried on where he left off last season and we’re lucky to still have him. Others who have excelled are Tim Krul, Kenny McLean and Todd Cantwell. No one has flopped as such but a few have struggled to step up – Marco Stiepermann among them. Happy with the manager? Oddly, yes, we are happy with Daniel Farke. He has plenty of credit in the bank after getting us here on a shoestring budget in the first place and had to contend with a horrendous injury crisis in the first couple of months of the season. He’s stayed true to his principles, which we like. He’ll do for us. 7/10 Moment of 2019 It has to be the sight of the Championship trophy lift at Villa Park last season. Trophies are hard to come by when you’re Norwich, so it was special: particularly when the style of football that won it was so exhilarating. The images will live long in the memory. • Gary Gowers NorwichCity.myfootballwriter.com / @gary_gowers / @NorwichCityMFW It couldn’t have gone much better. We look every bit like we belong at this level and have played exciting, full-throttle football in virtually every game. Even for me as an optimist, it’s been an astonishingly good start. 10/10 Stars/flops Honestly, everyone has been a star. Every single player has looked the part and some of them, such as George Baldock, John Lundstram and John Fleck, have taken huge steps forward. Lys Mousset is surely one of the summer’s best signings, with five goals and three assists in his first five starts. As for flops, it might have been nice for some of our other signings to have a bigger impact, but the fact is they’ve been kept out of the team by the bulk of last season’s XI. Happy with the manager? I can only score him up to 10? Easily the best Blades manager of my time as a supporter, and surely has to be in the conversation as our greatest ever after just three and a half seasons. 10/10 Moment of 2019? Late in last season’s promotion run we went to Hull for a must-win game against a team with excellent home form. Classic banana-skin potential – until we found ourselves 3-0 up at half‑time and with promotion in touching distance. A few people around me had something in their eye at that point – I may or may not have been one of them. • Ben Meakin @bladespod It felt like a promising pre-season – but things have gone south again. Thrashing Pompey in the Carabao Cup was the highlight and, despite a recent run of half-decent performances, the defeat to West Ham, who were apparently in crisis when they arrived, has left everybody fearing a long, hard slog for the rest of the season. A generous 2/10. Stars/flops Danny Ings has been our standout performer, and I say that as someone who was sceptical about paying £20m for him. Without his goals (and a few VAR interventions) we’d be adrift already. Some promising signs from Boufal and Djenepo, otherwise that’s it for the “stars”. Flops is a much longer list. Gunn lost his place after the Leicester humiliation (and a season save ratio of 55%), our centre-backs have been rotated out frequently because they’re all terrible, and our captain, Højbjerg, is leading by (bad) example – incapable of passing to a team mate. Happy with the manager? He played a mediocre hand pretty well for most of the second half of last season. He’s playing a very similar hand rather badly this time around. Defensive issues haven’t come close to being fixed. So, while accepting he’s really not got much to work with, it’s 5/10 so far. Moment of 2019? Slim pickings this year. I did enjoyed the memes after the Pompey v Sunderland play-off game with the idiot who tried to start a fight with Lee Cattermole – but I’m scraping the barrel here … • Steve Grant Total Saints Podcast @SteveGrant1983 Painful defeats (Bayern, Brighton, Colchester), exhilarating, thumping wins (Palace, Red Star, Burnley); at least things haven’t been boring. Spurs were 12 points from the top four when Pochettino was sacked but a win at home to Chelsea will put us in a Champions League spot having qualified for this season’s knockouts. Far from disastrous then, if below expectations. An upwardly mobile 6/10. Stars/flops Harry Kane has been decent by his standards, which are higher than most, and the real Dele Alli (rather than his brother) has been turning up of late. Son Heung-min has been the standout, though – what a goal against Burnley. A clutch of mainly defensive players with contract issues have been below par but Christian Eriksen has done neither himself nor us any favours and stunk the place out. The manager needs to get him on board or get him out. Happy with the manager? The new, smiley José is beginning to turn things round, and that the mood among the squad seems more positive is testament to some clever man-management. Persuading Toby Alderweireld to sign a new deal is something of a coup. Tactically he’s shaken things up with a no-nonsense, more direct counterattacking approach but the midfield has temporarily gone awol and things still feel fragile. Early days but an excellent start. 8/10. (Poch gets a 5/10 for the season but an 8.5/10 for his five years. He deserved so much more than just the Audi Cup.) Moment of 2019? Amsterdam, semi-final of the Champions League, deep into the 95th-and-final added minute. Spurs are heading out as Moussa Sissoko launches the ball high into the floodlit night sky. What happened next seemed to mess with the fabric of time: white and red shirts wilted like dying flowers as the green-and-navy whirled and wheeled around a single axis before piling on top of each other while a man in black dropped to his knees in triumph and disbelief, head in hands. Hat-trick hero Lucas Moura was then dropped for the final. Oh, Poch! • Richard Barnes @barnesrichard Lucas Moura Goal in Lego😃⚽️#Coys #thfc #ChampionsLeagueFinal pic.twitter.com/6byuXfK3jg The tumble from being European aspirants and cup finalists to the closest a strong division has to a basket case has been startling, illustrating the fine margins for a club like Watford between being pretty safe and being pretty rubbish. We’ve not actually been completely dreadful very often, but almost invariably inadequate in one key respect (not always the same respect) that has undermined everything else. We will need at least a goal and a point from Man United to take our accumulation of each into double figures before Christmas. 1/10 Stars/flops Difficult to single out either. The season has been characterised by us being far less than the sum of our parts. Daryl Janmaat and Christian Kabasele have at least stuck their chins out when fit, but Abdoulaye Doucouré’s form has been on the wane since he was the player everyone wanted 18 months ago. He’s been a tame imitation of the monster we know he can be. Happy with the manager? Javí Gracia’s sacking may have seemed harsh, but he was making no move to plug the great big hole in the base of the boat as it sank (3/10). Quique Sánchez Flores was brought in to sort out the defence and kind of did so but sacrificed everything else (2/10). Nigel Pearson’s “debut” at Anfield offered surly encouragement. Moment of 2019? Troy Deeney’s penalty at Wembley to level the FA Cup semi. Deulofeu’s gorgeous goal was more extravagant, but felt like a consolation at the time. The winning goal, the third, in extra time was a fine thing and the VAR decision that confirmed the penalty felt like the decisive point that irrevocably tilted the balance of the tie. But there’s nothing quite like a ball being struck really hard to score a decisive goal. Wonderful and cathartic. • Matt Rowson BHappy.wordpress.com @mattrowson After a promising start it all went wrong: Fabianski’s injury, that 4-0 defeat at Oxford, then a winless run of seven games that plunged us into a likely relegation fight. Roberto looked about as secure as Labour’s red wall, though he was playing behind a dodgy defence. The side has been short of pace and workrate, the midfield often bypassed and Haller left isolated up front. 3/10 Stars/flops Antonio has made a difference when he has played, and Snodgrass always puts in a shift. Ogbonna has had a good season at the back, Cresswell has come up with three valuable goals and David Martin has done a good job replacing Roberto. The overworked Declan Rice has often kept us in games. As for flops: Roberto has been a catastrophe; Anderson looks completely lacking in confidence; Yarmolenko started well but now looks way off form; Fornals is improving but took ages to settle; while Haller hasn’t produced the goals you’d expect for £45m. Oh, and Jack Wilshere is, predictably, always injured. Happy with the manager? The Southampton game bought Pellegrini some time, but he hasn’t delivered value for his £7m salary. He has been unlucky with injuries but he’s also bafflingly unwilling to change his 4-2-3-1. 4/10 Moment of 2019? David Martin breaking down in tears after making his debut at 33, then running over to his dad, Alvin, in the stand. That’s what playing for West Ham should mean. • Pete May Author of Goodbye to Boleyn hammersintheheart.blogspot.co.uk A fairly slow start, but we’ve since managed to produce strong performances in both the Premier League and Europa League – something that we were warned couldn’t be done. The squad still needs some development in the coming window, though. You can sense the club sees this season as a solid opportunity to establish ourselves, both domestically and on the continent, so it’s a good time to invest. 8/10 Stars/flops Before his injury, Boly was by far our standout player. So much so that panic set in when he suffered a fairly serious injury. Players have filled in admirably in his absence, though, with Moutinho and Traoré arguably the stars since. Jesús Vallejo, on loan from Real Madrid, has really struggled in his appearances so far, though. He arrived with pretty high expectations but it wouldn’t be a surprise if his loan was ended early in January. Happy with the manager? There’s a reason Arsenal were heavily linked with a move for him. He’s too good for them, though. I’m running out of superlatives for him, if I am honest. 9/10 Moment of 2019? I don’t think I’ve ever quite felt anything like when Diogo Jota scored the second in the FA Cup quarter-final win against Manchester United. It still gives me goose bumps now … • Louie Silvani ThroughTheThirds.blogspot.com @louiesilvani4 • Part one: Arsenal to Liverpool