Chelsea are ready to step up their interest in Crystal Palace’s Wilfried Zaha next month, with Frank Lampard keen to strengthen his attacking options, and are also expected to move for Bournemouth’s Nathan Aké. Zaha came close to leaving Palace last summer and was frustrated when transfers to Arsenal and Everton broke down. The 27-year-old winger is eager to test himself at the highest level and Chelsea, whose transfer ban was halved last week, are giving him strong consideration. Lampard, who has been given a £150m budget, made clear he wants more quality in attack after Chelsea secured their place in the last 16 of the Champions League with a 2-1 victory over Lille on Wednesday. Chelsea’s manager pointed out that losing Eden Hazard to Real Madrid has lessened his side’s creative threat. Zaha, whose form has improved following a slow start, could give Chelsea greater variety and incision in attack. Chelsea, who could strengthen their defence by signing Aké, recognise that completing business in January will not be easy. Zaha’s contract runs to the 2023 season and Palace have set his asking price at £80m. They are determined not to accept a lower fee. Zaha is Palace’s most important player and part of his appeal to Chelsea is that he would not need to adapt to the Premier League and would be eligible to play in the Champions League. With Pedro and Willian out of contract at the end of the season, Chelsea need to start building for the future. Chelsea are also monitoring Borussia Dortmund’s Jadon Sancho, CSKA Moscow’s Fyodor Chalov, Lyon’s Moussa Dembélé and Red Bull Leipzig’s Timo Werner. However they could be harder to attract in January than Zaha. Palace have identified Dwight McNeil as a replacement for Zaha, though it is understood the winger is unlikely to be allowed to leave Burnley next month. Newcastle and Tottenham are also interested in McNeil. Chelsea’s hopes of signing Zaha could be smoothed by Palace’s interest in Olivier Giroud. The striker, whose contract expires in the summer, has been out of favour and risks losing his spot in the France squad for Euro 2020. He is expected to tell Lampard he wants to leave in January. Chelsea, who could yet offer Willian a new deal, will also look to raise funds by selling Pedro and Marcos Alonso. Lampard also wants defensive reinforcements and a deal for Aké, who is out with a hamstring injury, would not be complicated. The defender left Chelsea for Bournemouth in 2017 and a clause in his contract means he can return for £40m, well below his market value. Alonso is wanted by Internazionale. Chelsea are keen to sign a left-back but any move for Leicester’s Ben Chilwell will have to wait until the summer.