Thousands of people armed with betting slips will pack into an ageing velodrome on the outskirts of Tokyo this weekend to watch nine cyclists compete for the title of Japan’s keirin champion. The Keirin Grand Prix is one of the highlights of the Japanese sporting calendar – and one of the richest. The first man over the line after six laps of the Tachikawa track will end the day a little under $1m (£768,000) better off, and secure a place in the history of an event that grew out of the ruins of war more than seven decades ago. Now, as Tokyo prepares to host the 2020 Olympics, the best of Japan’s 2,200 keirin cyclists are aiming to bring international success to the country that gave the event to the rest of the world. Japanese professional riders can earn huge sums on the domestic circuit but have failed to turn this into medal-winning performances against their international rivals. The country has won only one keirin Olympic medal – a bronze for Kiyofumi Nagai in Beijing in 2008. Benoît Vêtu, the head coach of Japan’s track team, is aiming to remedy that in Tokyo next year. “The main goal for me, and for the riders too, is to be good at the keirin at the Olympics,” Vêtu, a former French national team track cyclist, told the Guardian after a training session at Izu Velodrome, the venue for the Olympic cycling events. “I’m always telling the riders: ‘This is a Japanese event, so you have to bring it back home to to Japan. It’s your property.’ We are working every day for that.” Two of the men on Vêtu’s team – Yudai Nitta and Yuta Wakimoto – will compete in the grand prix, along with Yuka Kobayashi, who is among the favourites for the women’s title. “The riders I have on the Olympic team are really pure,” says Vêtu. “They are not doing this for money. In other countries like China an Olympic gold is a route to money, but that doesn’t matter here, because they already have money from professional keirin. Nitta has been dreaming about the Olympics since he was a kid.” International keirin, in which riders follow a pacer bike around a 250m track before sprinting to the finish line, made its Olympic debut at the 2000 Sydney Games. The women’s event appeared 12 years later in London, where Britain’s Victoria Pendleton won gold. Some keirin watchers attribute Japan’s lack of success to differences in the rules between the domestic version and its UCI counterpart. Head-butting and shoulder barging are a feature of the sport in Japan, where riders from the same region collaborate on tracks of up to 500m. But it is the promise of making huge sums of money in Japan that keeps many promising young riders away from the international circuit. Kohei Gunji, who earned 68.5m yen (£480,000) during the first 11 months of the year, will be in the grand prix lineup for the first time but, like several other elite riders, has no Olympic ambitions. “There are riders I know who are taking time away from professional keirin to prepare for the Olympics,” Gunji said in an interview last year. “I’ll be cheering them on, but it’s not for me.” However under the guidance of Vêtu and his assistant, the former Australian track cyclist Jason Niblett, Japan’s athletes are making their presence felt on the international track. At last year’s Track Cycling World Championships, Tomoyuki Kawabata became the first Japanese man to win a keirin medal for a quarter of a century. Yuta Wakimoto won keirin gold at a World Cup meet last year – Japan’s first in the men’s event since 2003. Nitta, Tomohiro Fukaya and Yoshitaku Nagasako won the men’s team sprint title at the Brisbane leg of the World Cup this month, with Yumi Kajiwara taking gold in the women’s omnium in Hong Kong. The world’s first keirin race was held in the south-western city of Kokura – present-day Kitakyushu – three years after the end of the second world war. The city’s mayor had cobbled together the funds to build a dirt-covered track he hoped would offer a distraction for the city’s war-weary residents – particularly local men who had only recently swapped their military uniforms for overalls – and raise cash for Kokura’s reconstruction. More than 50,000 people flocked to the Kokura Velodrome over four days of racing, placing a total of 19.73m yen in bets – a massive sum at the time. Keirin – whose two kanji characters can be read as “compete” and “wheel” – quickly spread to other towns and cities. But keirin’s early history was blighted by violence, allegations of race fixing, illegal betting arranged by yakuza crime syndicates and growing calls from women’s groups and teachers’ unions to close velodromes and protect children from the curse of gambling addiction. More than 70 years later, keirin continues to occupy an uneasy place in the Japanese sporting firmament because of its association with gambling. The grand prix is one of the few occasions when the sport attracts the attention of terrestrial TV channels, but it has made attempts to modernise in recent years. The women’s event, banned in 1964, was resurrected in 2012 to broaden keirin’s appeal, while a small number of foreign cyclists are invited to compete in Japan every year, including Chris Hoy in the mid 2000s and, this year, Joe Truman, a member of the British track cycling team. Vêtu said he understood the lure of professional keirin, and will be among the spectators at Tachikawa. “I knew about the grand prix before I came to Japan three years ago, but you never get a real feeling for that race – the electric atmosphere, the craziness – until you see it for yourself,” he said. “So I’m happy that some members of the team are taking part this year, not for the money, but because they will be putting themselves under a lot of pressure, with spectators yelling at them from the stands. You can’t get better preparation for the Olympics than that.” Justin McCurry’s book, War on Wheels: Inside Keirin and Japan’s Cycling Subculture, will be published in June 2020 by Pursuit Books.