I don’t think it’s spoiling anything to note that the recent puzzle from Independent puzzle editor Eimi has a theme so topical it appeared mere days after the event in question. If I tell you that one of the clues is … 4ac … body part possibly dripping, I hear – not a problem (2,5)[ wordplay: soundalike (‘I hear’) of a body part and an adjective indicated by ‘possibly dripping’ ][ soundalike of NOSE WET ][ definition: not a problem ] … for NO SWEAT, I’m sure you can deduce its subject. We have not yet been swamped with election references, though also timely is this Telegraph clue … 16ac Prime Minister must accept rubbish start to election for now (3,3)[ wordplay: abbrev. for ‘prime minister’ containing (‘must accept’) synonym for ‘rubbish’ & initial letter of (‘start to’) ELECTION ][ PM containing ROT & E ][ definition: for now ] … for PRO TEM. Even that ambiguously surnamed foreign leader we keep encountering has taken a back seat, though Wanderer has a clue … 20d Charge one politician, with every one considered separately (7)[ wordplay: I (‘one’) + abbrev. for a politician + synonym for ‘(with) every one considered separately’ ][ I + MP + EACH ][ definition: charge ] … for IMPEACH as “perfect” as any treasonous phone call. You surely remember the cluedoku? The probably one-off hybrid puzzle presented here by the great Chameleon? Chameleon’s newest initiative is a crossword advent calendar, which you can find here. Exciting news! My latest crossword is also an advent calendar. I'll be tweeting a new clue every morning between tomorrow and Christmas Day. pic.twitter.com/cU2RHwvYC9 If you, like Chameleon, have something to share, let me know! And if the general area of advent-calendar puzzles intrigues you, Peake’s Puzzles appears to be collecting them. Here’s a grim surface reading from Tramp … 25ac Harmful stuff when former footballer so drunk (8)[ wordplay: synonym for ‘when’ + name of former footballer + anagram (‘drunk’) of SO ][ AS + (George) BEST + OS ][ definition: harmful stuff ] Beginners should note that while two-letter anagrams are pretty rare beasts, this one obligingly helps the solver to identify the former footballer in question. The answer is grim, too; ASBESTOS has never been a lovely word. Six hundred-odd years ago, it was used as the name for a special kind of stone. It was special because once you heated it, it stayed hot, and even more special because it doesn’t and could not possibly exist. Even further back, Pliny the Elder used the word to describe a fibrous substance that we might today name by the same term: he took it to be vegetable matter; it wasn’t, and the word was already being used as a name for quicksand, so we live with the legacy of a doubly confusing error. And more recently, the grimmest error of all, regarding this poison as a magic mineral and cramming it into ships and public buildings before its effects became known. All these senses of ASBESTOS reflect, in some way or other, the Greek meaning: unquenchable. And since we haven’t had a Q since SQUIFFY: reader, how would you clue QUENCH? Thanks for your clues for AGENDA. The audacity award goes to Ousgg’s misleadingly spaced “Schedule had negative feedback”, though we also had some audacious surfaces, such as Catarella’s “Plan to have noisy sex on the second of January” and Dunnart’s “Remove head from butt, maybe, with a big to-do?” More family-friendly surfaces include Tomrollock’s “A little more than half of French policemen reveal motive” and Goujeers’ “List information in programming language”. The runners-up are DeetotheGee’s snappy “Order some collagen day-cream” and Phitonelly’s sneaky “Plan grand finale in Carmen”; the winner is Alberyalbery’s cryptic definition: “It could help with a listless constitution?” Kludos to Albery: please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics below. On the subject of audacity, our competition winner nominates a prize puzzle for which the annotated solution is now available as “Paul at his best”, singling out this clue … 8d She’s a manicurist, you might say, cutting end of finger in Hitchcock film (3,4,8)[ wordplay: how you might describe a female manicurist, removing (‘cutting’) last letter of (‘end of’) FINGER ][ THE LADY VARNISHES, removing R ][ definition: Hitchcock film ] … for THE LADY VANISHES. And it’s a scene you can imagine the old sadist relishing shooting, no?