The bodies of a local guide and an Australian tourist who died on Whakaari may never be recovered, New Zealand police have said, after days of bad weather hampered search efforts. Deputy police commissioner Mike Clement told RNZ he believed both bodies were in the sea, but sonar radar and divers had been unable to find them. The search was now being widened beyond Whakaari, also known as White Island, in line with tidal modelling. On Wednesday police would focus on areas from Whakaari through to the East Cape, Clements said, “based on tidal patterns and as the weather allows”. “There’s no perfect science with regards to whether those bodies will ever be found, to be honest,” Clement said. “We’ve done searches of a similar type in the past and sometimes you find them and sometimes you don’t, and there’s factors beyond our control in regards to that outcome.” On Tuesday, police said White Island tour guide Hayden Marshall-Inman and 17-year-old Australian tourist Winona Langford were the bodies they were looking for. Marshall-Inman’s family has expressed frustration at police efforts to retrieve him, saying they haven’t explored all the options suggested by locals who know the area. “I still believe time was of the essence and things could have moved a bit quicker,” Mark Inman, Hayden’s brother, told local media, saying if police hadn’t delayed their retrieval options his brother’s body might not have been washed out to sea. Meanwhile Ngāti Awa, the local Māori tribe in the area, say the rāhui (ban) placed on the fishing grounds off the coast of Whakaari would remain in place, despite complaints from commercial fishermen. The rāhui bans any water or boating activities as well as the collection of any seafood, and was ordered as a sign of respect to the dead and missing by Ngati Awa kaumatua (elders). “Out of continued respect for those yet to be returned to their loved ones, and the cultural implications around the likely presence of tūpāpaku [deceased] in the moana [ocean], the rāhui will remain in place until further notice,” said Ngati Awa chair and elder Dr Hohepa Mason. “Whakaari … should be respectfully avoided at this time”. Activities unrelated to fishing or collecting seafood would be permitted from 20 December, Mason said.