In the end it was Kelvin and Oti who lifted the glitterball trophy – something few would have predicted when Kelvin was drafted in last-minute to replace an injured Jamie Laing. That was just one of the surprises from this year’s Strictly; a year that has been blessedly light on tabloid scandal, but packed with great dancing and plenty of laughs to see us through what has felt like a VERY long autumn. Here are my top 10 Strictly moments. Feel free to share yours in the comments below. Back in the old days the waltz was a classic dance our Strictly couples did early on, but now it gets lost in the madness of couple’s choice and sometimes isn’t performed at all (I’m looking at you, Karim and Amy). This heartfelt routine from Saffron and AJ in week eight was beautiful – my favourite waltz of the series, and Saffron’s ticket to Blackpool. The rumba isn’t usually a high point of Strictly – they’re hard to master and require a level of chemistry few couples can pull off without making tabloid headlines. Most couples avoid it like the plague, but this one from Kelvin and Oti was a perfect blend of sensitivity, masculinity, storytelling and down-and-dirty hip action. The Strictly pros have put on some showstopping numbers over the years, but this high fashion-themed dance from week five was one of the greatest ever. Everything about it is classy and fabulous, from Oti’s sparkly catsuit to Johannes slaying the red carpet in killer heels. An absolute treat. 🤣The teeth are real. The moment Craig Revel Horwood thought Anton Du Beke had Austin Powers pearly whites. pic.twitter.com/X35J6dHFW8 The judges have been on stellar form this year, with new judge Motsi Mabuse bringing plenty of wisdom, positivity and sass to the lineup. But the best moment has to be in movie week, when Craig Revel Horwood commented on Anton’s Austin Powers fake teeth. It will never not be funny. Couples’ choice was added to Strictly in 2018 to mixed reviews; 2019 has been similarly difficult to judge and sometimes baffling to watch. This year’s standout was Paralympic table tennis player Will Bayley’s contemporary routine, which told the story of Will’s triumph over adversity with the perfect balance of power and vulnerability. Sadly, injury meant this was their final dance on Strictly. Footballer Alex Scott and her partner Neil Jones chose street/commercial for their couple’s choice, but on the day of the Halloween show Neil had to pull out due to a leg injury. Alex had 45 minutes to teach the routine to Kevin Clifton, who did a solid job under the circumstances. What’s wonderful about it, however, is the sheer determination on Alex’s face throughout – she’s learned this dance, and she’s doing it no matter what. The Blackpool special always offers up a few treats, and this gorgeous American smooth was no exception. It was an old-school showstopper with bags of class, and it also gave Anton his first 10s ever. Not a single 10 for 17 series, then two come along at once. Don’t you hate it when that happens? Find me a Strictly couple more suited to playing Morticia and Gomez Addams than these two. This graveyard foxtrot was an absolute treat, perfectly capturing the Halloween mood and one of the most intense on-screen marriages of all time. The judges agreed, giving it a near-perfect 39. Every series has a sensational jive – Jill Halfpenny set the benchmark in series two, but she’s been challenged over the years by Jay McGuinness in 2015, Ore Oduba in 2016 and Ashley Roberts last year. This year’s standout jive came from Karim and Amy in musicals week, with a Hairspray routine that hit all the right notes and prompted the judges to give their first perfect score of the series. We only had to wait till week 10. Showdances are an opportunity for our finalists to show us what they do best – and Kelvin and Oti’s gave us a high-energy tour of Kelvin’s Strictly journey in two minutes. An unforgettable dance from an outstanding partnership that almost didn’t happen.