The problem, getting ever harder, is what to leave out. For those who just think I’m feeling sorry for myself, let me remind you of 1979, a year often cited as a high point in British television. Among the delights – this is not me, this is Wikipedia – were Quatermass, the finale of Fawlty Towers, and the debuts of Minder, of To the Manor Born and of Thomas & Sarah, a failed Upstairs, Downstairs spin-off. BBC2 launched an “ident” and half the televisual world was on strike. And I could have compiled a list of 10 best back then in two shakes of a damp parka. Now we have the true glory years. Competition between streaming and terrestrial has never been more intense, nor competition between film and television for talent. We are, in short, being spoilt damn rotten, we greedy, needy children. My beloved Endeavour has dropped from the list, despite one of my favourite lines of the year A major player, of course, has been the BBC. Let me attempt to mount a full-throated defence. We should be clutching that corporation as close to our hearts as the NHS. And, similarly, it has savage problems. Somehow, despite being among the most ardently woke of any British institution, ever, it managed to embroil itself in a gender pay row. I have no hesitation in blaming top-heavy, vole-in-the-headlights management. I have no hesitation either in celebrating the wonderful giftings to us throughout the year of producers, writers, stars, cameramen, production designers and makeup chaps and the rest, all handed to us for 365 days a year for, essentially, the price of a middling coffee maker on Amazon. And then there’s free radio all year, telling us about everything. The corporation is infuriating, not least when it feels the wheedling need to advertise itself (badly, smugly): but it’s what we’ve got and I’m proud and grateful. Streaming has come of age, settled down somewhat. You tend to grow to know what you’re going to binge on, rather than graze. And it has produced some true marvels. I’ve found myself having to leave out from my top 10 many wonderful fantasies. His Dark Materials, Game of Thrones. Sorry. Sorry. And a few streaming-only offerings that, in 1979, might have rocked our world – The Politician, Stranger Things 3, Watchmen, Living With Yourself. And many comedies, mainly driven by a singular quirked personality. Fleabag, of course, but also GameFace, Aisling Bea’s This Way Up, Motherland – and that lovely, short sweet run, State of the Union. Black Mirror as well, although too few episodes. There was sadcom too – don’t forget Don’t Forget the Driver, Defending the Guilty. And with Stath Lets Flats and Flack, we were laughing all the way until we suddenly stopped. There was also a welcome rise in unknown stars. Just think Kaitlyn Dever in Unbelievable. Although, with Catch-22 and The Looming Tower, George Clooney and Jeff Daniels reminded us why they get big Hollywood bucks. Summer of Rockets – unquantifiable, still a delight. The latest Marvelous Mrs Maisel and Top Boy – the list would go on if I let it. Honourable mentions to some fab thrillers too, including Spiral and Money Heist, the best foreign-language geezers around. My beloved Endeavour has dropped from the list, despite one of my favourite lines of the year, Fred Thursday’s “You’re not a man. You’re not the arse of a man”. Another two series commissioned, however. Hurrah. The Capture was prophetic, gripping; Cold Call equally; similarly, BBC Scotland’s Guilt. Documentaries raised the game. Spotlight on the Troubles. Who Are You Calling Fat?, The Family Secret, Kathy Burke’s All Woman. I decided at an early stage not to review reality TV, because it’s nothing of the sort, just celeb flibber. Not, all things considered, a bad year. It was just real life that let us down. 1. ChernobylSky AtlanticI said in May that this was the best TV I’d seen so far this year and I see no call to revise. We were all blindsided. Some are talking of it as not just the best show of the year but of the decade. 2. The CrownNetflixNo time at all for the whingers who think Colman an ill-judged replacement for Claire Foy; and Tobias Menzies as Phil, and Josh O’Connor as Charles, bring savage new talent and a tragic powerplay. 3. The VirtuesChannel 4Stephen Graham flays his soul. A career-defining performance: expect garlands. Nobel prize for acting? 4. MumBBC TwoClosed wisely, winsomely, as it was performed throughout. Real life, a twitch heightened. 5. UnbelievableNetflixWho did you believe? The lass who’d been raped? The big preening cops? Intense, mesmerising. 6. Years and YearsBBC OneMost splendid six-parter to grace our screens this year. The imagination, the perspicacity, rival Wells, Verne, Orwell. 7. Killing EveBBC OneNo time either for those who said it had gone off the boil. Just magnificent, and long may Villanelle reign. 8. Gentleman JackBBC OneThe sprightly mood belied several deep and dark and long-held prejudices, gloriously hung out here on a stiffened washing line. 9. The Handmaid’s TaleChannel 4A searing last series. Still obliquely haunted. 10. Succession Sky Atlantic A never-slowing triumph. Of acting, of nuance, of power, of greed, of sheer drama. Several contenders – The Widow, the execrable “comedy” Warren, the yawn-by-numbers Beecham House, the relentlessly unengaging Sanditon, but one winner. Question Time, in its 40th anniversary year, had little to celebrate. Nothing to do with Fiona Bruce; everything to do with producers packing the audience with partisan rabble-rousers, as if this country didn’t yearn enough for pointless anger. Also, with MPs not giving a rat’s ass.