I was not totally surprised to read that our esteemed prime minister pocketed a reporter’s phone, containing the damning image of a child on the floor of a hospital. Some years ago I too suffered Boris’s legerdemain. It was in 2000 when I, as chair of the Bushmen, a BBC World Service club, eagerly awaited the arrival of our after-dinner speaker at the Commonwealth Club in London. It was to be Boris Johnson, then editor of the Spectator. He had been informed that we gathered at 7pm for drinks. Alas, at 7pm no sign of Boris. I hoped my agitation did not show. By 7.30pm I’m sure that it did. I phoned the Spectator office. Boris himself responded. Agitated, I explained that 80 members and guests were awaiting his arrival. Boris responded instantly. “Good God! Is it tonight? Look, I’m just round the corner. I’ll grab a cab. With you in five.” Boris duly arrived, accepted a drink and chatted. As we settled into our places in the dining room, he asked of no one in particular: “Could somebody get me some writing paper?” I beckoned to the maitre d’. A minute later Boris was presented with paper. Boris then enquired of no one in particular: “Does anyone have a pen?” I reached into my jacket pocket and found my Mont Blanc ballpoint, and passed it over. Boris began to compose his speech. I had no idea what the subject would be. Nor did Boris enlighten me as he wrote on at speed. But the speech went down well – a standing ovation, no less. The next morning I searched for my Mont Blanc. Having drawn a blank, I rang Boris’ office. His secretary answered. I explained about the pen. “ Oh, dear. Not again. Don’t worry, Mr Kaye. You will have your pen back in a couple of days.” I have waited ever since.Michael KayeHampstead, London • Kathy Kirkbright (Letters, 16 December) gives a negative interpretation of the reason for Boris Johnson’s visit to Sedgefield. I don’t know why he went, but it could be interpreted as a courtesy visit to thank those who voted for him and to get to know the constituency better. To say he went there “grandstanding at Labour’s expense” is just one of dozens of possible reasons.Ann SpencerHarefield, Middlesex • If Johnson wants healing to begin he could set the ball rolling by apologising for the deceitful election campaign. I haven’t forgotten the bogus Labour manifesto and “fact check” websites.Dick WolffOxford • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition