On the most basic level, Chernobyl was merely one of the best true-story miniseries ever made, capitalising on the curious fact that most people know hardly anything about the meltdown of a nuclear reactor in Pripyat, Ukraine, in April 1986, despite the incident’s global infamy. Both dismantling and dramatising the cover-up that followed, Chernobyl marshalled the relevant information from a shocking and complex bigger picture. It started with a one-hour disaster movie, ended with a courtroom drama where scientific minutiae became heavy dramatic blows, and used a conspiracy thriller to drive us from one to the other. Humming in the background was the awful, almost unimaginable consequences of a serious radiation leak, a horror elegantly painted by director Johan Renck: fallen birds asphyxiating on pavements; petals of lethal debris fluttering down on children; human skin turning vermillion. Like a good war epic, Chernobyl was deft at letting us see that a character was walking into hell just before they realised it, or showing us the moving sight of a lowly functionary knowing they were doomed, but fulfilling their duty anyway. How bad was it? Worse than you thought – so much worse. It showed how institutions can turn people into liars who, in extreme circumstances, lose their basic humanity The story of incompetence, mendacity and the wanton waste of life was taken by some as a statement on the heartless bureaucracy of a communist administration. To an extent it was, and it was OK to enjoy the deliciously evoked aesthetics of the knackered Soviet Union: cigarettes! Greasy moustaches! Itchy chocolate fabrics and intimidatingly dull tower blocks! But those who leapt on it as an illustration of capitalism’s superiority had it wrong, and not just because Chernobyl took the odd factual liberty, or because the west has had plenty of its own atomic balls-ups that were a dollop of dumb luck away from catastrophe. This show went deeper than a partisan gotcha. It made universal observations, painfully resonant in the UK or US in 2019, about how institutions and hierarchies turn people into liars who, in extreme circumstances, lose their basic humanity. Scene after scene saw someone, tasked with upholding an ideology, doling out an obvious untruth or incredible cruelty with a stony face, prompting the question: they don’t really believe what they’re saying … do they? Paul Ritter was a good shout for the role of Anatoly Dyatlov, the most senior man in the plant’s control room, who gave the technicians fatal orders then gaslit any underling who dared complain. Banal and malign, he was a terribly familiar portrait of a ratty coward who has chosen the dark side. But the standout turn was Jared Harris as nuclear scientist Valery Legasov, embodying our collective urge to stand up and scream, “No! This is all lies!” Chernobyl’s main narrative drive was watching Legasov push the Soviet authorities to abandon the party line and acknowledge the calamity, certain that he was doing right but never sure of his own courage. Harris is a master of that kind of brittle nobility. He was bolstered by Legasov’s involvement in two platonic romances. Boris Shcherbina (Stellan Skarsgård), a politician sent to keep Legasov in check, instead helped him because his loyalty to the Kremlin hadn’t eroded his decency; Ulana Khomyuk (Emily Watson), a scientist who was even more idealistic in her pursuit of truth than Legasov was, implored him not to waver. Khomyuk was a fiction, a composite of the experts who spoke up. In one of many impeccable judgment calls by writer Craig Mazin, her creation gave Chernobyl a classic trio of plucky avengers, each reassuring the others – and us – that good individuals still exist. Mazin himself was overturning the odds here, delivering a masterpiece having previously been best known for fratboy movie dreck like The Hangover Part II. To immortalise Legasov and co, years after their deaths, required a drama of rare power and beauty – a near-perfect example of the programme-maker’s art. Miraculously, that’s what Chernobyl was.