Caroline Flint (A failed Brexit strategy sealed Labour’s fate, Journal, 16 December) believes the referendum result was an expression of working-class desire to leave the EU. Consequently, she pins the blame for Labour’s collapse in its traditional heartlands on a failure of the party leadership to be convincing about its pro-Brexit stance. It is not a surprise that she overlooks evidence showing that the referendum was won by old middle-class people in the south of England and not by disillusioned members of the most deprived social classes, a majority of whom voted to remain. Furthermore, 48% of people voted remain and most polls leading up to the election showed an increasing majority in favour of staying part of the EU. As we suffer the economic and social consequences of Brexit, this trend can only continue. Therefore, I am looking for a leader of the Labour party to represent this ignored majority of UK voters – someone who will expose the government’s ineptitude and duplicity, who will remind the country that we would have been better off in than out, and who will campaign tirelessly to rejoin.Dr C Ian RaganCheltenham • The bitter arguments on Brexit have begun. Before they turn into myths, let’s understand why Labour got itself into such a mess. In 2017 there were three positions inside the progressive spectrum: a small group of remainers who wanted to overturn the referendum result; a small group of Lexiters who welcomed the vote; and a majority who didn’t like the decision but accepted it and wanted to focus attention on how the UK could stay close to its nearest neighbours. I argued then that a Norway-style option was the course to follow, leaving the EU’s political structures but sticking close to its economic, environmental and security ones. This position, understandable to the electorate and able to resolve the Irish question, never happened because of the Lexit faction around the Corbyn leadership. They refused “Norway”. In response to the majority of Labour members and trade unions, they offered a fantasy “cake and eat it” policy, calling for access to EU markets but somehow not bound by its rules. As they dragged their feet, the influence of those calling for a second referendum grew. Labour lost votes all round. Its new leader needs to be clear. Lexit is a dangerous illusion. This country needs to retain close links economically, environmentally, culturally and security-wise with our nearest neighbours and main economic partners. Labour’s new leader cannot be equivocal on Europe.Jon BloomfieldBirmingham • We must be as awake to “fake interpretation” as “fake news”. Caroline Flint wants Labour to get on the Brexit bandwagon with no more hesitation. “A majority of Labour MPs still represent leave-voting seats,” she reminds us, but look at the figures another way and they tell us that 106 leave-voting constituencies voted Labour even though the party was in favour of a second referendum. We must be careful of simplistic conclusions. Labour did not deliver a clear message, but we mustn’t buy into the narrative that a majority want the consequences of Brexit and that Labour should pander to them. What people want, apparently, is to “get Brexit done”, which is not the same as wanting Brexit.Nick InmanLarreule, France • Caroline Flint is right that Labour lost the election because of Corbyn and Brexit. How sad that she was rejected by her constituents despite bending over backwards to represent their pro-Brexit viewpoint, and what a pity Labour has lost such an intelligent and articulate MP who would have made a great leader. And she is right that a future leader cannot be a Corbyn without the beard. Labour needs to widen its appeal so that it is not just a mouthpiece for the downtrodden working class, but a party that also understands the fears and aspirations of the middle classes. My choice of new leader would be Jess Phillips, who has stood out as the most courageous, principled and genuine MP in parliament. Her forthright speeches are like an exhilarating breath of fresh air that make one want to applaud and shout “bravo!”Stan LabovitchWindsor • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition