When I travelled by train in India in 1982, tea was served to passengers at railway stations through the open windows, in earthenware pots just like the Minoan one (Ancient single-use cup shows throwaway culture is nothing new, 16 December). Once you’d drunk the tea, you simply threw the pot out of the window where, in time, it would return to the earth from which it came. Perfectly green. I’m told they were later replaced by plastic cups, and that these were still being thrown out of the windows. Just to be clear – that’s not green.Pete StockwellLondon • Bernie Ecclestone referred to the burglary at his daughter Tamara’s home as “an awful thing to happen” (Report, 17 December). In a society with so many people in poverty and numbers of homeless growing, what is more awful, Mr Ecclestone, is that someone should possess jewellery to the value of £50m.Phil JonesAshford, Middlesex • Will the IOPC now give its decision on whether Boris Johnson should face an investigation into possible criminal misconduct relating to his relationship with Jennifer Arcuri? Could this be the UK parallel to the US impeachment activity?Virginia BrownTalgarth, Powys • There would, of course, be no point in me sending a copy of your education feature to Boris Johnson (When Santa cannot call, 17 December). How I wish he and his MPs would read it and absorb it. To be the cause of children having little food and no presents at Christmas ought to cause the hardest hearts to think again. Shame on this government.Linda RheadLondon • Please will someone buy Dominic Cummings a suit for Christmas (Watch out Whitehall, 16 December)?Margaret HallCambridge • A trailer load of brussels sprouts are lost (Report, 17 December). Not all bad news then. Merry Christmas.Richard BarnardWivenhoe, Essex • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition