My daughter and I saw the stage show in London for her 18th birthday and loved it. We saw the film yesterday and love the film now! Superb choreography, terrific sets and some wonderful singing especially from Jennifer Hudson. The critics are not always right! Snowpenguin An already weak musical became even weaker with this adaptation. The entire movie is spent trying to stay awake through boring scenes ploughing through a boring story, sung by bad singers. There is one good song, which is the only reason the movie deserves a one star review rather than a zero. It was so bad I still feel shame when I look my cat in the eyes. Christoffer Oqvist, 24, Burton-upon-Trent I enjoyed the film and would give it 3/5 stars. I grew up with dance classes every weekend and have lovely memories of performing Cats in our annual show. It of course is a weird storyline, but the songs are just brilliant. So in terms of being adapted to a movie I knew in part I would love it. However, I was disappointed with the CGI which at times looked really fake and unnecessary. You have incredible dancers that need no CGI as evidenced when you watch the stage show, often less is more. I do feel it is a great cast and already have the soundtrack on repeat. Hazel, 37, Bristol From the first moment this film had me hooked. Beautifully shot and delightful in every way. Francesca Hayward is stunning but for me the stand out performance is by Jennifer Hudson, heart wrenching and magnificent. I am already planning to go and see it again. I cannot understand the bad reviews at all, I cannot see anywhere that it could be improved. Amanda Clabon, 60, Hertfordshire It’s precisely because of articles and reviews like this one that I decided I just had to see Cats. Surely it couldn’t be that bad, could it? It was positively jaw-dropping, particularly the scene with the mice children and Rebel Wilson scarfing down the tap dancing cockroaches. In other words, it’s the must-see movie of the season. The theatre was packed. Where did they go right? Cardinal Astonishingly ill-conceived mind fart. These ‘cats’ try so hard to be sexy but fail. They come across as merely perverse. The body dysmorphia is stunningly wrong and at one point James Corden receives a blow to the nether regions and registers discomfort. This is odd because there is nothing ‘down there’ for either gender in this achingly weird film. That struck the perfect low note for me. Colin Young, 58, London Brilliant, colourful, superb costumes, CGI, and cat movements were excellent. Great adaptation to film. We really enjoyed it and can’t believe the negative publicity it has been given. It helped knowing the poems and still believe the West end show is better, however a great film and would thoroughly recommend people go and make their own judgement. Angela Nutt, 55, New Forest I’ve just been to see it and I LOVED it. There I said it. I loved the singing (all top notch), I loved the choreography and I really loved Jennifer Hudson singing memory – she is amazing. I don’t know why everyone is acting perplexed about plot and believability, it was mental when it was a poem and it was bonkers when made into a musical and it is still deranged as a movie – but that’s part of the joy and eccentricity of it. There is a lot of CGI overkill which is wasted when you’ve got good performers anyway, and you need to get over the furry nudity, but it’s ace! rloliver1792 I could have done without watching this. Ian McKellen’s attempt to groan a painful meow and his milk licking scene was bad enough but Rebel Wilson’s crutch inducing scene was an anti-climax. The scene where the human cockroaches were swallowed alive was just distasteful and Idris Elba looked weird, not wonderful. Having said all that my wife loved it! She said it was touching, beautiful and moving! Well, at least one of us enjoyed it. I’ll just have to erase it from my ‘memory’. Hola Garip, 58, London I thought it was one of the best pieces of ballet I’ve seen in a long time. The costumes were fantastic; the way the dancers imitated the feline movements of a cat was awesome. The emotions were so believable and I was mesmerised from beginning to end. So much so that I will buy the movie to keep and watch over and over again. Pamela Cobley, 82, Wales After reading through so many negative reviews my 11-year-old daughter and I were unsure what to expect when we bravely went to see the film. We are already fans – I’ve seen it three times in the theatre. I thought the music in the film was well done, I enjoyed the characterisation which was given more focus than in the theatre. The musical has never really had much of a storyline but it did have a bit more in the film. I didn’t like the use of CGI in some dance moves but enjoyed the choreography of Skimbleshanks and watching ballet star Francesca Hayward as Victoria. I think it’s a bit like Marmite and if you are already not a fan then this probably won’t massively change your mind but we enjoyed watching it. Clare Barnett, 41, Warwickshire