The Fiver was reminded of Harold Bishop’s mid-90s resurrection in Neighbours when Quique Sánchez Flores returned to Watford in September. “I thought he was dead!” yelped Granny Fiver, spitting out her sherry and coming out in a cold sweat when she spotted the Spaniard back in the Hornets’ dugout. “Woah! Get a grip, Granny! It’s not a soap opera, it’s Watford v Arsenal. It’s real,” we explained, while fumbling around for her Xanax. Just three months and one league win later, Flores has again been axed from the show – because that’s what Watford have become. Forget, Arsenal, Spurs and Manchester United – for ridiculous soap opera-standard drama you want to get yourself down to Vicarage Road. The club have sacked more managers than they have won league games this season, with the Pozzo family going the full Palermo in its approach to running the club.“The appointment of a new head coach is imminent and with nearly two thirds of the season remaining, we will provide all the support necessary to make the coming months successful,” parped a Watford statement after Saturday’s 2-1 defeat at Southampton. On Monday, they revealed an announcement is not that imminent after all, because academy manager Hayden Mullins will take charge for the inevitable defeat at Leicester. The Fiver can’t wait to see which manager pops up next. If recent history is anything to go by, Javi Gracia would be the obvious choice, given that he probably still has a valid security pass. A return for Dave Bassett could come with a deal for an Amazon documentary attached, Gianfranco Zola would be good for ratings, while the second coming of Magic Marco Silva at Christmas would be pure pantomime, if only Everton would sack him already. Sadly, the leading names being linked with the club appear to be sensible options: Chris Hughton and Sam Allardyce, two men with seasoned survival tactics so tediously effective that Watford could be in danger of stumbling upon stability if they kept hold of either of them. Even the wildcard choice, former Betis boss Quique Setién, is known for bringing consistency and identity to his teams. Could it be that the Pozzos have realised that winging it through a kaleidoscope of managerial chaos might not be the best way to secure mid-table mediocrity after all?With games against Liverpool, Manchester United and Sheffield United coming up, Watford need to choose their next manager wisely. Perhaps that’s why the Pozzos are considering putting the brakes on their free-jazz approach to running the club. At least Allardyce or Hughton would be good for Granny Fiver’s blood pressure. We’re not sure she could handle another Hornet being resurrected on live TV. Join John Brewin for live non-football coverage of the FA Cup third-round draw and Ballon d’Or ceremony, as our STOP FOOTBALL campaign finally gains traction. “I’ve mentioned my taxi ride with [Brendan] before. He was with us here at beIN Sports after losing his job at Liverpool. I won’t go into detail, but during the journey back to his hotel, he left me with absolutely no doubt that Arsenal’s was the job he coveted” – Richard Keys won’t go into detail on Brendan Rodgers’ Arsenal inspirations. A piping-hot new edition of Football Weekly is over here. “As the long-suffering editors of The Fiver will know, I occasionally send in a letter in keeping with the general tone of Fiver letters. Somewhat unfunny, overly pun-laden and tenuously linked to football. But I want to be serious for once. The continued pain of Liverpool people – not fans of one club – over Hillsborough is very distressing to me, a visitor and resident of that city for 10 years. Scousers opened their hearts to me, and I to them. Their friendship and welcoming city deserves far more than they have been given so far. Football unites people of all stripes, and so does the city of Liverpool. I stand with the families of the 96 in their pursuit of justice and peace for their lost loved ones. The game of football should unite, not divide” – Andrew Tate. “First it was Arsène at Arsenal, then Emery at the Emirates. Step up, poor beleaguered Ole Gunnar …” – Rod de Lisle. “Delighted to see I’m not alone in seeing a resemblance between Unai Emery and the manager of a certain high-class bureau de change. I posted this observation on Facebook a while ago – with pictures – and got three likes. Maybe we’re as funny as each other. What a sobering thought” – Nick Wiltsher. “I unashamedly admit to laughing out loud when I read that you trademarked Humility Man™. Oh my, I’m laughing again. Mourinho’s new nickname is appropriate and humorous on so many different levels. Thank you for making my day!” – Elizabeth Frederiksen [the er, cheque’s in the post, Liz]. “I just won a game of Scrabble by playing the word FIVER. Is this the first case of Britain’s favourite daily teatime football email being useful for something?” – Richard O’Hagan. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’ the day is … Andrew Tate, who wins a copy of Bottled. We’ve got more prizes to give away, so get scribbling. Kick-offs in all of January’s FA Cup third round games will be delayed by one minute to help promote mental health awareness, the FA has announced. Working in partnership with the Heads Up campaign and the NHS’s Every Mind Matters, the initiative aims to get fans thinking about their mental wellbeing. Atlético Madrid fans may be punished with a partial stadium closure after they chanted “Griezmann, die” at their former striker on his return to the Wanda Metropolitano with Barcelona. Several objects were thrown on to the pitch, including a black umbrella. Dwight McNeil for England? Sean Dyche is firing up the bandwagon. “When I see some of the other young players getting called up, he can’t be that far away in my opinion,” Dyche croaked. Sergio Agüero will sit out the weekend’s Manchester derby due to his ongoing thigh knack, according to Pep Guardiola, who has also defended his continued trust in Fernandinho as a centre-back. “Have you seen him play?” he pouted. After rather fudging the question on Sunday, Brendan Rodgers has clarified his commitment to Leicester. “Why would I want to leave at this time?” he roared, to set fans of the Queen’s Celtic scoffing. And finally a nod to Ajax’s terrifying under-12s outfit, who showed no mercy to MVV Maastricht’s youth side, winning Saturday’s contest by 50 goals to one. Pep Lijnders, Jürgen Klopp’s Liverpool lieutenant, talks secret friendlies, pressing and paddle tennis with Arthur Renard. Ten things we learned from an entirely decent weekend in the Prem. A teenage keeper making headlines, and Lazio racking up the goals – it’s like the 90s in Serie A again, writes Nicky Bandini. Leverkusen rode their luck to hit Bayern Munich with another setback, writes our Bundesliga doyen, Andy Brassell. Rachel Brown-Finnis has the lowdown on the latest WSL action, including an 11-1 hosing and Liverpool in a relegation battle. Remember André Villas-Boas? He’s back on top, baby, and has Marseille stable and second in the Ligue 1 table, say Adam White and Eric Devin. Big Website is launching their countdown of the world’s 100 best female players on Tuesday. Here’s how they did it. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!