Not content with having Joel Matip, Dejan Lovren and Joe Gomez to choose for the role of AN Other central defender to play alongside Virgil van Dijk, Jürgen Klopp is pondering a move for £65m-rated Sevilla stopper Diego Carlos. A £13.5m signing from Ligue 1 side Nantes last summer, the 26-year-old has also turned heads at Real Madrid. With just three appearances to his name in the past two seasons, it’s safe to say the career of Danny Drinkwater career has stalled. On loan at Burnley from Chelsea, the midfielder may move to Aston Villa in January, according to Sky Sports. Everton fans are unlikely to be impressed with reports that Manchester United are mulling over a summer move for Dominic Calvert-Lewin. With 10 goals in 22 appearances in all competitions this season, the Sun claim the 22-year-old features prominently on the ‘Most Wanted’ list at Old Trafford. Currently on loan at Leeds, Arsenal striker Eddie Nketiah is going to be recalled by his parent club before being farmed out to a club that will give him more game time. The Yorkshire Evening Post say Arsenal are concerned with the lack of minutes the 20-year-old is getting from Marcelo Bielsa, and may send him to Bristol City instead. Meanwhile at Stamford Bridge, Frank Lampard would quite like to add RB Leipzig’s Timo Werner to his portfolio of strikers and is investigating how much it would cost to trigger the 23-year-old’s release clause. Having had their transfer embargo lifted by the Court of Arbitration for Sport, the Telegraph claim Chelsea are planning a January trolley dash that could also see them try to sign Jadon Sancho, Moussa Dembele, Leon Bailey, Wilfried Zaha and Samuel Chukwueze. Hull City winger Jarrod Bowen is a man in big demand and may secure a move to the Premier League in the coming weeks. Aston Villa, Brighton, Southampton and Newcastle are all reported to be interested in the 23-year-old who is valued at £15m. Villa are also sniffing around Brentford’s Algerian forward Said Benrahma, who would cost them somewhere in the region of £20m. Unable to nail down a place in Liverpool’s starting line-up for obvious reasons, Rhian Brewster may be farmed out on loan to Swansea City. On the verge of returning to full fitness after a spell on the sidelines with a knee ligament injury, Liverpool defender Nathaniel Clyne may also be sent elsewhere on loan. Elsewhere on Merseyside, Everton are cautiously optimistic that they can make a Premier League player of James Rodriguez, who is surplus to requirements at Real Madrid. And finally, rumours abound that Mikel Arteta wants to bring French midfielder Adrien Rabiot to Arsenal, while talk persists that Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang is ready to quit the Gunners next summer in favour of a club that will afford him the opportunity to play Champions League football.