Patrick Reed’s caddie has been banned from the final day of Presidents Cup action after getting into a fist fight with a fan. The controversial US player’s caddie, Kessler Karain - also Reed’s brother-in-law - came to blows with a heckling spectator after Saturday’s morning session at Royal Melbourne. After a PGA investigation, Karain was axed from the final day of singles play. “Following an incident that took place on Saturday at the Presidents Cup involving Kessler Karain and a spectator, Karain will not return to caddie for Sunday’s final-round singles matches,” the PGA Tour said in a statement. Reed also issued a statement: “I respect the tour’s decision. We are all focused on winning the Presidents Cup tomorrow.” Reed’s coach Josh Gregory is expected to step in to carry his bag for the final day. Security had to step in as tensions boiled over after the morning four-ball competition, with Karain admitting he “shoved” the fan but said it only resulted in spilled beer. Karain made a statement via “Fore Play”, a US-based golf podcast, which they issued on Twitter. Reed’s caddie for six years, Karain said it was his job to “protect your player” and he felt the fan had gone too far with his comments about the 2018 Masters champion. “We have been known for having fun with some good banter, but after hearing several fans in Australia for 3 days some had taken it too far. I had had enough. And this gentlemen was one of them,” the statement said. Official statement to Fore Play from Patrick Reed’s caddie, Kessler Karain, on #PresidentsCup altercation with fan: pic.twitter.com/ZQXT0NxhJ7 “Riding on the cart, guy was about 3 feet from Patrick and said “you f***ing suck”. I got off the cart and shoved him, said a couple of things, probably a few expletives. Security came and I got back in the cart and left. “I don’t think there’s one caddie I know that could blame me. Unless his bones break like Mr Glass, the most harm done was a little spilled beer which I’m more than happy to reimburse him for.” Winless from his three matches, Reed has been targeted by local fans with continual taunts since his arrival in Australia. Last week, he was penalised for improving his lie in a bunker during a tournament, with Australian International team member Cameron Smith labelling him a cheat. On day one, Reed shouldered Smith, who was in the crowd, as he left a hole, with the Australian saying he wasn’t sure what prompted the bizarre action. A group of fans dressed up as Reed’s caddie on Saturday, but were stripped by security of toy clubs and a shovel.