Five months on I can still remember all of it. But never all of it at once. It returns, instead, in fickle flashes and brief bolts. Martin Guptill knocks the ball to midwicket and scampers for a run. England need 15 to win off four balls. The sunlight is golden and glorious. Ben Stokes slides desperately for his ground, bat outstretched. New Zealand win the toss and bat. Jason Roy gathers the ball. The sunlight is golden and glorious. I want to vomit. Anyone who tells you the 2019 World Cup final was the greatest game of cricket played has probably not seen enough cricket. It is forgotten now what a drab spectacle it was for the most part: played on a terrible, sticky Lord’s pitch producing two tortuously low scores. But in one important sense it was utterly unsurpassable: the sheer, bewildering theatre of two teams wrestling each other on the narrowest, most hazardous of precipices. So, in my mind at least, the World Cup final does not appear as a linear narrative, because it makes no sense as a linear narrative. In a way it makes no sense at all. Now, with hindsight, we can rationalise it with numbers and awards and packaged videos but no scorecard or montage will ever quite capture the drama or the terror, the outrageous reversals of fortune, the utter confusion of a game whose defining character was a lurching, teetering chaos. Consider, by way of example, those last three overs: the final over of England’s regular innings, and the two Super Overs bowled by Trent Boult and Jofra Archer. Has a game of cricket packed so much simple, logic‑defying turbulence into 18 (legal) deliveries? In those three overs, spanning around 40 minutes, the initiative changed hands – depending on your interpretation – at least four or five times. The Stokes six over midwicket. The stunning ricochet off his bat for four overthrows. The run-outs of Adil Rashid and Mark Wood. Jos Buttler’s four off the final ball of the Super Over. Jimmy Neesham’s towering six into the Mound Stand, reducing New Zealand’s target to seven off four balls. This was a place cricket had never been before. The rhythms of one‑day cricket generally militate against the tight finish: either the run-rate spirals out of control or the chasing team saunter to their target against a demoralised attack. In tennis the alternation of service games generates an innate cut and thrust that over time tends towards the protracted and epic. Cricket, on the other hand, is a game of purple patches and dominant streaks, where the team with the initiative generally cement it. Which is why, to seasoned observers of the game, this particular finish felt so unorthodox, so unreasonable, so thoroughly beyond the realms of the possible. We all know, or at least we think we do, that a team requiring 15 off the last four balls does not win and certainly not a team addled by four decades of existential angst and the pressure of home advantage. England mess it up again: this was a tale we all knew off by heart and this base note of fatalism inflected everything that followed. But in the other camp, a different song was playing. The Black Caps fall gallantly short again: this has been the refrain of New Zealand cricket since its inception and as Stokes chipped away at their advantage, first through brute force and then through blind luck, this was the parallel analysis swiftly being assembled. We all know, or at least we think we do, that a team requiring 16 off six balls doesn’t win, certainly not on this surface, against a bowler of Archer’s boundless skill and steel-plated nerve. Then came Neesham’s brilliant, shocking six. Then two more runs (via a misfield), then two more. Suddenly New Zealand needed three off two, or possibly two off two, because even in the press box nobody could quite be sure of the rules. For a vast number at Lord’s that evening only England’s celebrations on taking the final wicket ultimately gave the game away. A dead heat at the end of a dead heat, the biggest prize of all decided by a rule nobody knew in advance. Only cricket has the power to mess with you like this. Perhaps it should have ended as a tie: Eoin Morgan and Kane Williamson awkwardly clasping the trophy, an image that would have been beamed around the world. Then again, perhaps the recent Turner Prize and Booker Prize backlashes teach us something about our abhorrence of an unsatisfactory fudge. Sharing the trophy would have suited the moment but not the wider context: nobody goes into a contest wanting or expecting the spoils to be shared. However cruel, however irrational, it felt right for somebody to win and somebody to lose. Still, has any triumph felt simultaneously so predestined and so precarious? England winning the World Cup felt like such a logical culmination of what had come before it: the nadir, the four-year plan, the renaissance, the crisis of faith (and it’s forgotten, in the aftermath of the Sri Lanka and Australia defeats, just how close their campaign came to disaster). Yet when you watch the tape back, you still feel as if Roy’s going to fumble it, that Stokes is going to get out. It all just feels so crazily fragile, like the evanescent memory of something you still can’t quite believe happened.