Good morning and welcome to the final full week of the election campaign. Unsurprisingly, the horrific attack at London Bridge has dominated the news over the weekend. This morning the Conservatives stand accused of politicising the deaths of two victims of the attack, after Boris Johnson tried to blame Labour for the release of the terrorist who carried it out. We also have a taste of non-election news from across the country and around the world and you can follow our rolling election news here. Boris Johnson has been accused of trying to create political capital out of the deaths of two people in the London Bridge terror attack. The prime minister was accused of twisting the facts of the London Bridge terror attack in a “distasteful” attempt to turn it into an election issue. Despite the family of Jack Merritt, one of the victims, calling for the murder not to be exploited for political gain, Johnson sought to push a perceived political advantage on the issue, claiming that “a lefty government” was responsible for Usman Khan being freed. Richard Burgon, the shadow justice secretary, accused Johnson of going “straight from a tragedy to reheating pre-packaged political lines smearing the Labour party”. Meanwhile, Merritt’s father retweeted a post showing the front pages of the Mail and Express, which led on Johnson’s “blitz on freed jihadis”, calling them “vile propaganda” and saying that his son “stood against everything you stand for – hatred, division, ignorance”. Johnson laid the blame for the attack at Labour’s feet in a lengthy interview on BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show yesterday, saying Labour was responsible for the automatic early release scheme under which the attacker was sentenced, though the reality is more complex. We’ve fact-checked some of Johnson’s claims in that interview here and John Crace sketched the exchange. MI5 has begun an inquiry into how a suspect whom they had under “active investigation” could have launched such an attack and Johnson said there were “probably about 74” convicted terrorists who had now been freed. Johnson’s Marr interview, which was granted by the BBC despite the broadcaster’s commitment not to allow the prime minister to appear on its flagship political programmes until he had committed to a sit-down interview with Andrew Neil, was one of two significant political television events last night. The other was the ITV leaders’ debate, which featured leaders of all the parties except Labour and the Conservatives, who were represented by MPs. The most dramatic moment of the debate came as leaders attacked Nigel Farage and Boris Johnson for their closeness to Donald Trump. When challenged by Lib Dem leader Jo Swinson over Trump’s comments about sexually assaulting women, Farage said that while the remarks were “wrong”, “men say dreadful things sometimes”. A breakdown of the winners and losers of that debate is here. Labour has announced what it is billing as the biggest ever plan to cut rail fares, promising to immediately reduce the price of season tickets by a third. Facebook has banned a Conservative party campaign advert that used footage of the BBC political editor Laura Kuenssberg and News at 10 host Huw Edwards, saying it violated the corporation’s intellectual property rights. A combination of long-term cultural shifts and the fallout from the 2016 referendum have disrupted the electoral map in this general election, writes John Harris. Brexit supporters are more likely to live in areas most threatened by the economic impact of automation, according to a new report. Boris Johnson will be in the south of England before he heads to a rally in the east of England. Jeremy Corbyn will be in London to talk about rail policies. The Lib Dem justice spokesman, Phillip Lee, will be in London to talk about mental health initiatives. Nigel Farage will campaign in North Wales. Nicola Sturgeon will visit Lockerbie, where she will warn that rural Scotland is among the areas most at risk from a bad Brexit deal. Sinn Fein will launch its manifesto in Londonderry. Ukip will launch its manifesto in London. > Island nations who face inundation from rising sea levels have issued an impassioned plea to the industrialised world ahead of crucial climate crisis negotiations that open in Madrid today. “We see [these talks] as the last opportunity to take decisive action,” said Janine Felson, deputy chair of the Alliance of Small Island States. The summit will hear that today’s carbon emissions must be halved to restrain global temperature rises to 1.5C, after which it’s believed low-lying islands and atolls will be inundated. The Paris agreement in 2015 set a 2C limit of heating above pre-industrial levels. You can read our guide to the summit, what’s likely to be achieved and how fossil fuel lobbyists are pushing to water down planned EU rules to set science-based criteria for investment which claims to be environmentally sustainable. > A strike by hundreds of train guards and drivers on South Western Railway will disrupt the UK’s second biggest train operator from this morning. Some 600,000 passenger trips from Surrey, Hampshire and beyond into London Waterloo will be affected with services cut entirely on some routes and bus replacements on others. The strike, scheduled for 27 days (except for election day) is part of a dispute with the RMT union over the role of train crews. Only about half of normal weekday services will run. If you’re affected, we’d like to here from you. > Malta’s embattled PM, Joseph Muscat, has quit over the constitutional and political crisis triggered by the 2017 murder of the investigative journalist Daphne Caruana Galizia. Last night he expressed “deep regret” over the murder but his tone remained defiant: “This case cannot define everything that our country is,” he said. Thousands had gathered on the streets of the capital ahead of his TV appearance, holding candles, waving Malta’s red and white flag, and singing the national anthem, marking the conclusion of an emotional and angry demonstration. Muscat will stay in office until a new party leader takes over in early January. David Conn has spent years reporting on the pursuit of justice by families of the 96 Liverpool fans who died at a football match in Sheffield in 1989. Plus, Deborah Mattinson on the importance of older voters in the 2019 election. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2019/11/29-72818-191202TIFHillsboroughv2.mp3 Liam Payne admits he was always classed as Mr Boring in One Direction. He got fewer screams from the crowds than anyone else but the adrenaline peaks of performing, followed by long troughs of tedium, were akin to a drug addiction and Payne turned to alcohol: “Doing a show to however many thousands of people, then being stuck by yourself in a country where you can’t go out anywhere – what else are you going to do? The minibar is always there.” For a time, he was also taking an epilepsy drug as a mood stabiliser that he says affected his cognitive functioning under certain lights. The band’s breakup in 2015 devastated fans, but took the pressure off, Payne says. Now he has a debut album launching this week. In One Direction, he admits to being “Mr Vanilla – no one wanted to know a thing”. Then, with the “chain and rapper phase … I didn’t really know what I was aiming for, but it was actually exactly where we are right now. I just needed to find the right keys to make me feel like the man I wanted to be.” A double century by captain Joe Root gave England a first innings lead of 101 and an outside chance of forcing a win in the second Test in Hamilton overnight. But the Kiwis have reduced that deficit to five with one day to go. Spin-playing specialist Keaton Jennings is being considered for a recall for the tour of Sri Lanka in March. Leicester cut Liverpool’s lead at the top of the Premier League to a mere eight points after their last-gasp 2-1 win over Everton at the King Power, while Manchester United let slip a lead at home to Aston Villa. The result prompted Ole Gunnar Solskjær to say that his team’s league position of ninth was “not the biggest concern”. And England boss Gareth Southgate says the favourable draw for next summer’s European Championships is a chance for the team to improve their “appalling” record in the competition. Lewis Hamilton ended his sixth world title season with a win in Abu Dhabi yesterday and hinted he may leave Mercedes for Ferrari. The number of insurers withdrawing cover for coal projects has doubled this year, making coal – the biggest single contributor to climate change – “on the way to becoming uninsurable”, according to a new report. The Unfriend Coal campaign says it hopes that “within two to three years it will be so difficult to obtain insurance that most coal projects won’t be able to go forward”. The report says US companies are beginning to take action, leaving Lloyd’s of London and Asian insurers as the “last resort” for fossil fuels. Amazon, Facebook, Google, Netflix, Apple and Microsoft have been named in a report by tax transparency campaign group Fair Tax Mark as avoiding tax by shifting revenue and profits through tax havens or low-tax countries, and for also delaying the payment of taxes they do incur. The report singles out Amazon as the worst offender, saying the group paid just $3.4bn (£2.6bn) in tax on its income so far this decade despite achieving revenues of $960.5bn and profits of $26.8bn. The pound is buying €1.172 and $1.291. All but one of the front pages leads on the London Bridge attack: “PM accused of exploiting deaths in terror attack” is the Guardian’s splash, next to a large picture of Saskia Jones, who was named as the second victim. The Times has: “Spy chiefs on alert for London Bridge copycats” and the Telegraph leads with, “Terrorists freed early to be sent back to jail”. The Mail’s headline is: “New blitz on freed jihadists”; the Express’s headline reads, “Boris blitz on freed jihadis begins”; the Sun has “The angels stolen by pure evil”; and the Mirror splashes with “Betrayed”. Only the FT goes with a different splash, instead leading with “TCI boss calls for fund managers to be fired over emissions failures”. The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com