Odsonne Édouard hit a 66th-minute winner with a smart finish as Celtic regained their five-point lead in the Scottish Premiership. Aberdeen’s Sam Cosgrove was sent off for a challenge on Kristoffer Ajer three minutes later after earlier heading his 20th goal of the season to cancel out Christopher Jullien’s seventh-minute opener. It was Aberdeen’s only effort on target while Celtic almost paid for failing to capitalise on their dominance – they had 28 efforts on goal and 11 on target. Aberdeen’s back four defended their box well but the hosts were also guilty of over-playing at times. The pattern of play emerged early on and Jullien diverted Ryan Christie’s corner against the bar before succeeding from the same source four minutes later. The Frenchman beat Ash Taylor to the delivery and volleyed into the top corner. The champions largely pinned Aberdeen back as they went for a second. Joe Lewis pushed away Édouard’s drive after the striker turned Taylor on the edge of area and also made more routine saves from Scott Brown and James Forrest. Aberdeen had forced a couple of set-pieces in the final third but their equaliser was unexpected. Niall McGinn hung up a cross to the back post and Cosgrove rose to head into the top corner from six yards. The hosts had an opportunity to go in front before the break but Édouard hesitated after being played in by Forrest’s return pass and Shay Logan nicked the ball away from his feet. Lewis saved from Forrest after more intricate play but Celtic were not getting far in the opening stages of the second half and Neil Lennon made a change on the hour mark. Left-winger Mikey Johnston replaced Olivier Ntcham, allowing Forrest to switch to the right flank and Christie to take up a central role. Johnston and Christie had shots saved before Celtic opened Aberdeen up. Christie threaded the ball through for Édouard, who swiftly dispatched a shot just inside the post. Aberdeen’s chances soon fell apart. Ajer had just made a risky but perfect sliding challenge on Jon Gallagher in his own area before keeping the ball in play. Cosgrove sprinted over and threw himself into a tackle, getting the ball but catching Ajer on the follow-through. The challenge sparked an angry reaction with Brown running 20 yards to remonstrate and Euan Anderson was soon on the scene to show a straight red card. Cosgrove and Brown continued to clash as the Aberdeen striker walked off. Forrest, Christie and Jeremie Frimpong missed the target before the latter handed the visitors a chance to take their second shot by conceding a free-kick on the edge of the area. Lewis Ferguson hit the effort too high. The Aberdeen manager, Derek McInnes, expressed his disagreement with the sending-off. “It’s not a red. He’s won the ball. It’s actually a great tackle. He just goes in with a bit too much speed and that gives the officials a decision to make. Speed only comes into consideration when the player doesn’t win the ball. He wins the ball cleanly, 100% we will be appealing against the decision.” Celtic’s assistant manager John Kennedy was full of praise for Édouard: “He does give us something extra. He’s a very clever player and it was another great performance even though he’s still not back to full fitness.”