A decade ago, Observer Sport Monthly tried to imagine what sport would look like in 2020. China, it daringly predicted, would be on the verge of Olympic rugby sevens gold. Snooker would be dead, Formula One on life support. Oh, and Cristiano Ronaldo would have a team named after him. True, the much-missed magazine got a few things right, including boxing’s renaissance, but its January 2010 issue mainly served to highlight the perils of being a sporting soothsayer. So, with that in mind, it’s time to polish my own crystal ball, cross my fingers, and offer up some guesses for 2020 and beyond. At the 2016 Rio Games, Team GB did what pretty much everyone thought was impossible by bettering their London 2012 performance, with a staggering 27 golds and 67 podium finishes lifting them to second in the medal table. Yet, incredibly, UK Sport’s performance director, Chelsea Warr, is “quietly confident” Britain can do even better in Tokyo. I can’t see it. Yes, UK Sport’s budget and tech resources remain the envy of the world, and such as Adam Peaty, Dina Asher-Smith and Laura Kenny are likely to be multiple medallists. But most experts believe a drop-off is more likely given the rise of China and Japan. And do you know what? If GB’s medal haul ends up being closer to 50 than 70 we should be intensely relaxed about it. There will still be enough ra-ra to go round. Honour will be satisfied. And given spending millions on elite sport doesn’t drive participation levels, whether Team GB come second or fifth in the medal table will have little discernible effect on the wider population. When is an Olympic ban not an Olympic ban? When it involves Russia. Barring a fresh doping bust I expect hundreds of Russian athletes will be cleared to compete in Tokyo, despite the country’s recent global ban. In fact here is a prediction: the size of the not-Russia-Russian team will exceed the 282 who turned up at Rio. Few may have heard of the 41-year-old New Zealand weightlifter Laurel Hubbard but, barring injury or other unforeseen circumstances, that will change in Tokyo as Hubbard is likely to become the first transgender athlete to compete at an Olympic Games. Given Hubbard finished fourth in the 87kg+ snatch competition at the 2019 world championships, a medal could be even on the cards. Whatever happens, expect the thorny issue of transgender athletes to get even more pointed in the 2020s – with the policies of governing bodies, who are trying to juggle “fairness” with “inclusivity”, being increasingly challenged in the courts. How much the emerging scientific evidence informs the debate is another intriguing factor. Are Gareth Southgate’s side capable of winning Euro 2020? Of course. Should they be the bookies’ favourites? Hmm, maybe. Sure, England will benefit from a kindly group draw and home advantage but it seems odd they are only 4-1 for glory, when world champions France are 13-2 and Belgium are 7-1. England’s path to the final certainly does not appear straightforward. Win Group D and they are likely to face Germany, France, or Portugal in the last 16, Spain in the quarters and the Netherlands in the last four. Finish second and Sweden, France, and then Belgium could block their paths. That isn’t one banana skin rather a whole plantation. True England’s attacking talent is the envy of the world but will the question marks over their centre-halves, goalkeeper and deep-lying playmaker be solved in the next six months? With that in mind, we may not see the best of England until later in the decade. Quick quiz question: When did Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic first end the year as the top three in the world? Well done to anyone who said 2007. It is also now over three years since a grand slam was won by anyone outside the big three. Yet in 2020 Djokovic will be 33, Nadal 34 and Federer 39. Age has to catch up with them at some point, especially as the challengers are getting closer. Dominic Thiem and Daniil Medvedev reached the French and US Open finals respectively. Stefanos Tsitsipas won the end-of-year ATP final. The 20-year-old Canadian Denis Shapovalov and the 18-year-old Italian Jannik Sinner also have immense promise. Chuck in the fact Olympic years can be squirly and there could well be a new name on a grand slam trophy. During the 2020s we will surely see the first English footballer come out while still playing. A female manager or head coach of a major men’s sports team is also in play – although Britain lags far behind the US. The NBA, for instance, has 11 full-time female assistant coaches, while the NFL has 10. And given Becky Hammon, the assistant coach of the San Antonio Spurs, was interviewed for the Milwaukee Bucks job in 2017, the shattering of this particular glass ceiling may be closer than we imagine.