General knowledge paper 2019-20, No 115, sat by the pupils of King William’s College, Isle of Man “Scire ubi aliquid invenire possis ea demum maxima pars eruditionis est” 1 which Giant was mauled by the Kid? 2 which keyboard virtuoso achieved premier status? 3 whose first edition of what was inspired by Paul Gauguin? 4 whose Divine intervention caused raised eyebrows in SW19? 5 who received the Daily Mail Prize from the Secretary of State for War and Air? 6 just 2½ hours into the new year, which aquiline vessel fell tragically foul of Holm Bastin? 7 which tabloid, aimed at the men and women of tomorrow, was launched? 8 how did epilepsy bring great sadness to George and Mary? 9 despite soft speech, whose big stick would go no further? 10 who kept it in the family by the Tamar? 1 Which Aberdonian became a general in the tsar’s army? 2 What is the traditional site of pilgrimage in the last Sunday in July? 3 Whose father practised inoculation until it was made criminal in 1840? 4 Which very dry concoction came from the eponymous warehouse in the Calle Divina Pastora? 5 Who received a command from Dunfermline to make a potentially dangerous North Sea crossing? 6 Who created an enduring friendship between the naval lieutenant and the man in the rusty black coat during a Locatelli recital? 7 Which reviled factor was cleared of gross inhumanity following a fatal croft fire in Strathnaver? 8 Who wrote of his travels through the Transvaal with his Staffordshire bull terrier? 9 Who established a bilingual school in Ranelagh, later moving to Rathfarnham? 10 Who likened potato-gatherers to mechanised scarecrows? 1 Who suggested a profile of the Dorset Street murderer? 2 To whom was a Perry Mason story involving dual identity dedicated? 3 Which professor used photographic superimposition to identify remains found near the A701? 4 Who concluded that the dead man found hanged below Blackfriars Bridge was the victim of foul play? 5 Whose development of genetic fingerprinting exonerated a kitchen porter and led to a life sentence for a bakery worker? 6 Whose groundbreaking test, distinguishing human blood from wood stain and sheep’s blood, led to an execution at Greifswald? 7 Which Manxman provided the first contemporary account of what is now known as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy? 8 Whose astute discovery of a gallstone disproved the murderer’s boast that there was no body? 9 Whose pioneering use of DNA confirmed the identification of Little Miss Nobody? 10 Who advised on a suitable body in the planning of Mincemeat? 1 Who was Ashie, the leader of Juventus? 2 Which Veronese nobleman was rejected by a tallow-faced baggage? 3 Which regicide was represented as Samuel in a Boston operatic setting? 4 Which diplomat received an 11-gun salute on disembarking Nonsuch near Rügen? 5 Who arrived from the continent with a cockatoo, a pair of canaries and a family of white rodents? 6 Who experienced love at first sight on seeing Stiva’s married sister, when meeting his mother at the railway station? 7 Who travelled as an abbé following his escape from prison and purchased an island, and with it a title? 8 Who was the messenger for the Reichsführer’s clandestine peace proposal? 9 Who was depicted at his interment attended by Stephen and Augustine? 10 Who mimicked Hines and Ellington in adopting a noble title? 1 What was Best and Goes Farthest? 2 Which product held the fifth Golden Ticket? 3 What did Vianne open in Lansquenet-sous-Tannes? 4 Which Gammel Strand grøntsager put marzipan to good use? 5 Desperation, Pacification, Expectation, Acclamation and finally Realization – what was it? 6 With which producer of baby foods did the Vevey candlemaker combine to produce milk chocolate? 7 For which manufacturer’s “effect” was Liotard’s waitress the initial inspiration? 8 How did Raina affectionately address Capt Bluntschli? 9 Who advertised Chocolate Heaven since 1911? 10 What was described as Quality in a square? 1 In whose garden can we both gather nosegays? 2 Where was the lofty location of Aritomo’s garden? 3 Who is invited into the garden to share the musk of the rose? 4 Which Garden was developed on the site of the Bishop of Ely’s town house? 5 Which town’s development was based on plans inspired by Howard and holds his grave? 6 In whose garden did the trespasser help himself to lettuces, French beans and radishes and, despite nausea, search for parsley? 7 Where in Yorkshire did the robin assist in locating the key to the secret garden? 8 Which Irishman disputed the disappearance of the Garden of Eden? 9 Who described rose plot and fern’d grot in his garden? 10 In whose garden had the bear nothing to wear? 1 were we 76 for 7? 2 did the Donkey kick off northward? 3 did Gurney reward Lightborn by stabbing him? 4 does Monti’s Father Thames overlook the first lock? 5 did Simpkin confiscate the twist of cherry-coloured silk? 6 did William Harrison return some time after the Perrys had been hanged for his murder? 7 did the son-in-law of Jacquetta gain a decisive victory? 8 did Miss Burdock drink cider beneath a haywagon? 9 are Flower’s unrivalled 28 coloured windows? 10 do the winds blow cold? 1 Who fell to Pardiñaz in Madrid? 2 And who fell to Bailaor in Talavera de la Reina? 3 Who initiated the vindication of the Maid of Orleans? 4 Which avenging monarch succumbed to plague in La Linea? 5 Which king was assassinated with his own sword while besieging his sister’s inherited city? 6 Which sometime jure uxoris King of England, suffered indignity at the hands of a draconian barber? 7 Which painter was the inspiration for which Catalan composer’s most famous work? 8 Who was rewarded in Stockholm for his work on neuroanatomy? 9 Which uncle is the toast of Jerez de la Frontera? 10 Who died in a knife fight with Carlos O’Neill? 1 Who started in the Justinian? 2 As what is the black trumpet also known? 3 Upon what is the Lord laughing in the sun? 4 Where did Dulcibella run aground, lured by Dollmann? 5 Which oxymoronic engagement resulted in the humiliation of the 7th? 6 What was first conquered by an Irishman remembered for his eponymous “Effect”? 7 Where was the home of the flat-bottomed Dreadnought? 8 Whence the cobbler who developed the long drop? 9 What tossed the feline-persecuting canine? 10 What can be grey, wrinkled or wreathed? 1 Whose opera was inspired by Virgil? 2 Who honoured Queen Anne’s consort with a stimulating voluntary? 3 Who wrote music for the attendant to Prospero as he donned his ducal robes? 4 Who wrote music forever patriotically associated with our green and pleasant land? 5 Who named a composition after a mighty biblical hunter in honour of his editor and friend? 6 And whose music, for words originally penned by a mediaeval Tuscan poet, is named after his Cotswold birthplace? 7 Whose celestial composition was renamed after which Essex village, for ecclesiastical use? 8 Who composed an opera with juvenile involvement based on a story from Genesis? 9 And whose cantata was based on a Babylonian banquet described by Daniel? 10 Whose combined effort for a Strand theatre ended in a duel? 1 did Rajam captain the MCC? 2 did the chauffeur confess to Pinky’s hit and run? 3 did the doomed old man ride on a long-eared, cream-coloured donkey? 4 did the Irish orphan play his eponymous Jewel Game in the spymaster’s shop? 5 was the elephant, earlier acquired for £2,000, given to the mahout by the grateful globetrotter? 6 did the peg-legged Jonathan witness the murder of the treasure-carrying Achmet by Abdullah Khan? 7 did the doctor remove the bullet from beneath his own pericardium, aided by M’Allister? 8 were three nuns frightened, when a fellow passenger removed his clothes? 9 did Antony attempt to blackmail Ronny’s sometime fiancée? 10 did Skene allegedly shoot his wife? 1 a nip? 2 6.76 metres for gold? 3 a Balkan amphitheatre? 4 a sweet-tasting carbohydrate? 5 a converted Muslim place of worship? 6 a competitive gathering of male gamebirds? 7 the home of an optical Leviathan? 8 a multi-coloured trogon? 9 a glowing proboscis? 10 punctuation? 1 Whence the “two-spotted” duck? 2 Where were the forgeries sunk after Bernhard? 3 Where did Alexander defeat the crusaders on ice? 4 Whence the winter’s spray, washing through the bars in high winds? 5 Over what stretch of water did Cat escape with her lover in Emilio’s boat? 6 Where did Julie believe that there was constant sunshine, green laurels at Christmas and glowing oranges? 7 Where did McDonnell and Simpson claim to have encountered Morag? 8 Where did duck sandwiches lead to eight deaths? 9 Whence Finn’s projectile in pursuit of the giant? 10 Where did Barca finally defeat Nepos? 1 What slope is now chronometric? 2 Where is a duck bill followed by a dive? 3 Where might there be help from the north-westerly? 4 What recalls the twin child nurtured by a lupine wet nurse? 5 What would be recognised in Japan as a breed of dog or a battleship? 6 Where was a suggestion of risotto changed to honour one of the greatest? 7 What is a reminder of a murderous conflict with Matilda’s son? 8 Where is there a reminder of a Cervantes-based première? 9 What owes its name to discarded underwear? 10 What recalls the rule of Kerchak? 1 could work wonders? 2 took over from West and Wyatt? 3 gives one a shot at Double Dutch? 4 exploited the unique qualities of Siberian Weasels’ hair? 5 created 33 complications in a limited edition of just four devices? 6 brought together ideas on seating in ocean liners and combat aircraft? 7 began with the initial export of raisins by brothers-in-law? 8 created a major outlet for the Lindströms’ product? 9 partly suggests rodents in the sail loft? 10 first sold clothing in Friesland? 1 What included the Bill as part of the Rape? 2 What is long in Britain but short across the pond? 3 Whence the destination of Commons members on resignation? 4 What was the location of an old world strigine residence of great charm? 5 In what did conflict between Maharashtrian refugees and the weeping willow lead to arson? 6 What tale ended with the delivery of an unwanted porcine appendage, followed by a maternal death and a disposal by ants? 7 What was derived from a Hessian event, and came out shortly after Jerry’s passing? 8 What ended with a decisive Gallic victory on the banks of the Dordogne? 9 What unique event took place at Bristol on 17 May 1895? 10 In what did two pearl fishers twice top the poll? 1 Where did Colonel Ross and the inspector await the travellers? 2 Where did the duo alight when following up Cubitt’s conundrum? 3 Which little “halt-on-demand station” was used by the would-be anglers? 4 From where in the Peak District had the prep school principal obtained a return ticket? 5 From where did they plan to take the 11:10 to investigate the death of the colonel of the Royal Munsters? 6 At which small wayside station did they alight in investigating the death of the retired seal and whale fisher? 7 From where did the messengers drive to the Russian embassy with documents to save Alexis? 8 In responding to Miss Hunter’s request, where was their train due to arrive at 11:30? 9 Which station was visited twice in the investigation of Sir Eustace’s death? 10 Where did they change trains in deceiving the mathematician? 1 who needed just 7.69 seconds at WD18? 2 which myopic nightwatchman fell just eight short? 3 which Servant, having acted the part, was elected in reality? 4 where did a spiral slide add fun to the Holy and Undivided Trinity? 5 whose famous embrace in Times Square has been remembered 73 years later? 6 how have the trailblazing efforts of Cyrille, Laurie and Brendon been recognised? 7 on what did a spelling mistake appear in Edith Cowan’s maiden speech? 8 who triumphed with paraffin, where Icarus had failed with wax? 9 what Chrysanthemum changeover has taken place? 10 what Cambrian fruit has graduated to PDO status? The quiz also appears on the King William’s College website, kwc.im. The answers will be published next month.