My top 10 only hints at the glints of 2019. Jotting down my highlights from memory, I came up with a list of 30 shows. This was a rich year. There was, hurrah, plenty of outrage and outrageousness in new work. Lucy Prebble’s A Very Expensive Poison roared with unruly splendour out of the Old Vic’s proscenium arch. At the Royal Court, Nicôle Lecky sizzled in Superhoe; Alice Birch dissected the criminal justice system in the Donmar’s [Blank]; Robert Icke’s production of The Doctor skewered identity politics at the Almeida. Adaptations were audacious. Arthur Miller’s Death of a Salesman was re-illuminated when Marianne Elliott put an African American family at the centre. Jamie Lloyd’s dynamic production of Cyrano de Bergerac revoiced the play, ticking to the rhythm of beatbox. I am looking forward to Lolita Chakrabarti’s version of Life of Pi, praised by my colleague Clare Brennan in Sheffield, which transfers to London next summer. There was a seismic shift in the tussle for dominance between Chekhov and Ibsen. For the first time in the 20 years I have been the Observer’s theatre critic, the Norwegian dramatist was in the ascendant. As society and ideas of identity fractured, the appetite for ironic lassitude seemed to wane; people reached for confrontation and harsh truth. Remodelled Ibsen was everywhere. David Hare dextrously updated wild Peer Gynt to make Peter Gynt. Ian Rickson’s incandescent production of Rosmersholm had a terrific script by Duncan Macmillan, a transporting collaboration between Rae Smith (set and costumes) and Neil Austin (lighting), and Hayley Atwell giving the performance of her life. At Nottingham Playhouse, Rebecca Lenkiewicz’s version of An Enemy of the People featured Alex Kingston in the title role, while at Chichester, Cordelia Lynn’s Hedda Tesman ingeniously moved Ibsen’s action into the present. Samuel Adamson’s Wife riffed cleverly on A Doll’s House at the Kiln, while in Rachel O’Riordan’s vibrant opening season as artistic director of the Lyric Hammersmith, Tanika Gupta’s adaptation whisked the play to Kolkata, with Anjana Vasan, skittish, shadowed and magnetic, as Niru. Sound design crackled into wider recognition. When, some 15 years ago on an Evening Standard panel, I proposed that the design award be given to a soundscape, a fellow panellist explained to the girl (me) that she didn’t know what design meant: it had to be visual. Not any more. The brothers Ringham, Ben and Max, masters of sound design, provided a series of auditory revelations: in Ella Hickson’s eerie Anna, when the audience, listening through headphones, heard only what the main character heard; in the exquisite detail (ah, that clink of a wedding ring against a glass) of Betrayal, which rounded up the marvellous Pinter at the Pinter season; and in the stealthy effects in Berberian Sound Studio at the Donmar. They prove that what we see in the theatre is changed by what we hear. There were sad extinguishings. Jonathan Miller, who brilliantly made the outlandish look like the natural truth, died at the end of the year. As did Nell Gifford, the circus enchanter who wove extraordinary feats into exuberant stories, and who rode around a series of West Country rings in the summer to a chorus of Thank You for the Days. There were new acting lights. Liv Hill made an astonishing stage debut – looming up like a monstrous toddler in a too-young dress – in the National’s Top Girls. Two years out of drama school, Luke Thallon nimbly multitasked as geezer and toff in Pinter’s Family Voices – and went on to be terrifyingly springy as an avid avant-garde dramatist in Present Laughter at the Old Vic. And in London there was promise from new (non-subsidised) theatre buildings: who would have expected that in this mostly barbaric climate for the arts? Nicholases Hytner and Starr announced that in 2021 they will open a 600-seat Haworth Tompkins-designed stage in King’s Cross. Near Battersea Power Station, the Turbine started to thrum with musicals, while on the former site of Raymond Revuebar in Soho, the Boulevard opened with promising programming and an art deco bar. Speeding towards the opening show, I turned into what I thought was the open space of the foyer – and crashed into a glass pane. Turns out that days before, Joan Collins had done the same thing. Knockout productions. 1. Cyrano de BergeracPlayhouse, London Marvellous new beatbox version with James McAvoy. 2. Xanadu Various West Country fields Giffords Circus’s whirligig celebration of 70s psychedelia – with hoops, Beatles songs, horses. 3. A Very Expensive PoisonOld Vic, LondonLucy Prebble’s unflinching play about the Litvinenko murder swirls between tragedy and farce. 4. King Hedley IIStratford East, LondonPart of the mighty August Wilson cycle; Martina Laird sings of red sails as if they were stitched with her blood. 5. Black Teeth and a Brilliant Smile Ambassador, BradfordIntimate dramatisation of the life of Andrea Dunbar. 6. A German LifeBridge, London Maggie Smith implacably superb as Joseph Goebbels’s inscrutable secretary. 7. There Are No BeginningsLeeds Playhouse Powerful exploration of the effect of the Yorkshire Ripper killings. 8. seven methods of killing kylie jenner Royal Court, LondonA blizzard of a play by 20-year-old Jasmine Lee-Jones. 9. Standing at the Sky’s Edge Crucible, SheffieldSoaring hymn to tower blocks, fuelled by Richard Hawley songs. 10. Operation Mincemeat Diorama, London Frisky wartime musical from new company SpitLip. Bitter WheatGarrick LondonDavid Mamet’s flaccid post-Weinstein satire.