While The God Child is a debut novel, its author is already well known in the art world. Like John Berger, to whom the book is dedicated, Nana Oforiatta Ayim is an art historian and critic unafraid of challenging the establishment. Her pioneering works range from an open-source, pan-African cultural encyclopedia project to a mobile museum and, most recently, the curation of the first ever Ghanaian pavilion at the Venice biennale. Ayim’s desire to question assumptions about African art (and the continent in general) is shared by Maya, the protagonist of her coming-of-age story set between Germany, Britain and Ghana. When the novel begins, Maya is living in Germany, the only child of Ghanaian parents. Her father is a reserved and bookish doctor, while her shopaholic mother, Yaa Agyata, is outgoing and gregarious. Yaa is Ayim’s most vividly painted character: loud and flamboyant, she is described as having “gold trapped beneath her skin” and a voice “peppery with chicken stew”. Comfortable with herself, she doesn’t care what others think of her - including her daughter, who finds her embarrassingly disorderly next to her German friends with their “tall, blonde, neat parents”. Maya knows that her mother is of royal lineage, and that her father is perpetually planning to return to Ghana, but does not fully understand either of her parents’ family histories. When her cousin Kojo comes from Ghana to live with the family, Maya finally finds someone who shares in her increasing restlessness and sense of dislocation. Ayim is adept at capturing the anxiety of a pre-teen whose desire to fit in is exacerbated by being black in a world where blackness and Africa are not valued. When Maya tells a friend that her mother is from a royal family, the friend doesn’t believe her. Shaken and upset, Maya shuts herself away and wraps a towel around her head, “imagining shiny, straight hair swinging down my back […] wondering when I would ever know what stories it would be all right to tell and when”. Later, Maya gets hair extensions in the hope of better resembling her white friends and those she idolises, from Brigitte Bardot to that “perfect German girl” Romy Schneider. Like Pecola from Toni Morrison’s The Bluest Eye, Maya hopes that by changing the way she looks, she might be more loved. “My hair was long now and it shook behind me,” she says, adding: “I knew that I was now safe.” Except of course she isn’t. And just as Maya is made to feel like a foreigner in Europe, at the story’s climax, when she finally returns to Ghana, she is made to feel a foreigner – an “oburoni” – there too. This feeling of being caught between two worlds is reminiscent of Zimbabwean author Tsitsi Dangarembga’s classic novel Nervous Conditions, published in 1988. While Ayim does an admirable job of capturing the dynamics of a splintered family and Maya’s fractured sense of identity, the novel’s frequent leaps between place and time are often made at the expense of plot and the exploration of character motivation. Maya goes from not liking the arrival of Kojo one minute, to shortly thereafter never wanting to be separated from him. In contrast, Maya’s father, with whom she shares a close relationship based on a mutual love of books, virtually disappears from the story and from Maya’s thoughts. In what promises to be a moment of great drama, Kojo goes missing from his boarding school until, suddenly, he’s simply … no longer missing. And without explanation the story marches on, until the next time Kojo’s life careers out of control. The lacunas in plot and character development are particularly frustrating given how well Ayim handles other aspects of the story. To date, there are only a few works of fiction that explore the African experience within continental Europe and just a handful address the Afro-German experience, so Ayim’s book is important in helping to fill this gap. As we hear Maya pondering Goethe’s idea of Weltliteratur and reflecting on just how lacking world literature actually is, books such as The God Child have the potential to enrich it and, in Berger’s words, bring new ways of seeing. • Sarah Ladipo Manyika’s In Dependence is published by Cassava Republic. The God Child is published by Bloomsbury (RRP £16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.