“In a way I crave those moments now,” Katarina Johnson-Thompson says of the quiet and the solitude that helped her become the heptathlon world champion this year after she had suffered so much doubt and disappointment in past major events. “If I don’t get enough quiet time now, I go a bit mad. I like that quiet time, especially between training sessions.” Johnson-Thompson flies back from her warm weather training camp in Martinique on Saturday and she will join five other athletes on the shortlist for the BBC’s Sports Personality of the Year on a cold Sunday evening in Aberdeen. It is another sign of the progress she has made in 2019 that Johnson-Thompson has been selected alongside Ben Stokes, Dina Asher-Smith, Raheem Sterling, Lewis Hamilton and Alun Wyn Jones in the annual BBC vote. Yet it is more interesting to consider how Johnson-Thompson overcame her old demons to win the world championship in Doha in October and put herself in a position to challenge for the gold medal at next summer’s Olympic Games in Tokyo. Her success in beating the Olympic champion, Nafi Thiam, was built in the relative seclusion of Montpellier where Johnson-Thompson moved in late 2016. “I’m enjoying it now,” Johnson-Thompson says of her changed life in Montpellier. “At first I did struggle. I didn’t like being alone as I’d never been alone in my life. I’ve definitely grown as an athlete and as a person. I can be alone and entertain myself without Netflix. I enjoy being there. I enjoy the weather and enjoy pushing myself in training.” Amid the quiet, Johnson-Thompson has developed a love of reading. She is animated when telling me that, after resisting novels for so long, she is now often absorbed by fiction. Yet the book she has loved most this year is Lemn Sissay’s My Name is Why – a searing memoir of the poet’s time as a child in care in Wigan. “It’s the best book I’ve read all year,” Johnson-Thompson says as she shares this glimpse into her more reflective life away from athletics. The 26-year-old has always been open in sharing her vulnerabilities and, after the best year of her sporting life, she has had time to consider the turning points that have transformed her from a nervy contender into a world champion. Johnson-Thompson pinpoints the death of her father in 2017, and her move to Montpellier, as key moments in changing the narrative. She even suggests she was close to giving up the heptathlon for good in 2017. “It was a horrible time. That November I lost my dad [who lived in the Bahamas] and it was really sad. At that point in my career there was nothing good. The worlds that year and losing my dad was a huge wake-up call. I’m glad I could turn it around and my mum’s witnessed me doing so much better. It means the world because she’s always advocated for me and I proved she was right to believe in me. I came fifth in the 2017 worlds and it was then that I knew I had to change my life in France. “It came after lots of heartache. In 2014 I cracked my foot and couldn’t go to the Commonwealth Games or Europeans. I had three quad tears and a knee injury in 2015 and needed surgery. In 2016 I had a quad tear again coming back from knee surgery. I got to the Rio Olympics, which was the one heptathlon I finished properly in those two years, and lots of people said I wasn’t going to win anyway. In my head, I wasn’t confident at all. I didn’t want to train. I didn’t want to compete in case I got injured. My head was a mess and I didn’t have time to grow and mature, to develop.” Johnson-Thompson thinks hard when I ask which of her disappointments wounded or taught her the most. “The one that taught me the most is definitely [the world championships in London in] 2017. I hit a real low with that performance. But it was a stupid one-off high jump where my ankles felt really bad in the rain. It really affected me mentally and I was wrong to let it get to me. I had such good events either side of that, so it was such a shame. It taught me you have to be in the moment and you can’t allow one little thing to stop you. I needed to be mentally tougher. When I was younger, I was in the spotlight and the public expected me to win. I wasn’t ready, my body would break down “But the worlds in 2015 and the Olympics in 2016 also hurt me because by the time I was in Rio I was done with it. 2015 got to me the most because I fought so hard to get on to the starting line. I had a really good indoor season and I was getting close to world records. I really believed I could win it back then. But I had injuries and I had to battle to get there. I then put myself in a position where I could have won it and it was heartbreaking to fall away. I was only 21 and it was very tough to take. After that, to add salt to the wound, I had to do another heptathlon in September. I got right up to javelin to get the bare minimum of 6,200 points to qualify for Rio. I pulled my adductor in the javelin and I had to have knee surgery. I was on crutches and so 2015, for sure, was the worst year of my career.” Listening to her turbulent memories it seems obvious why she now relishes the serenity of Montpellier. It was lonely at first, moving from home in Liverpool to a new country where she could barely speak the language, but the change happened in stages. “It was late November 2016 and I was with Denise Lewis when I went for the first time. Denise took me. I only went for a couple of days and we met Jean-Yves Cochand, an athletics legend and a coach who has been going since Denise was a junior. He took me through shot put and javelin and they said I’m never going to win a medal if I throw like that. They were just trying to help. “After a couple of weeks I stayed for a bit longer. I did five days, went back to Liverpool, went back to Montpellier, stayed there for two weeks. In the end I just asked them if I could stay for ever. Jean-Yves was in the first stage of retirement but Bertrand Valcin was at the track coaching Kevin Mayer [the decathlon world record-holder]. Jean-Yves was his mentor and told me Bertrand was a really good coach, that he trusted him and he’d be coaching me. That’s how I fell into working with Bertrand. They’re very lovely and I respect that they have so much patience with me. They believed in me when a lot of people didn’t. Bertrand’s a great coach and I trust him. He’s taken me to being world champion and he’s taken Kevin to world championship gold and a world record.” So Montpellier turned her into that world champion? “It’s a combination of things. When I was younger, I was put into the spotlight and the public expected me to win. I wasn’t ready for it and my body would break down or get injured. I just wasn’t good enough, not across the seven events and two days back to back. “I’d be good at one event in a Diamond League or national champs but people, including myself, doubted I could put it together. We started training six days a week so my body can handle being on the track all the time. We knew it was going to be a four-year challenge and my main goal was Tokyo. We’ve already had success which is great but my full focus is next year. I’ve got my coaches, Bertrand and Bruno and Jonny, these three Frenchmen, to thank for the performances they’ve brought out of me.” How is her French these days? “I’m not going to lie to you that my French is good but I understand a lot more. Bertrand can speak to me in French and I can understand and try and act upon that. I can get around, I can ask for things but it’s still very hard for me to get the accent. I do feel a lot more at home and I’m settled in the place that I live. I’ve got my routines so it definitely feels like a second home for me, minus the language.” Johnson-Thompson sounds genuinely enthused to be coming home for Spoty. “For sure. I’ve watched them from a young age and it’s one of the biggest nights in the year in the sporting world and a huge honour to be up for it among the top six. I’m going to come off my training camp because it’s a special occasion. It’s more than a dream to be recognised among the top sporting people in the UK.” Who does she feel deserves to win the award? “Ben Stokes. I think what he did for cricket was unbelievable. But I have to back Dina as well as we’re the only two females and athletes on the list.” Asher-Smith and Johnson-Thompson are the best GB hopes for Olympic gold in track and field in Tokyo. But will she need to surpass her world championship score of 6,981 points, which broke Jessica Ennis-Hill’s record, to beat Thiam again? “I think so. She’s a very talented athlete and capable of massive scores. In the past, Nafi’s scored over 7,000 points so she’s going to prepare for next year with added determination. I feel she’ll come back better. I’m not going to rest. I know it will be a big battle.” Before then, whether at home in Liverpool for Christmas, or back in the relative solitude of Montpellier, the world champion will have time to reflect again on all she has been through to reach this point – and all she needs to do to become an Olympic champion next year. “As athletes we measure our lives in Olympic cycles. I was so young in 2012 and just being there was the gold medal for me. I was 18. In 2016, I didn’t want to be there. I hated life and was injured throughout the season, I wasn’t enjoying the sport. I wasn’t ready. Hopefully I feel ready for Tokyo. Every experience I’ve had these last eight years has helped build me up. I now think I’ve got the strongest mind going into this Olympics and I’m ready for it.”