Kiley Reid’s debut novel Such a Fun Age isn’t out yet, but early readers have already confused the author with her main character and she would like to make one thing clear: “Emira’s not me.” Emira is a 25-year-old typist and babysitter who looks after Alix’s two-year-old daughter, Briar. Set in Philadelphia, the story begins when Alix calls Emira at 11pm and asks her to look after Briar while Alix deals with an emergency. Emira takes Briar to an upmarket food shop where the toddler likes to look at the displays of nuts, but the young black woman looking after a white child is challenged by a security guard, unleashing a reckoning with issues of class, money and race that unlocks a guilty secret from Alix’s past. Born in Los Angeles in 1984, Reid was raised in Tucson, Arizona, before moving to New York City to study acting at Marymount Manhattan College, followed by creative writing at the University of Arkansas and the Iowa Writers’ Workshop. Reid says she finds it funny when readers think they can hear her in Emira, explaining that if anything she has “more of a background like Alix”. Growing up in a fairly wealthy family with parents who valued education, she’s conscious of her “very privileged place”, but when she started at college, she made her living from childcare, doing children’s birthday parties at an art studio and – just like Emira – working as a nanny: “That was my income for about six years.” The people Reid nannied for, like Alix, were rich – “all of them … If you ask them, they probably wouldn’t say that, but if you own a home in New York and can afford to hire a nanny, then you either have extreme income, or extreme wealth – or both.” A lot of Americans will often say: 'Well we’re all human, we all have the same experience,' when we don’t On both sides of this divide, working women are making choices about childcare in a world designed by men, she continues. “There’s no way it’s going to work unless someone is at home, taking care of the child.” There’s also an expectation that women will be cut out for it. “Childcare is not easy and Emira kills it – she’s good at it. Alix is much more interested in why Emira doesn’t have an Instagram or who she’s dating, rather than her being an excellent caretaker.” When Alix comes back from a trip to New York City, she realises how much she has missed both her “chatty and nervous daughter”, Reid writes, “and the quiet, thoughtful person she paid to love her”. And that’s the essence of the transaction: to give love for money. Reid says she’s fascinated by emotional labour, citing Harry Harlow’s experiments in the 1950s and 60s with rhesus monkeys, which showed that baby monkeys preferred the comfort of a substitute mother made of terry cloth instead of wire, even if the wire mother dispensed milk. With the minimum wage in New York City set at $15 (£11.20) an hour, “when you are looking for someone to take care of your child,” Reid continues, “you’re asking for love, but you’re only paying $16 an hour.” Nannies are not only denied the money and status their weighty responsibilities demand, they’re also working within the tiniest margins of error. “I was a receptionist,” Reid says. “If I messed up a phone call it was: ‘OK, I’d do better next time.’ But if you mess up with a child, if you hurt someone’s child, that will stay with you for the rest of your life. You’re going to lose your job – the parent network is very small, they’ll make sure you don’t babysit for anyone else’s child – and it’s going to affect your performance because you’re nervous. Parents make mistakes all the time, but they often don’t allow the same forgiveness to their caretakers.” For many young women working as part-time carers in the US, this precariousness is all the more serious because they have no health insurance. After a catastrophic Thanksgiving dinner with Alix’s friends and family, Emira tells her boyfriend that she knows she has to quit, but she can’t do it yet: “I turn 26 next week … I’m gonna be kicked off my parents’ health insurance.” It’s a dilemma Reid knows only too well. She recalls feeling nervous as she cut cakes at children’s birthday parties. “The issue of health insurance became real to me because I knew if I cut myself it was going to alter the course of my life, and I’d have to pay thousands of dollars.” Emira’s struggle to find a secure job may be at the heart of the novel, but while Reid says she doesn’t like “issues books … at the same time, I’m not interested in reading or writing anything that doesn’t comment on the world we live in”. Donald Trump was only an unlikely candidate for president when she began writing Such a Fun Age in 2016, but race has always been a divisive issue in the US, and it shapes the world of the novel right from the opening scenes. The confrontation that opens the story is framed by the racial implications of walking into a smart shop if you are a black person, and Reid weaves these questions into the heart of the novel. As Emira protests that she’s Briar’s nanny, a customer in a college T-shirt starts filming the dispute, and it is the relationship Emira falls into with that customer, Kelley – a monied, white professional man – that reveals the unacknowledged prejudice at the centre of Alix’s carefully constructed life. It’s not that Alix is a bad person, Reid explains. “Her whole personality is more of a symptom of a bigger systemic problem, rather than just her being inherently bad.” Reid is fascinated by the way “a lot of Americans will often freeze over these topics and say: ‘Well we’re all human, we all have the same experience,’ when we don’t. I wanted to create characters who were dying to help, but kind of going through mental gymnastics to ignore the broken systems that put people where they are to begin with.” The novel suggests it is hard for Emira’s relationship with Kelley to thrive, the young black woman asking herself if her white boyfriend could ever really “take our son to get his hair done? Who’s gonna teach him that it doesn’t matter what his friends do, that he can’t stand too close to white women when he’s on the train or in an elevator? That he should slowly and noticeably put his keys on the roof as soon as he gets pulled over?” Questions that are all the more urgent because of Reid’s own situation. “I mean, I’m married to a white man.” Most black women in a relationship with a white man, she says, ask themselves: “Could this person really take this on with me? My husband and I have had many conversations, but I’ve also learned a lot from him. He says to me sometimes: ‘You should be angrier, be louder about the situation.’” She can’t stand the current fashion among white women in the US to deplore the number of white men in public life. “It’s never bothered you until right now. Before it was fine. I think it’s incredibly lazy and I think it takes the pressure off white men to step up and be something in their white skin.” Her husband has taught her “so much about the human experience and equality”, she says. Writing is such a brave thing, it’s so hard – if you don’t do it right, I’ll be the one that comes for you Since black women die earlier than any other demographic in the US and make less money, it’s natural for them to come into an interracial relationship thinking they have less power, she says. “Some black women say: ‘I don’t want to explain anything, I’m not going to do this any more.’ I’m not one of them, but I completely understand that perspective.” Of her characters, she adds, “I think Kelley and Emira quite like each other, I think what’s holding them back from being together are class issues, rather than race. “Any conversation about race without bringing up class is a bit of a moot point,” Reid says. “Whenever people want to talk about race in the States, there’s a lot of push to even the playing field and find a common ground. In a lot of cases it’s very easy to do that with race, because when you’re a white person in power you’re often around one or two black people who are in power as well. So … I don’t know … ” She trails off. “It’s complicated.” With issues of class, money and race at the front and centre of her novel, Reid says she feels lucky her editors didn’t push back. But publishers who want to reflect these complicated experiences have still got a long way to go. “I was not searched for at all,” she says. “If you want to be a writer, you have to have support and capital to get yourself there. If you do not have that, it’s not going to be as easy, and in the States the people who don’t have that are mostly black people.” And that’s a problem for the voices we get to hear. It’s not that any subject is off limits, Reid thinks, but it’s just harder for an author to write outside their own experience. “You, as a writer, can write from any perspective, but you need to do it right. And if you don’t – writing is such a brave thing, it’s so hard – if you don’t do it right, I’ll be the one that comes for you.” She laughs. “You’re going to fail often – have people read it, and if you don’t have black people around you to read it, then maybe you’ve got to figure out why that might have happened.” At the moment she’s working on a screenplay for the adaptation of Such a Fun Age. When the producer Lena Waithe – best known for Master of None – bought the film and television rights, Reid “didn’t just want to let it go”. “I wanted to be a part of the process, for sure,” she says. “Lena Waithe is someone who wants to create opportunities for people of colour – she really puts her money where her mouth is when it comes to bringing on new voices.” Reid is also working on a second novel, although it is still so fresh she is reluctant to give clues about what it will contain. But readers can be sure she won’t be ducking any of the issues that animate her firecracker debut. After all, as Reid says: “No writing is not political.” • Such a Fun Age by Kiley Reid is published by Bloomsbury on 7 January.