The Mill welcomes you this Friday with news of an expected stampede in Austria’s post-Christmas January sales. You see, reports in Germany suggest that RB Salzburg “goal giant” Erling Braut Haaland does indeed have a £17m release clause in his contract. The club denied such a thing existed last week which, The Mill supposes, you would do if you had a player on your books whom clubs were falling over themselves to offer £50m-plus for. Manchester United are among a number of European clubs to have been linked with the goal-guzzling big man who Ole Gunnar Solskjær managed at Molde, but talent-polishing German giants Borussia Dortmund appear to be leading the race for the Norway striker as they look to close the five-point gap at the top of the Bundesliga. In a further blow to United’s January transfer hopes, Dortmund are going to put £100m-rated Jadon Sancho – who is also being monitored by Liverpool – under lock and key at the Westfalenstadion until at least the summer. Hot air emanating from Istanbul suggests that mid-table Süper Lig side Galatasaray will try to sweet-talk Xherdan Shaqiri into leaving Premier League title-chasers Liverpool in January but the “Power Cube” might want to hang around until at least May, having been brought back into the fold and scoring against Everton on Wednesday. A more realistic move is the sulky Danish playmaker Christian Eriksen emptying his Tottenham locker in January and heading to pastures new. The 27-year-old is yet to start a game at Spurs since humility-era José Mourinho took the reins. He is able to sign a pre-contract agreement with interested clubs in the winter transfer window and Atlético Madrid, Juventus and Manchester United are known to be among them. It says here that United may try to elbow competition out of the way and offer a fee to secure his services early. Eriksen’s preference is to get a bit of Iberian sunshine on his pasty face in his sunset years, though, so United might want to prepare for yet another confidence-knocking brush-off. Ousmane Dembélé’s career at Barcelona looks to be heading the same way as Philippe Coutinho’s. Which is to say that he might not be in Catalonia for much longer. The forward has been hampered by a number of injuries and rumours of a preference for playing video games instead of focusing on recovery have not endeared him to Ernesto Valverde or fans at Camp Nou. The 22-year-old is currently in Qatar after his latest setback and reports suggest his agent has spoken to PSG, Chelsea and Manchester City about taking his client off Barça’s hands for a cool £96m. Wilfried Zaha’s agent has also been busy. He has been trying to drum up interest in the Crystal Palace winger as January nears and the latest fluff wafting around suggests Chelsea could be tempted to make a move for the 27-year-old. They do have the small matter of a transfer ban hanging over them, though, so perhaps the summer would be a more realistic window for business to be done. The Mill’s going to pause to take a breath before we finish with a roundup of the managers lining up for vacant jobs in the Premier League. Phwoooooo. OK, here goes: Alan “Pards” Pardew would love the job at Everton but has backed David Moyes for the role but the Toffees’ leading candidate is Shanghai SIPG boss Vitor Pereira, presumably because Marco Silva left some Portuguese custard tarts behind and someone has to eat them. Arsenal have started interviewing potential successors to Unai Emery. Mauricio Pochettino is said to be the club’s favoured candidate but, well, just imagine. Mikel Arteta and Max Allegri are also believed to be on the Gunners’ extensive list of people they would like to talk to who might not want to talk to them. And Watford have interviewed Nigel Pearson in the hope he may last long enough in the job to keep them up.