Very happy that we now have a young female PM with fresh new thoughts on how to lead our beautiful country. She is well educated, bright and does not take any BS from anybody. She is a strong independent woman and a bright new star for her generation. I’m sure she will make a good example for all the young men and women of our world. It’s the young people that need to take over as they are the ones living here long after my generation has passed. Veikko, 65, Ilomantsi, Finland I cannot recall when politics last made me cry tears of happiness. This did. I experienced my political awakening at age 16. The power that rose from the 2015 elections four years later didn’t look like me. This, now, is what politics is supposed to look like. It is supposed to look into the future, think of the welfare of the people. Ella Kivisaari, student, Helsinki, Finland She’s going to have a challenging time finding a way to fund government spending and find a path to improving employment. She’s fresh, popular and brings a major improvement in communication skills but also needs to break her ties with her predecessor Antti Rinne to be able to avoid an impression of being a marionette of his. Ilkka Kivi, 48, works in IT, Espoo, Finland Best choice for prime minister. Our political party has long needed ‘fresh air’. Sanna is very good at speaking in the media and doesn’t hesitate to say her opinion. I’m very pleased. The opposition parties will have to face a lady in parliament and I’m loving it. Finland faces a bright future with Sanna Marin! Teemu Lintumaa, 35, Finland She seems competent and will probably do alright, but I would say that her appointment is almost like an act of desperation from her party. The SDP is in a similar downfall such as so many former ruling parties across Europe, with their voter base leaking both to the far-right, far-left and to the greens. She is basically their only politician with star power, and they are now pulling her from the sleeve to save them from oblivion. Whether that will work is yet to be seen, but basically this appointment is about a 20th century party trying to be hip, cool and relevant in the 21st century. Mikko Damskägg, 28, student, Helsinki I first met Sanna Marin around 10 years ago in an election panel. She stood out from the other panelists in a most positive way, with deep knowledge and formidable arguments. Over the years, she has proven herself as one of Finland’s most apt politicians. I am so very happy and proud that she is our prime minister. Jari Kallio, 46, journalist and teacher, Tampere I’m super excited and happy about our new PM! I think she’s starting a whole new chapter in Finnish politics by lifting up some really important values like equality, climate change and solidarity between people. Finland has been led by more or less right-wing politicians for over 15 years and since the actual election things have started to change in Finland for the better. Sanna Marin as our new PM will surely keep our new government in order and work towards the goals set six months ago. To see a young woman rise up to this position makes me really happy. Jarkko Veijanen, 39, project manager for a telephone company, Jyväskylä, Finland It’s great to see women and young women on the frontline in politics. We’ve been hailed as a very equal country but even now the comments regarding Marin’s appointment still leave me speechless. Her age, education, experience in both ‘normal jobs’ as well as politics are being questioned and I’m quite sure this wouldn’t have been the case if Antti Lindtman was appointed instead. I’m so disappointed in Finns not even giving her a chance. Tiina, 43, TV prodicer, Helsinki