This felt like a year that belonged to women. Finally. It took Pam Tanowitz until her 50th birthday to be recognised as the great new thing, but her stunningly ambitious Four Quartets dazzled with its cool, limpid beauty. She followed it up with a new work for the Royal Ballet, the mysteriously lovely Everyone Keeps Me, which confirmed her as somebody whose talent is absolutely developed and assured. Elsewhere, Cathy Marston triumphed with the complex Victoria for Northern Ballet, and Helen Pickett made the dark tones of Arthur Miller’s The Crucible into a work for Scottish Ballet that was full of shadow, sinew and passion. Dada Masilo’s Giselle at Sadler’s Wells shone bright South African light on a familiar European classic, turning its Wilis into terrifying avengers and giving Giselle liberation after death. On the contemporary front, in Hard to Be Soft: A Belfast Prayer, Oona Doherty announced herself as a force to be reckoned with. Meanwhile, that old hand Anne Teresa de Keersmaeker took a break from her work re-choreographing West Side Story on Broadway (surely the US dance event of the year) to perform at Sadler’s Wells in her cerebral and uplifting interpretation of Bach’s Cello Suites, with Jean-Guihen Queyras playing on stage as the dance snaked around him. In a strong Dance Umbrella lineup, Crowd was a striking new work from Gisèle Vienne, and waving the flag for the male side of the dance family was the Senegal-born Amala Dianor, who blends African, hip-hop and contemporary to mesmerising effect. While the Edinburgh festival continues to neglect dance, the Manchester international festival brought a chance to see the work of the unique experimental American dance-maker Trajal Harrell. With so much good new work around, there was also a lot of looking back, particularly at the legacy of Merce Cunningham. The centenary of the American master’s birth was celebrated most notably with the intercontinental Night of 100 Solos, and on a smaller scale by Dance Umbrella, the Royal Ballet and Rambert. At this distance it’s fascinating just how hard and challenging Cunningham’s works still look – but equally how clearly they spring from the classical tradition with which they once appeared to represent an entire breach. The Birmingham Royal Ballet said farewell to David Bintley after 24 years as director; there can be no doubt as to how much he had loved and nurtured the company, but the arrival of Carlos Acosta in the role promises an injection of energy. In London, Tamara Rojo achieved the remarkable feat of moving English National Ballet to a state-of-the-art new building just five years after she first announced the idea; from this base their already soaring reputation – confirmed by the company’s performances in Akram Khan’s Giselle and Christopher Wheeldon’s Cinderella – should continue to grow. Khan said farewell to solo shows with his magnificent Until the Lions; Paris Fitzpatrick and Cordelia Braithwaite were electrifying as the young lovers in Matthew Bourne’s bold and inventive Romeo and Juliet; and Sergei Polunin compensated for a new low on stage by making a brief appearance in Ralph Fiennes’s film The White Crow, a tribute to Nureyev that got a lot right but didn’t for a moment capture the glory of the man. That’s the thing about dance: you have to be there on the night. Nights I was pleased to be there include Marianela Nuñez and Vadim Muntagirov’s perfectly polished performances in Don Quixote. Together they almost made me love my least favourite ballet. Then there was Francesca Hayward’s Manon, the boldest I’ve seen since Sylvie Guillem’s; and the Royal Ballet’s tribute to Margot Fonteyn on the centenary of her birth, an evening that allowed young dancers to conjure her spirit. How odd it is to think she and Cunningham were born in the same year. 1. Four QuartetsBarbican, LondonPam Tanowitz’s interpretation of TS Eliot’s poem, read in its entirety by Kathleen Chalfant, was a thing of crystalline beauty, both simple and complexSets by Brice Marden and lighting by Clifton Taylor added to its glory. 2. The Royal BalletRoyal Opera House, LondonThe company has had a great year, with the current generation of dancers, many of whom have come up through the Royal Ballet School, exploring the repertory and bringing old pieces to new life. 3. Shostakovich Trilogy San Francisco BalletAlexei Ratmansky’s large-scale response to three contrasting works by the Russian composer was packed with ideas and rapturous inventiveness, and beautifully danced. 4. Maggie the CatManchester international festivalTrajal Harrell’s interpretation of Cat on a Hot Tin Roof in a style that mixes Harlem voguing and contemporary dance logic was utterly transfixing and sure of itself. 5. The ThreadSadler’s Wells, LondonRussell Maliphant’s melding of contemporary dance and folk dance to music by Vangelis was original and revelatory, and under the lighting of Michael Hulls, with costumes by Mary Katrantzou, looked just gorgeous. Sergei PoluninLondon PalladiumPolunin emoted badly in Rasputin, which didn’t show a fraction of his once glorious classical technique. His fans don’t care, but I do. It was a great waste of his talent.