The job of looking after the Grand National course falls vacant about four times a century, on recent trends, so Sulekha Varma is counting herself very lucky to get it at the age of just 34. “I’m over the moon,” she said on Thursday as the news began to sink in. “I’m fully aware of what a big challenge the job will be but I know how things operate there.” That’s because running Aintree during the National meeting is not a one-man job. For those three days, the Jockey Club brings its clerks of the course from around the country to Liverpool to help out, so if you walk the track you’re as likely to bump into Simon Claisse or Kirkland Tellwright as Andrew Tulloch, who has been Aintree’s clerk for the last 24 years. It’s odd to see those familiar figures of authority in the one place, working together, a bit like Avengers Assemble for racing geeks. Varma has been with the Jockey Club over the last 10 years, doing her training at Haydock and then clerking at Nottingham, Market Rasen, Warwick, Huntingdon and Hamilton. And each April, she would travel to Aintree for experience that will now stand her in excellent stead. “I’ve been there when there was a lot going on, changes, new ways of working, new protocols and procedures. My first year was Ballabriggs’s year, which brought about the changes in the pull-up area and the wash-down area. It was my job was to oversee that area and its function, once it had been redeveloped. I then moved on to assisting Andrew directly, so I was in the stewards’ box with him, running a lot of comms and being there if he got pulled away to do something else. The race after the National, I often clerked that so that he could deal with press conferences. “I’ve thankfully had a lot of experience. I think there will still be a huge amount to learn but the structure and the set-up, I have a good understanding of.” Bright and funny, Varma is one of the most approachable of Britain’s clerks and her ability to communicate and co-ordinate should be very valuable in the new role. Born in Cardiff and raised near Dundee, she can be claimed as one of their own by large parts of the country. She studied Classics at Durham University, which must be handy in inquiries when one of the more longstanding stewards starts declaiming in Latin. Equine welfare will be at the heart of her work at Aintree and Varma has long had a love of horses, having ridden since she was a child. Her first memory of the National was watching Miinnehoma win it when she was nine. Tulloch started in the role the following year. It was a work placement at Lucinda Russell’s yard that switched her on to racing. “We were packed off there for a week. One trip up the gallops and that was it, I was absolutely hooked.” She remembers riding Kerry Lads, who was twice placed in the Scottish Grand National. Between Durham and the Jockey Club, Varma was briefly a journalist at the Racing Post. The fact that she did not continue as a racing scribe reflects well on her intelligence, it could be argued. Good luck to her. The whole sport would be delighted if she got a smooth run for years to come. Colin Tizzard could be in for a good day at his local Wincanton, where he runs Lizzie Langton (2.40) in a handicap chase. She shot up the ratings after winning this last year but has come back down to a fair mark and will be sharper for a Lingfield reappearance on heavy ground. This sound surface will suit her better and she’s 11-4. Tizzard’s Duc Kauto (3.15) is a warm order at 6-4 in the next, when he’ll be partnered by one of the more experienced amateurs involved. He produced a career best on his chasing debut at this track in October and the extra half-mile looks a help. Earlier, Jonjo O’Neill Jr can sustain his good run on Above Board (1.30), down to 5-1 from Wednesday night’s 10s. He’s almost back down to his last winning mark and seemed to need his reappearance run. At Market Rasen, Connor Brace is an eye-catching booking for Swilly Sunset (1.05) in the conditionals’ race. Making his first start for Alex Hales, this one is down to 7s from 33s. Market Rasen 12.00 Defining Battle 12.30 Winningseverything 1.05 Swilly Sunset 1.40 Global Ruler 2.15 Cavalry Scout 2.50 Timely Gift 3.25 Jayaaah Leicester 12.10 Skeaping 12.45 Hold That Taught 1.20 Arqalina 1.55 Chirico Vallis 2.30 Eleanor Bob 3.05 Wenceslaus 3.40 Shadow's Girl Wincanton 12.20 Favori De Sivola 12.55 Cill Anna 1.30 Above Board (nb) 2.05 Flashing Glance 2.40 Lizzie Langton (nap) 3.15 Duc Kauto 3.50 Le Bateau Kempton 4.00 Ivatheengine 4.35 Katzoff 5.10 Lottie Marie 5.40 Faramman 6.15 Indigo Lake 6.45 Delta's Royalty 7.15 Baadirr 7.45 Al Asef Southwell 4.15 Classy Lady 4.50 Motahassen 5.25 Redesdale Rebel 6.00 Contingency Fee 6.30 Esprit De Corps 7.00 Eesha Says 7.30 Tynecastle Park 8.00 Espoir Et Bonheur