Writing in these pages last month, Robert Del Naja of Massive Attack articulated many of the concerns that the music industry is grappling with over its effect on the environment. The survival of the classical music industry relies very heavily on international touring. My colleagues and I at talent agency HarrisonParrott are this year celebrating our 50th anniversary; over the past five decades we have booked tens of thousands of concerts and performances around the world, for musicians from sopranos to saxophonists, conductors to cornet players. In recent decades globalisation has opened markets and created audiences for western classical music far from its original roots in Europe. In the last 12 months alone HarrisonParrott has organised 38 international tours to more than 200 countries, many involving American and European orchestras travelling to Asia, which usually entails well over 100 people flying to different cities. Our roster is around 190 musicians, and many of them perform upwards of 100 concerts a year around the world. New concert halls should only be permitted if they will be carbon neutral. Existing halls must make radical changes But now, faced with undeniable scientific evidence of manmade climate change, music and arts professionals must take a stand rather than blindly continuing with business as usual. We have a responsibility to galvanise our industry and question the established way of working in order to mitigate its ecological impact. Welcome work by the Tyndall Centre for Climate Research examines all the areas of impact touring has on the environment and recognises that the issue is complex: it cannot be solved by planting a set number of trees per tour. From audiences travelling to concerts to the power required by the halls, this crisis is the responsibility of all of us. Everyone must be conscious of their behaviour and acknowledge the active part they have to play. Planning permission for all new concert halls, for example, should only be given if the buildings will be carbon neutral. Existing concert halls must make radical changes to ensure they are as close to carbon neutral as possible. I’m proud of our musicians who are leading by example. Violinist Patricia Kopatchinskaja last season partnered with the musicians from the Orchester des Wandels (the Orchestra of Change) and performed works written as a reaction to the climate crisis, with all proceeds donated to environmental projects. Kopatchinskaja now organises her schedule so as to travel by train as much as possible, and our touring department plan tours that allow orchestras to avoid taking flights. As so often in debates about climate change, the Scandinavians are leading the way. The Norwegian conductor Tabita Berglund recently wrote: “Travelling back and forth, visiting a new orchestra every week, is not ultimately sustainable. There are more clever ways of organising ourselves, and these might bring new perspectives and values to our musical life. They might even create possibilities that we haven’t even thought about.” Her mix of urgency and optimism strikes exactly the right chord. So much of this debate takes place within a frame of comfort, with most of us kidding ourselves that we can keep on as we always have, and that by being a bit smarter – no single-use plastic bottles! – we can fix this. In truth, that time has long gone. Musicians and artists need to be disruptive in challenging assumptions about how our industry operates – and we all need to make real changes. Jasper Parrott is co-founder and executive chairman of HarrisonParrott Ltd