Aston Villa’s summer spending spree totalled almost £150m, half of which was apportioned to strengthening the defence, but on this evidence they have reason to feel short-changed after Southampton thrice exposed a concerning soft centre. Jack Grealish struck a wondrous half-volley late on but it proved nothing more than a consolation as Danny Ings continued his scoring streak, finding the net either side of Jack Stephens’s first-half header to earn a victory that hoists Southampton out of the relegation zone at Villa’s expense. Villa, who have lost seven of their past nine Premier League matches, displayed a frailty that must have had the assistant coach, John Terry, tearing his hair out. “The manner of the goals we are conceding at the moment is very poor,” said Dean Smith, the Villa manager. “We played Leicester a few weeks ago and when you play against Vardy, you know you don’t get in a race with Vardy. But we got in a race with him twice. “We ended up getting in a race with Shane Long. We lose that one and then let someone [Stephens] have a free header from six yards. They are soft goals at any level. All we can do is go home, look in the mirror and put right what we have done wrong.” This match marked the start of a pivotal week for Villa, who host Norwich on Boxing Day before a trip to Watford, and a fourth successive league defeat heightens the importance of those games. An injury to John McGinn, who hobbled off inside four minutes with an ankle problem after making a thunderous block, set the tone on a deflating and sore afternoon. Until Grealish’s unstoppable strike, they struggled to muster much more than a whiff of the Southampton goal, with Wesley guilty of stroking painfully wide from an early Anwar El Ghazi cross, and it was only a matter of time before Southampton seized the initiative. When Long skipped on to a ball over the top by James Ward-Prowse, Villa were in trouble. Long beat Bjorn Engels for pace, with the Villa defender stuck in slow motion as Long raced away before striking at Tom Heaton, who palmed his shot to Ings, who could not miss. “We can catastrophise goals too quickly,” Smith said. “When the first goal went in, I could see shoulders and heads go a little bit, probably for the exception of Jack [Grealish] and Douglas [Luiz], who wanted to keep getting on the ball. You concede a soft goal and all of a sudden it feels like the world is against you.” Villa’s back-five, including Matt Targett, the former Southampton defender, were recruited following promotion last season and they spent most of this chastening encounter chasing shadows. Grealish’s peach stirred a late rally but ultimately Villa’s hunger was too little, too late. Villa, who were again without Tyrone Mings through injury, always looked susceptible to further damage in defence. Southampton doubled their advantage when Stephens glanced in unchallenged after comfortably beating his marker, El Ghazi, to meet a sweet Ward-Prowse corner. Villa were at risk of suffering a hiding after the substitute Marvelous Nakamba gift-wrapped Ings’s second goal, inadvertently prodding a loose ball into the striker’s path. It proved a fatal error with Ings thumping home his 13th goal of the season. “We like him [Ings] in this form,” Ralph Hasenhüttl said. “I like to see how he is working, how he is going. He is always there, wherever the balls are coming and he has a clinical finish. His second goal was fantastic with his left foot. “At the moment he is full of self-confidence and not only this but he is also a fantastic character and hard-working for the team. We have had a few good away wins but this was an important one because of the situation in the table.”