Hong Kong police used pepper spray and made arrests on Sunday as small groups of black-clad pro-democracy protesters targeted some of the city’s shopping centres, ending a rare lull in violence. Flashmob protests and vandalism broke out in several locations. Riot police responded with pepper spray in at least two shopping centres as members of the public heckled them. A secondary school girl and a 16-year-old boy were arrested in a Sha Tin mall, the pair shouting out their details as officers led them away. Earlier in the afternoon an elderly woman was knocked over in the same shopping centre after a fight broke out when a shopper tried to stop protesters spraying graffiti. Masked activists had also trashed restaurants run by Maxim’s, a catering firm that has become a frequent target because its owner’s daughter has criticised the pro-democracy movement. The skirmishes were the first in three weeks. Hong Kong has been upended by six months of pro-democracy protests, violent battles between police and hardcore demonstrators, as well as regular transport disruption. Pro-democracy parties won a landslide victory in local council elections last month. Last Sunday an estimated 800,000 people marched peacefully through the streets. But public anger remains, with no sign of further concessions from Beijing or Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, despite the election success. Lam is in Beijing for an annual visit and is due to meet President Xi Jinping on Monday. A new Hong Kong extradition law is proposed, which would allow people to be transferred to mainland China for a variety of crimes. Residents fear it could lead to politically motivated extraditions into China's much harsher judicial system. Large public demonstrations start as thousands march in the streets to protest against the extradition bill. Hong Kong lawmakers scuffle in parliament during a row over the law. Hong Kong's leader, Carrie Lam, introduces concessions to the extradition bill, including limiting the scope of extraditable offences, but critics say they are not enough. The scale of protests continues to increase as more than half a million people take to the streets. Police use rubber bullets and teargas against the biggest protests Hong Kong has seen for decades. Lam says the proposed extradition law has been postponed indefinitely. The protests continue as demonstrators storm the Legislative Council, destroying pictures, daubing graffiti on the walls and flying the old flag of Hong Kong emblazoned with the British union flag. The protests coincide with the 22nd anniversary of the handover of Hong Kong from the UK back to China. Armed men in white T-shirts thought to be supporting the Chinese government attack passengers and passers-by in Yuen Long metro station, while nearby police take no action. 44 protesters are charged with rioting, which further antagonises the anti-extradition bill movement. By now the protest movement has coalesced around five key demands: complete withdrawal of the proposed extradition bill, withdrawal of the use of the word "riot" in relation to the protests, unconditional release of arrested protesters and charges against them dropped, an independent inquiry into police behaviour and the implementation of genuine universal suffrage. The mass protests enter their fifteenth week, with police resorting to teargas and water cannon against the demonstrators, and a wave of "doxxing" using digital techniques to unmask police and protesters as a new front in the battle. Police shoot a protester with live ammunition for the first time, as demonstrations continue on the day marking the 70th anniversary of the declaration of the People's Republic of China. The first charges are brought against protesters for covering their faces, after authorities bring in new laws banning face masks in order to make it easier to identify or detain protesters. Hong Kong officials spark outrage in the city as it revealed that nearly a third of protesters arrested since June have been children. Seven hundred and 50 out of the 2,379 people arrested  were under 18, and 104 were under 16. Lam is forced to deliver a key annual policy speech via video link after after being heckled in parliament, as the legislative council resumed sessions after it was suspended on 12 June. Later in the day one of the protest leaders, Jimmy Sham, was attacked by assailants wielding hammers and knives. Chan Tong-kai, the murder suspect whose case prompted the original extradition bill is released from prison, saying that he is willing to surrender himself to Taiwan. The extradition bill is also formally withdrawn, a key demand of protesters. Chow Tsz-lok, 22, becomes the first fatality of the protests. Chow, a computer science student at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), was found injured in a car park in Tseung Kwan O in Kowloon, where he was believed to have fallen one storey. Protesters had been trying to disrupt a police officer’s wedding, which was being held in the area. A week later a 70-year-old cleaner who is thought to have been hit by a brick during a clash between protesters and pro-Beijing residents becomes the second person to die. Hundreds of protestors are trapped as police lay siege to a university, firing tear gas. Local elections deliver a landslide victory for pro-democracy campaigners. The protests were ignited by a now scrapped plan to allow extraditions to the mainland, and they evolved into a revolt against Chinese rule. Among the movement’s demands is an independent inquiry into the police and fully free elections. In a separate protest, around 1,000 people waving Chinese flags rallied in a park on Sunday afternoon in support of Hong Kong’s police force. The protests, coupled with the trade war have hammered the economy and helped tip Hong Kong into recession as tourists stay away. On Sunday its airport reported its steepest drop in passengers in a decade, down 16% in November compared with the same month the year before.