Stick to the confines of traditional makeup and you’ll get stuck in a rut. Hence this ethereal look, from Dundas AW19 Couture, appeals. Agreed, it is left of centre but, surprisingly, this painterly melange of watercolour brights – aka a splash of colour in all the wrong places – can actually be wearable. Just take note of the following… With the exception of a cream blush and a touch of highlighter, keep skin bare. Applying eyeshadow with a light hand and damp brush achieves that delicate wash. Unless you want the Scary Hot Mess look, don’t be tempted to add a million colours. I was recently asked what my favourite luxury was. For many years it was time, but now more than ever, it is silence. For many of us, silence is becoming as rare as hens’ teeth. If, like me, you don’t have time to take a monastic vow of silence (ah, the bliss!) then the next best thing is the Glow Bar. This wellness haunt was launched by ex-New Yorker Sasha Sabapathy as a way to help anxiety-ridden urbanites de-stress. It is all millennial pink interiors, velvet sofas and gold palm trees – aka Instagram heaven – with new-agey offerings like moon milk and healing herbs. (Which really don’t float my boat.) What I do love, however, are the LED saunas. These are small heated rooms that you sit in for 45 minutes and sweat. This does a myriad of things - improves circulation, detoxifies, stimulates collagen (plump skin) lowers your cortisol levels (less stress), releases endorphins (better sleep) and leaves you with glowing skin. And it happens in complete silence. Now, you will need to drink the water provided and open the inner door from time to time as the heat gets quite intense. There were moments where I felt slightly nauseous and the leaves from the book I was reading began loosening from the spine. But for the brighter skin, relaxed shoulders and the 45 minutes of silence, it was absolutely worth it (The Glow Bar, £40, glowbarldn.com). Fresh fruit pie This medley of fresh and feminine Calabrian bergamot, apricot and muguet, by perfumer Frank Voelkl, is another winning scent from this high quality low price brand. Beauty Pie, Love, £16.72, beautypie.com Lemon dressing Lyn Harris, the lauded British perfumer, is known for her unconventional olfactory creations. This citrus meets woody collaboration with clothing brand Sunspel is no different. Sunspel Eau de Parfum, £90, sunspel.com Coming up roses A beautiful concoction of magnolia, sweet Rose de Mai and spicy Rosa damascena, patchouli and amber, this unique take on the classic floral is worth it for the bottle alone. Jo Malone Rose and Magnolia Cologne, £104, jomalone.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.