‘She was a very happy child. Bright, bubbly. She was always the one that made the friends when we went on our holidays in the caravan.” Old video footage of Katherine barrelling about, and family photographs of her grinning face, attest to this, Andrea’s memory of her daughter’s childhood. What they don’t show is the truth. The Family Secret (Channel 4) is the record of that truth because, as Katherine puts it: “I spent 25 years carrying it. And now I just feel like – not any more.” It is circled around at first, quietly, unsensationally, by the makers of the documentary, like archaeologists assessing the width and breadth of a site before they get to work. Delicately, they brush away layer upon layer of trauma and pain to reveal the event buried deep beneath. First it becomes clear that Katherine was abused as a child. Then it becomes clear that she is preparing to confront the perpetrator in a meeting arranged by a restorative justice organisation. Finally, it becomes clear that her abuser was her older brother, Robert, who was 10 or 11 when he started raping his seven-year-old sister. She doesn’t remember every detail of the first time he penetrated her – when she was first allowed to stay at their grandad’s for the night – but she remembers how much it hurt when she had to get up afterwards and do a wee. “Everything that was safe in the world was not safe any more,” says Katherine, who speaks directly at all times, her language and attitude shorn of all embellishments that might obscure or soften her story. “That fucking poor little girl.” The abuse went on for three and a half years. She remembers his breath, “the quiver in his voice” and his hands all over her “like an octopus into my private parts”. At their meeting, supervised by a mediator, Kate, Robert describes it as becoming increasingly intimate. Katherine stops him. Not intimate. “I never wanted it. It was rape.” “Yes,” says Robert immediately. “I understand completely.” “I was seven,” she replies. From what Robert says, and the mediator and Katherine draw out of him, he seems to have used her simply to pursue a high he enjoyed. “Euphoria … I think it was all selfish desires.” “So you’re saying,” Kate says, calmly, “that you didn’t really think about Katherine in the process. She was just a means to an end?” “It sounds so callous,” says Robert. “But – yes, it was.” It stopped when Katherine got a new bedroom, “with a new bed with a desk underneath”. “Something in my gut told me I was ready for him. I didn’t want him to do that to me in my new bedroom.” Your heart aches for the 10-year-old defending her unsullied space. She fought him – for far from the first time – and this time won. She split his 14-year-old lip and he never again padded across the landing from his bedroom to hers after their parents were asleep. But she remembers one later incident as clearly as any of the physical abuse. Frustrated with a computer game she was playing, she said: “Fuck me!” Robert overheard and said: “I would, but you won’t let me.” That’s when she first truly reckoned there was something wrong with him and felt he was dangerous in the wider world. She made it through teenagehood, university and getting a job, but describes herself as “on the inside, just crumbling away.” When she had a baby, she couldn’t bear for Robert to touch him “because I knew where his hands had been” and decided to tell her parents the truth. “If you could hear a heart break,” she says, “you would have heard Mum’s.” Her mother hugged her, told her she believed her, and told her they should go to the police. She and her husband have since separated because, he says, “I didn’t want to see my son in trouble. Even if it was my daughter.” A legal technicality meant that although Robert confessed everything, he could not be prosecuted. The meeting is all the recourse Katherine has left. There is no narrator to the programme and the camera is unobtrusive. It captures her impossibly dignified, full-blooded, quiet denunciation of her brother, her description of the effects of his depravity on her and on the family and her expulsion of him from her life. There are no histrionics. There are barely any tears. It was as powerful a portrait of a family not shocked, not grieving, but harrowed to its very soul as we are likely to see. My only fear is of lesser, copycat versions to follow by less scrupulous and disciplined film-makers, but let us hope conscience prevails. “I feel like I am really me now,” were Katherine’s final words. She is extraordinary.