Berlin’s rubbish collection service is urging the city’s residents to cut down on their waste this Christmas by gifting time rather than material objects. In an advertising campaign, BSR suggests the festive season could be more meaningful if people reduce their rubbish by shopping less, try to eat rather than throw away leftovers, and do a good turn for a neighbour. “People squeeze into shopping temples and package couriers can hardly keep up with the deliveries … is that really what this joyful day is all about? The mass of presents and overflowing rubbish bins rather misses the point,” it says in its Time not Stuff appeal, using words that might seem more at home in a vicar’s advent sermon. BSR, which serves 2 million households in Berlin, suggests alternative ways of celebrating to help the environment and ease the public purse. “One of our most precious commodities is our time,” it says. “So that’s what you should gift. How about an evening of cooking with someone, or a trip to a concert or cinema? Everyone likes to have nice memories.” It recommends giving the parents of young children “babysitting vouchers”, holding clothes swap-and-share parties with friends, and visiting upcycling shops across the city, as well as its own swap shop. BSR also advises being inventive with the remains of the Christmas goose or carp rather than throwing them in the compost bin. It urges Berliners to avoid drinking spicy punch and Glühwein (mulled wine) out of disposable cups “when ceramic ones will do”, pointing out that across the year an average of 20,000 disposable cups are thrown away every hour in the city, and the number is at its peak at Christmas. It suggests if Berliners want to give material gifts, they should make their own, such as knitting a hat or making chutney, and then wrap the presents in toilet roll, newspaper or pieces of fabric instead of plastic packaging and aluminium. As well as daily craft tips on its Twitter page throughout advent, such as an elk made from a toilet roll, it offers a video demonstration of how to make tree decorations out of egg boxes. The waste management firm concludes: “Help us make this a rubbish-reduced Christmas.”