Frank Lampard admitted Chelsea had ridden their luck en route to a dramatic, come-from-behind 2-1 win at Arsenal but argued that they made it themselves after harsh words at half-time. Arsenal dominated for the opening half-hour, scoring through Pierre‑Emerick Aubameyang and forcing Lampard into a tactical substitution on 33 minutes when he replaced the left wing-back, Emerson, with the midfielder Jorginho. That was the start of the turnaround and Chelsea came to control the game in the second half. Jorginho’s 83rd-minute equaliser, though, carried a degree of controversy because he had been lucky to escape a second yellow card a little earlier for a pull on Matteo Guendouzi. He capitalised on a goalkeeping howler from Bernd Leno before Tammy Abraham scored the winner in the 87th minute. “It certainly could have been a second yellow,” Lampard said. “We might have struck a bit of luck with that one. But there have been times when I’ll moan about not getting luck in other games and I don’t think it was absolutely clear-cut. Maybe you make your own luck sometimes. I think with the way we played, the way Jorginho played, he was a big catalyst for the change.” Mikel Arteta, the Arsenal manager, was asked whether Jorginho should have been on the pitch to score. “I think that is up to you guys,” he replied. “For me, it was very clear. That is it.” Lampard was angry at his players’ lack of fight before Jorginho’s introduction and they were animated in the tunnel before the start of the second half, having been sent out early from the dressing-room. “There should be [a half-time inquest] because you don’t want 11 quiet players, who just get on with it and just want to trot out again,” Lampard said. “I said my piece and was pretty firm because you can’t just come here and have nothing about you and think you’re going to get anything. “Win, lose or draw, I wasn’t so bothered about how I saw the second half – it was more: ‘Can we show something here, lads?’ Then the lads started talking and it was a bit aggressive, which is a good thing. “ We’ve rightly been questioned recently – Everton away would be a good one. We were quiet after that game in the dressing-room and I didn’t like it. The Southampton defeat, and some of our home games, lately, we’ve been lacking something. Today isn’t a turning point. It can only be a turning point if we show it going forward.” Arteta said that Leno, who has been one of Arsenal’s better performers this season, was “down” after his error. “We have to lift him. We need him on board and the confidence back.”