“If it’s not funny, it’s art,” goes the joke by US standup Demetri Martin, protecting his craft should his wry sketches fail to raise a laugh. But are comedy and art really so irreconcilable? The supposed incompatibility of the two comes from the former being regarded as low culture and the latter as high. To bring humour into a civilised arena is seen as a juvenile affront to solemnity, like a fart in a sermon. However, that is comedy’s true power: to take something or someone down to size. The godfathers of satirical cartoons – James Gillray and William Hogarth – knew that. Marcel Duchamp’s best gags were a moustachioed Mona Lisa and a urinal in an art gallery, which combined mockery with incongruity. Sarah Lucas used humour to desexualise the male gaze, replacing a woman’s genitalia with a plucked chicken and her breasts with fried eggs. And David Shrigley, with his barbed whimsy, is often laugh-out-loud funny. It works the other way, too. Take a look at some of our best-loved TV comedy: Reeves and Mortimer is pure dadaism, The Mighty Boosh had a Rousseau-ish richness to it, while Terry Gilliam’s art stomped all over Monty Python. In standup, the relationship between the jokes and art is more subtle. An hour in Maria Bamford’s company is a positively cubist experience in its disjointedness, and Simon Munnery errs towards the abstract (see his routine about his act belonging somewhere between unfunny comedy and bad art). Now, today’s crop of standups are showing off their artistic chops, with an exhibition raising money for Mental Health UK. It is quite the showcase: behold Harry Hill’s take on Leonardo, and Josie Long’s comic strips and collages. Joe Lycett plays it for laughs with his painting of a baby with the slogan “Wear a condom”, while Eleanor Thom speaks about how art helps her cope with the “consistent pain” of endometriosis. But what do comedians themselves think about the relationship between humour and art? Here, five of the community’s more artistically minded members reveal all … The painting I’ve donated is a modern take on Leonardo da Vinci’s The Virgin of the Rocks, with Chris Tarrant, Phillip Schofield, Jeremy Clarkson and Piers Morgan. The ceramic figure [depicted in the centre] I got in the south of France. I got a bit obsessed with Tarrant at one point, when he had a messy divorce and was in the papers a lot. I just started painting him and got good at it. Art’s a big thing in my life. I started in the 90s when Hello! was a big thing; I would paint pictures of the people in the magazine and [the publication’s] recipes. I have a small building in my garden and most evenings I go out there. I bought this old school bench off eBay with a couple of vices on it and little cupboards underneath; it’s quite nostalgic. I mainly paint but increasingly I’ve been doing wood carving which is quite crude but I like it. To me, the paintings are quite serious. Obviously they’re superficially silly, but they meant something to me at the time I was painting them that goes beyond the silliness. Also, whatever you put out comedy-wise, there’s this filter of: “Does anyone else find it funny?” but with painting, I don’t give a shit what anyone thinks about it. There was one year in Edinburgh [at the festival], I was sharing a flat with Sean Lock. We would go out [after their shows] and get drunk, usually quite anxious and angry. But then I thought: “I can’t do this,” so I went and bought a painting-by-numbers of two dinosaurs fighting, and did that instead. It’s a difficult thing, that adrenaline after a show, but I find painting very therapeutic, just the process of sitting there and concentrating on something else. My artwork is a poem, written by me, turned into a beautiful artefact by my collaborator, Emily Juniper. Emily’s a genius and has an amazing eye. I sometimes photograph my poems and get obsessive about this and spend a lot of time squatting over them but it’s a bit demeaning to me and, actually, to photography. Handing them over to Emily is more dignified. I’m no art buff but I do have some art in my flat. There’s one great bit of art of a man in a waterlogged suit. I also have some nice Russian film posters, and some beautiful Chinese cigarette-advertising poster things. When I was in China a few years ago, I smoked some fags that tasted horrible but came in really beautiful packets. Those are now framed. Frame anything and it can look beautiful, in my experience. I don’t know if I would call my comedy shows artistic, but sometimes, when you have a clever person lighting it, there can be some nice moments. I think there definitely can be an intersection between comedy and art. The Office is funny but it also pulls away at something inside me more than a lot of Da Vinci’s stuff has done over the years. I love comedy when someone creates a world of their own with just words – like John Kearns; that is mindblowing. My painting is a self-portrait in the style of Picasso. I had to make it abstract as I’d never be able to do a real self-portrait. It was a really nice Sunday the day I painted it: it was raining outside, I set up in the living room, I put on Celebrity X Factor, and just painted for a few hours. I thought: “If this was my career I’d be so happy.” I like art that’s simple but feels kind of genius – like David Shrigley or David Hockney. I like things with bright colours [that] aren’t too stressful to look at, blues and yellows. That’s my very intellectual art review! I don’t really love looking at people on my walls; it’s like people are in your house. I think [US comedy-drama] Atlanta is a work of art. Certain directors have that eye where something is beautiful as well as funny. And it feels like it’s not just surface-level. Comedy can be quite stark. If you’re just making people laugh, that can be one-dimensional. You have to bring something artistic into it, so it’s working on another plane or is more complex. Making comedy is a privilege, so you should be doing something no one else can do. That’s when it feels like art; it’s a personal expression and it’s being done in a unique way. I’ve been trying to copy surrealist collages since I was a teenager, mainly to try and make my friends laugh. The best one I ever did is still mixing up a textbook on cathedral architecture and an annotated picture of the body’s organs. For me, the pleasure in doing art is the process. Sometimes cutting up and rearranging text is the funniest thing in the world because it feels so naughty. The musician Jeffrey Lewis is my inspiration when it comes to comics. He works them into his live shows and writes about all kinds of subjects and styles. When I started out telling stories on stage, I used to have big A2 comic books to illustrate. I only stopped because they were so heavy and I wanted to see if I could do standup with no props. Some comics are definitely “artistic” in what they do: Zoë Coombs Marr, Bryony Kimmings, Harry Hill. James Acaster has a very pure and artistic approach to his work but, God dammit, we are all artists as well as silly clowns! As for my favourite artists, I love Marc Chagall’s beautiful spirit and loving energy, and Dorothy Iannone is beautiful, loving and vibrant beyond belief. At home, we have a lot of really silly art: a picture of Simon and Garfunkel where one is saying: “Is this art?”; another one says, “Speaking!” – the comedian Caroline Mabey made it for a party about 15 years ago where everyone had to bring a painting. But my sister is the real artist in my family, and she drew a portrait of my daughter which has pride of place. I did Batman on the toilet for Big Night Out; we animated it for the show. I’ve done loads of superheroes having a dump, simply because that’s not what you expect them to be doing. I reckon he’s thinking about his life: “Is it really worth it, what I’m doing? I’m Bruce Wayne, I’ve got a big mansion, do I wanna be doing this?” I paint celebrities, too, but I don’t think of myself as a famous person, I’m detached from it all. I’ve only ever thought of myself as an onlooker. I really like the human body so I paint a lot of nudity; that comes from going to life classes. Basically, I like muscle formation but I also like Jimmy Tarbuck and taking the piss out of The X Factor. There’s not really a gap between my comedy and my art; it’s all the same thing. The comedy I do on TV came from me being at art school and seeing Gilbert and George films, thinking they were hilarious. I was trying to do that, a sketch version of art, and it ended up on TV. Comedy and art go hand in hand, even if it’s not laugh-out-loud. David Hockney, Peter Blake, [Jean-Michel] Basquiat, John Currin. I want that in my art, too; the way I allow myself into other people is with humour, so it comes out in my art. I’ve got notebooks of ideas but I tend to really keep things in my head. And when you have an idea, you have to act on it or it’ll drift away. I paint or sketch for two, three hours every day. It keeps me sane. Bob [Mortimer]’s painting is absolutely diabolical. Honestly, it’s like a six-year-old child. He did a drawing of a frog once for me on a train, and I laughed all the way from Birmingham to the capital. Art Is the Best Medicine is at Fiumano Clase, WC1, Friday 13 to 20 December