Leinster will qualify for the knockout stage if they defeat Northampton with a bonus point at the Aviva Stadium and Lyon come unstuck in Treviso. The Saints start the round second in the group but have made eight changes from the side that lost at home last weekend to the 2018 winners. Tom Wood leads the side on his 200th appearance for the club but Teimana Harrison, outstanding in defeat at Franklin’s Gardens, is among those rested as head coach Chris Boyd keeps an eye on the Premiership where his side are top. Leinster are without the injured Johnny Sexton and have recalled scrum-half Luke McGrath while the Ireland prop Tadhg Furlong starts at tighthead prop. Scott Fardy captains the side from the second row. Lyon, who secured their first Champions Cup last week, need to win in Italy to remain in contention for the last eight. Treviso v Lyon Saturday 12.45pm Leinster v Northampton Saturday 5.15pm A bonus-point victory for Exeter against Sale at Sandy Park on Sunday would take them through to the knockout stage after starting a Champions Cup campaign with three victories for the first time. They survived a Sale fightback last weekend and they have only once won back-to-back matches in the tournament, against the Scarlets seven years ago. They have twice in the last three seasons won away and lost at home at this stage, but with the Sharks making 10 changes – centre Sam James is the only survivor behind the scrum – another stumble looks unlikely. Glasgow welcome winless La Rochelle on Saturday needing two victories from their final three matches to secure second place. They have made an offer to the Fiji second row Leone Nakarawa, who was last week sacked by Racing 92, the club he left the Warriors for three years ago. Glasgow v La Rochelle Saturday 5.15pm Exeter v Sale Sunday 1pm Bath and Harlequins, regardless of how the latter got on at home to Ulster on Friday night, will finish the weekend in the bottom half of the group. Bath are still looking for their first victory and Clermont Auvergne is not known as a destination where pick-me-ups are often dispensed. They have made eight changes from the team that lost to the Top 14 side last week for Sunday’s return. Ruaridh McConnochie is the only one of their five England World Cup players on parade, although Sam Underhill is among the replacements. The wing Aled Brew makes his first start since receiving a red card against Northampton last month and Tom Ellis captains the side from the back row. The former Bath full-back Nick Abendanon is not in Clermont’s 23 with the New Zealand international Isaia Toeava starting at 15. Harlequins v Ulster Friday 7.45pm Clermont v Bath Sunday 3.15pm Saracens have recalled seven of their players who appeared in last month’s World Cup final for a match the holders need to win to have a chance of making the quarter-finals. Elliot Daly, Owen Farrell, the Vunipola brothers, Jamie George, Vincent Koch and George Kruis all start after being given last weekend off as Sarries rotate their squad having been docked 35 Premiership points for breaching salary cap regulations. Maro Itoje, who played in the 10-3 defeat at Thomond Park last weekend, is left out of the 23 and only three players remain in the team, Alex Lozowski, Nick Isiekwe and Ben Earl. With a trip to Ospreys, who fac Racing on Friday night, and Racing 92 at home to come, a win would put them on course for the last eight with Munster still to visit Paris. Racing v Ospreys Friday 7.45pm Saracens v Munster Saturday 3pm Gloucester start the round second in the group, but it looks like being one of the two that does not supply a runner-up to the quarter-finals, making their qualification unlikely. They secured their first victory of the campaign at home to Connacht last weekend, but head coach Johan Ackermann has made eight changes for the return in Galway with half-backs Danny Cipriani and Joe Simpson among the replacements along with Franco Mostert and Ben Morgan. Matt Banahan is at full-back, Billy Twelvetrees returns to the midfield for the second time in six matches and Todd Gleave makes his first start of the season at hooker. Connacht have switched the Ireland fly-half Jack Carty to full-back with Bundee Aki remaining in the midfield. Group leaders Toulouse are in Montpellier where a bonus point victory could leave them one point away from topping the pool. Connacht v Gloucester Saturday 12.45pm Montpellier v Toulouse Saturday 3pm