There’s nothing quite so effective at quashing the Christmas holiday spirit as the spectre of January exams. But if you get organised, plan your exam prep and follow our tips from revision experts, you’ll be ready to ace your tests while still making time for some all-important relaxing. Here are the best revision methods. One of the most effective ideas is to rewrite your notes and say things out loud, according to Carina Cunha of tutoring firm Crimson Education. “Rewriting your notes can help trigger your memory,” she says. “It can also help you organise the material better, making your notes easier to understand and absorb. It’s beneficial to then read them aloud – you are more likely to remember something this way than you would by reading the material in your head.” Sian Duffin, student support manager at Arden University, helps students deal with revision and exam stress. “Look at how effectively you are using your time,” she advises. “Figure out when you are most productive and plan your study around that – is it in the morning or at night? Is it for longer periods of time or short bursts with more breaks?” Revision guides often point to the morning as the most productive time for hitting the books but that isn’t always the case, according to Sophie Valentine, a science tutor at MyTutor. “Recent research has found that teenagers need between eight and 10 hours of sleep for their brain to be fully rested, compared to just seven hours for an adult. So it could be better to have a lie-in and be 100% ready to get started later in the day.” Make yourself a realistic revision timetable. There’s no point setting up a packed 7am-to-midnight learning schedule with a five-minute break for two meals: you’ll soon feel overwhelmed and give up. In my first year of uni, I used my old school timetable as a model for my revision time: it meant learning for 40-minute chunks, with regular breaks and an hour off for lunch, as well as time off in the afternoon to properly relax and get outside for some fresh air. Alternatively, there are lots of sample timetables to download online. Don’t forget to build in mini-rewards for each time you hit a target like learning a chapter of a textbook – I found chocolate to be a pretty useful learning incentive. “Diagrams work well when studying for anatomy or biology exams, and you are trying to memorise a process or a set of relationships,” says Cunha. The nature of revision means you’ll need to work solo some of the time, but partnering with a friend who works in a similar way to you can help you to reinforce learning and test each other. Sites like Quizlet can be useful: you can make your own flashcards, mini-tests and even games to help you to learn facts. You can also access some 300m study sets created by other students on topics stretching from film and graphic design to science, economics, and languages. Stick revision notes on your bathroom mirror, by the kettle, or near the loo. Not only does it give you lots of reminders, it can also help you in exams – you’ll think “Ah! The secretions of the liver ... that was on the mirror …’ Previous years’ exam papers are a brilliant resource, but Valentine warns students to avoid trying to anticipate which topics will come up. She explains: “It may well be possible to figure out patterns from past questions if you look long enough, but it’s definitely not the most effective way to spend revision time. Relying too heavily on clues can end up with students getting caught out in the exam hall.” Try an app like Offtime or another digital detoxers – it blocks texts and notifications, restricts access to apps and will even limit your phone usage.