“Viva life, viva the bicycle!” The chant fills the streets as around 150 participants on a 10-week bicycle-based environmental course cycle through Ciudad Bolivar, one of Bogotá’s most dangerous neighbourhoods. With ages ranged from seven to 75, and accompanied by a police escort, they are headed to Cerro Seco (or Dry Mountain), a nature reserve in the city’s hilly southern outskirts. As this city of 8 million residents continues to expand, the pressure increases to transform ecological zones into what some argue are short-sighted building projects. Campaigners say Cerro Seco is under threat from three powerful developers vying to build 14,000 houses. “Behind every ecosystem there is a story of struggle,” says Camilo Andrés Julio Vergara, the founder of Diplomado Ambiental en Bici (DAB), which uses bicycles to take participants to key nature zones in and around Colombia’s sprawling capital city, teach them about the environment and connect them to community groups fighting to protect these areas. Top: DAB founder Camilo Andrés Julio Vergara addresses a group Bogotá recently elected the Green Alliance party’s Claudia López as its first female and first openly gay mayor. She replaces urbanist and Bus Rapid Transit pioneer Enrique Peñalosa. DAB team members temporarily block roads to allow the group to whizz past. Camilo leads the way each week, words of encouragement and music – from salsa to reggaetón to Queen’s I Want to Ride my Bicycle – blast from the giant speaker lashed to the back of his bike. The rapidly spreading city of 8 million lies in the centre of a vast, moist savannah with some of the richest soil in the world Locals are unsure what to do as the procession passes through. There are bemused expressions, thumbs up, cars hooting and small children excitedly pointing from doorways. Bogotá is Latin America’s cycling capital with more than 10% of its residents using the bicycle as their preferred means of transport, yet many zones are seen as too dangerous to visit. “DAB gave me the opportunity to visit many places for the first time … and to travel without fear”, says 39-year-old social worker Margarita Aguirre. The group arrives at Humedal Jaboque, one of several humedales (wetlands) surrounding the city and one of nine ecological zones visited during the course. On this day, the bird song infused silence is broken by distant fighter jets flying over the 200-year anniversary celebrations of Colombia’s independence from Spanish colonial rule. During the 10-week course, participants cycle to key nature zones to learn about the environment. The course leaders also connect them to community groups fighting to protect these areas Before the Spanish arrived, Bogotá was the capital of the Muisca confederation, an ancient civilisation that rivalled the Aztecs, Incas and Mayans. The city lies in the centre of a vast, moist savannah with some of the richest soil in the world. Jaboque, meaning “place of abundance”, was Muisca farmland; ancient monoliths on the site also point to its use as a celestial observatory. Today the border of Humedal Jaboque is fringed by high new apartment blocks. “Businesses put the politicians into power”, says 32-year-old audio-visual producer Richard Gonzalez. “They are at war against nature.” Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram to join the discussion, catch up on our best stories or sign up for our weekly newsletter