In October 2018 I bought a £99 Activity Store experience voucher (spa day and afternoon tea for two) for my wife’s birthday from Argos. It was valid until 1 December this year. Last month she tried to use it on its website but was told that without the original receipt this was not possible. I had thrown it away – who keeps receipts from a year ago? I contacted the store directly (no help), then the helpline (five times; twice they promised to call back but never did), then I sent a registered letter to customer relations (which they never replied to). When I finally made contact, the main issue is still the need to produce the receipt. Because I paid cash it cannot be traced via bank or credit card. I was not supplied with an e-receipt. The catalogue number has changed so it cannot be traced that way. I was not told at the time of purchase I must keep the receipt as it was essential for booking the spa day. The voucher just states that the only thing needed to book is the activation number printed on it, which, of course, we have (why can’t Argos trace the transaction using this code?). I’m left almost £100 out of pocket and my wife has threatened to leave me (joke!). PG, Crowborough, East Sussex These vouchers are on sale at numerous retailers, including Morrisons and Marks & Spencer, as well as Argos, now owned by Sainsbury’s. The company promises over 1,000 gift experiences from just £10. However, when things go wrong, it becomes rather complicated as it means Argos is acting as an agent for (The) Activity Superstore Ltd which issues the voucher. We note online that others have complained of difficulties making contact with the company. Fortunately Argos/Sainsbury’s stepped in quickly to sort this out after we made contact. Sainsbury’s says: “We have apologised to PG for his experience and arranged a replacement voucher.” This underlines the importance of getting a receipt if you pay cash. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions