There are panel shows galore tonight, and Pointless’s Richard Osman hosts the most ambitious of all, assessing the best of the decade in the five categories of film, television show, song, celebrity and “new thing”. Celebrity guests who will be arguing out their top choices include Jon Richardson, Lorraine Kelly, Alex Brooker and Rhianna Dhillon, while viewers can have their own say via a Twitter poll in the run-up to the show. Will Malala win celebrity of the decade, or will it be Kanye West? Ammar Kalia The former Hollyoaks star Bronagh Waugh, the comedian Darren Harriott, the actor and anti-bullying campaigner Adam Pearson and the documentary-maker Riyadh Khalaf take on John Humphreys and the black chair of doom. Who will triumph … and who will just squeal “pass!” repeatedly? Hannah J Davies Celebrity alumni gather for this yearly test of wits, hosted by question-master Jeremy Paxman. It’s Royal Holloway v Sussex universities this time around and the contestants include the likes of the ceramics designer Emma Bridgewater and BBC correspondent Mark D’Arcy. AK An hour-long documentary celebrating half a century of the BBC’s lightly amusing sports quiz, with celebrity fans praising its longevity and both current and former participants sharing behind-the-scenes gossip. Sue Barker, the host for more than 20 years, is, of course, interviewed. Jack Seale It feels as though an unusually high number of musical icons died in the past decade, and if you need a macabre refresher, this one-off documentary takes us through the lives and performances of everyone from George Michael to Whitney Houston, David Bowie and Amy Winehouse. A sombre reflection. AK While it might not have personally opened the gates of our current hell, the programme certainly got the keys cut. Paul Merton and Ian Hislop will be looking back on one of the most chaotic years in modern British history in a compilation show that is sure to be dominated by more than one B word. Ali Catterall Raiders of the Lost Ark, 1.25pm, BBC OneFirst, fastest and funniest of the Indiana Jones movies, with Harrison Ford’s indestructible archaeologist chasing pell-mell from Nepal to Cairo with bickering partner Karen Allen to whip the Ark of the Covenant from under Nazi noses. A tremendous, classic Steven Spielberg romp. Paul Howlett Premiership Rugby Union: Bristol Bears v Wasps, 7pm, BT Sport 1. The seventh-round match. Scottish Championship Football: Dundee United v Dundee, 7.15pm, BT Sport 2. Second-tier Scottish league match from Tannadice. NBA: Atlanta Hawks v Milwaukee Bucks, 12.30am, Sky Sports Main Event. Eastern Conference clash.