It’s going to be party time in 2022, apparently. The government, I hear, is lining up Martin Green, who ran the very successful Hull City of Culture during 2017, to take charge of a four nations arts extravaganza with a budget of £120m. Our beloved leader, who likes to emphasise that he is not just PM but also minister for the union, wants a festival of the UK. Anybody would think that threats of Scottish independence and a united Ireland were in the ether…? The 2022 Festival of the UK will be centred in Birmingham, which will also be hosting the Commonwealth Games, while the BBC, which will be celebrating (or commiserating) its centenary, will play its role with a raft of relevant programmes. (And hopefully not dancing to the tune of the government to appease those demanding its funding be switched to subscription.) I’m in two minds about this cultural cornucopia. Good that the arts, design and creative industries will, Heineken-like, reach parts often starved. It worked before with Liverpool, European Capital of Culture in 2008, whose legacy is still lasting, and with Hull, though Derry has not fared so well after being City of Culture in 2013. My problem with this plan, aside from the danger of this government making it into a union flag-waving, post-Brexit jamboree, is its very vastness and non-specificity. The whole of the UK? What’s the uniting force, arts-wise? The National Portrait Gallery will itself be reaching out from mid-2020 until 2023, loaning about 300 works a year to galleries and museums, hospitals and schools. The reason for such largesse is that the NPG will be closed during this period for a massive refurbishment. Still, it’s good to make these loans to places such as Bath, Newcastle, Edinburgh, and Belfast, as well as to National Trust properties. It will also be lending portraits of noted people to the towns with which they are most associated – like one of Meera Syal, who hails from the Black Country and who will visit Wolverhampton Art Gallery to see her portrait; or Florence Nightingale, whose picture will go to Derby’s museum as her family came from nearby. I hear that about 400 NPG members have cancelled their annual subscriptions since the closure was announced in early November. About 1,250 have renewed though, presumably lured by the offer of a three-year membership for the cost of one. This will give them free or reduced price entry into some regional museums where the loans are heading. And before the NPG closes in June next year, the gallery will bow out with exhibitions of David Hockney drawings and Cecil Beaton’s photos of his Bright Young Things. Some exit. Do watch The Trial of Christine Keeler, a six-part series on BBC One about the girlfriend of Tory politician John Profumo, starting on 29 December. Starring Sophie Cookson as Keeler and Ellie Bamber as Mandy Rice-Davies it is written by Amanda Coe, directed by Andrea Harkin, and has two female producers. This extraordinary 1960s story has previously centred on the men - Profumo in the movie Scandal, and then the pimping osteopath Stephen Ward in the eponymous 2013 musical. A welcome post- #MeToo take.