A 16th-century painting of a nativity scene has been discovered beneath another work of art by experts assessing its deterioration. Outlines of a baby in a manger, angels with haloes, and what appears to be one of the wise men in a stable, were uncovered behind a 400-year-old depiction of the beheading of Saint John the Baptist at The Bowes Museum in County Durham. Art conservators from Northumbria University had originally conducted an x-ray analysis on the painting to find out what was causing damage to the wooden panel the canvas is stretched over. Nicky Grimaldi, a senior lecturer in conservation of fine art at the university, said such a discovery was unusual. “Incredibly we can see lines over the x-ray image which we believe to be preparatory drawings, showing where the painting was probably copied from an original drawing [cartoon],” she added. “Those lines were subsequently filled with another paint layer such as lead white, which allows them to be visible on the x-ray.” The painting in its present form was acquired by the museum’s founders, John and Joséphine Bowes, in the 19th century and is thought to have formed part of a larger altar piece. The wooden panel will need careful restoration and a forensic scientist will examine it further in order to determine its age, background and history. Dr Jane Whittaker, the museum’s head of collections, said: “We’re simply delighted and astounded to discover that this 16th-century work was hiding such a wonderful secret and to find out at this time of year is really quite fortuitous.” Jon Old, a painting conservator who cleaned the picture two years ago, said he saw obvious markings when he removed varnish from the canvas. “I thought it would be a fun thing for the students to look into so we donated it to the university,” he added. “It’s quite a rare find. I only found out a month ago about the nativity scene, but it’s really quite fascinating.” It’s not the first time the university has hit the headlines after an interesting art discovery. In 2011, Grimaldi discovered that a portrait of Susanna Trevelyan by Thomas Gainsborough, which had hung in a Northumberland country house since 1761, could have been reworked by a rival.