Angela Merkel has for the first time visited the former Nazi German death camp of Auschwitz, site of one of the most notorious atrocities Adolf Hitler’s regime inflicted on Europe. The German chancellor also pledged a donation of €60m (£51m) towards a fund to conserve the physical remnants of the site of the barracks, watchtowers and personal items of those who died, such as shoes, spectacles and suitcases. Together, such objects endure as evidence of Nazi atrocities and as one of the world’s most recognisable symbols of humanity’s capacity for evil. But they are deteriorating under the strain of time and mass tourism, prompting a long-term conservation effort. The donation to the Auschwitz Foundation comes in addition to the €60m provided by Germany when the fund launched a decade ago, according to the Auschwitz-Birkenau state museum. That makes Germany by far the most generous of 38 countries that have contributed to the fund. As with the earlier donation, half comes from the federal government and half from the German states, an acknowledgement of the nation’s responsibility. Since becoming chancellor in 2005, Merkel has paid her respects at other Nazi concentration camps, and she has been five times to Israel’s Holocaust museum and Yad Vashem memorial. Merkel was accompanied by the Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki. Poland’s foreign ministry called her visit “historic” in acknowledgement of the unique status Auschwitz has in the world’s collective memory. The ministry also noted it was only the third visit to the camp of an incumbent head of a German government. Helmut Kohl went there twice, in 1995 and 1989. Before him, Helmut Schmidt was the first ever to visit in 1977. Merkel has visited both Dachau – the first Nazi death camp – and Buchenwald, together with former US president Barack Obama, but never Auschwitz, until Friday.No official reason has been given as to why this is the first time in her 14 years in power that she is visiting the most notorious of the Nazi death camps. But speculation is rife in Berlin that she was keen to do so ahead of the possible collapse of her government, after repeated threats from the incoming new leadership of her junior coalition partner the Social Democrats to withdraw from government. A rise in the number of antisemitic attacks in Germany has led to pressure for her to take a symbolic stand, especially following a brutal attack in front of a synagogue in the central city of Halle two months ago, in which two people were murdered by an attacker claiming he was driven by antisemitic motives.Josef Schuster, the president of the Central Council of Jews in Germany, who is accompanying Merkel, along with Romani Rose, the chairman of the Central Council of German Sinti and Roma, said he welcomed her visit, calling it an “important signal at a time of a swing to the right” in Germany.“There is no other memorial site that so emphatically brings home the events of the Shoah than Auschwitz,” he said. Rose said that even 75 years after its liberation “the former Nazi death camp and the industrial mass murder that took place there still makes visitors shudder”. Schuster has repeatedly warned of the dangers of Alternative für Deutschland, the leading opposition in the Bundestag, one of whose figureheads, Björn Höcke, has called for Germans to make a “180-degree” turn in the way they perceive their culpability in the Holocaust, and referred to the Holocaust Memorial in Berlin as a “monument of shame”. A huge rise in the number of visitors from about 1 million five years ago to 2.15 million last year, has posed a particular challenge, the memorial´s director, Piotr Cywiński, told the Frankfurter Allgemeine newspaper, saying that visitors often tried to take home objects from the former death camp as souvenirs. Nazi forces killed an estimated 1.1 million people at the Auschwitz-Birkenau complex during their occupation of Poland during the second world war. Most of the victims were Jews transported from across Europe to be killed in gas chambers. Tens of thousands of other people were killed there too, including Poles, Soviet prisoners of war and Roma. The camp was liberated by the Soviet army on 27 January 1945.