As he walks through the Guardian offices in London, agreeing to selfies with the ever-growing line of people who have heard he is in the building, Ian Wright is back to his charismatic self. As he patiently flashes his signature golden-tooth grin over and over again, it is hard to imagine the irritable, sometimes sullen figure the former Arsenal striker cut on this year’s I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here! When the 56-year-old entered the jungle for the ITV reality show, he did so as one of the favourites. His happy-go-lucky manner and godlike popularity with many football fans put the broadcaster and football pundit in a strong position. But as the show progressed he became more morose and irascible – worn down by hunger, isolation from his family and clashes with certain camp mates. He was the fifth celebrity to be voted out. Now as he sits in one of the Guardian’s meeting rooms – relaxed, legs crossed, leaning back – he says the show’s producers had been chasing him for seven years. When he agreed (“They do pay you very well”) he expected the physical challenges: could he drink a glass of blended pig’s penis? (He could.) Could he swim through a crocodile-infested tunnel? (He could, just.) Could he keep calm in the presence of large spiders? (No.) What he wasn’t expecting was the mental challenge – an intense environment (hunger, arguments, isolation) and the stress of the challenges. “In hindsight, if I’m being totally honest, I probably wouldn’t have done it,” he says. Yet, he says, his time there was still a personal triumph because it showed him how far he had come. “The problems I’ve had since I was a child – that I’ve got a lot of help with – the impatience and the anger issues … I was quite pleased with the way I dealt with that in the end.” Wright has never been someone to shy away from his flaws. He sought professional help for his anger issues after an infamous incident in 1999 when he smashed up a referee’s dressing room after being sent off. In truth, though, Wright had been battling to control his anger long before he stepped on to a football pitch. Born in Woolwich, south London, Wright grew up on the Honor Oak estate in Brockley. He was raised by his mother and stepfather (his biological father left when he was about 18 months old), with his older brother, Maurice, an older stepbrother and a younger stepsister. It was a chaotic and oppressive childhood, he says. “I never had the kind of tactile love my missus and I give to my girls now,” he says. “Being hugged wasn’t something I remember happening a lot,” he says. Although he loved Maurice, he never bonded with his other siblings. His stepfather – who he has described as a weed-smoking, gambling womaniser – was cruel and neglectful to Wright (“He was rough with my mum and rough with all of us kids,” he told the Players’ Tribune), while his mother rarely showed him support or affection. Yet there was one adult who did take an interest in Wright’s early development: his teacher, Sydney Pigden. For a time, he was the only positive male role model in Wright’s life and would tell Wright to overcome the “red mist” by counting to 10 (“It always made me smile because, when I was young, it never worked”). He felt rejected, he says, by his family, but also by football clubs: Wright’s footballing career is notorious for its late start. “It was something I had to deal with from a very, very young age,” he says. “Rejected by a mum, stepfather, older brother, little sister … then you come out of the house and everybody talks about how good you are at football, but you get rejected by everybody you go for trial for.” It wasn’t until 1985 that Crystal Palace took a punt on Wright, then a 21-year-old striker playing for the Sunday league club Ten-em-Bee. He didn’t waste the opportunity. After becoming the club’s third-highest goalscorer he was bought by Arsenal in 1991 for £2.5m. Wright’s record on the pitch in the years that followed propelled him to the status of club legend, then national hero. He won numerous trophies with Arsenal and became its record scorer, with 185 goals (only beaten by Thierry Henry in 2005). As one Nike billboard slogan had it: “Behind every great goalkeeper there’s a ball from Ian Wright.” For Wright, the best year of his career was 1992, when he moved to Arsenal and won the golden boot (nicking it off his BBC pal Gary Lineker, no less). But the achievements, he says, were less important than the fact they were accomplished alongside the late David Rocastle, the childhood friend he grew up with (Rocastle is the reason Wright supported Arsenal in the first place). Rocastle developed non-Hodgkin lymphoma and died in 2001, aged 33. It was the first major bereavement Wright had experienced, and it devastated him. “I’ve not come to terms with his passing,” he says. “If we were in a place where the lighting was darker, you know, I can easily snap off into pure emotion. I can’t even speak. I think about him every day.” Rocastle’s wife and daughters are like family to Wright. “I will never come to terms with it because I’ll always feel that, at 33, one of the loveliest men in the world was taken and it was just so difficult to deal with,” he says. “My biggest arguments now are with God. Sometimes I believe, sometimes I don’t. I just ask him: ‘Why?’” Off the pitch for some of his years at Arsenal, things were less harmonious; his swift fame and commercial success (including the lucrative sponsorship from Nike) took its toll. “I got caught up with people who didn’t have my best interests at heart,” says Wright. “I got caught up with women who were using me. I got caught up with believing the hype, just because I was playing great football. You kind of get into this hedonistic mindset where you think everything’s just amazing, you could do anything you want, like you’re breathing different air.” In his 2016 book, A Life in Football: My Autobiography, Wright says of these years that he came to hate himself. Yet, he says, he cannot regret these experiences “because it shapes you” and he understands why he behaved the way he did. “When you grew up in a situation where the love wasn’t forthcoming, then all of a sudden, you get into a situation where you are successful and everybody loves you, you can get a little bit high on that.” “This is why counselling is so good,” he says. “You’re able to go back and let people know what you were going through, and you can only try to apologise and make people understand that you were just losing it.” The counselling also encouraged him to try to reconcile with his mother. “As time went by we spoke,” he says, slowly wringing his hands: “She said she had her own problems as well. Whatever her problems were I always wanted to find out, but she was never forthcoming. She didn’t want to speak about those things. I’m not going to put a spotlight on her. I learned to deal with it myself because at the end of the day, you can only heal yourself.” Wright has eight children – with ages ranging from nine to 38 – with four women. He has said he “fell into” fatherhood during his turbulent young adulthood, although Wright adopted his eldest child, the former professional footballer Shaun Wright-Phillips, when he was just 19 and Wright-Phillips was a baby. “If I didn’t have such a disturbing time with my stepfather, I probably wouldn’t have adopted Shaun to try to give him as much love as I could. I didn’t want any of my kids to not be loved, like how I felt.” Wright stopped playing football in 2000 (he moved from Arsenal to West Ham in 1998, with stints at Nottingham Forest, Celtic and Burnley afterwards), launching his own ITV chatshow, Friday Night’s All Wright, shortly before his retirement. The series saw him interview stars from Elton John to Mariah Carey, but today he says he wishes he had taken a different path. “I regret not doing [coaching] badges, and being too weak to say no. I didn’t need money.” He was advised, he says, that “management is really tough. ‘Why do you want to do that? Television’s waiting.’ And I listened. That’s the only thing I regret.” He has gone on to have a successful career in TV and radio, and is still a popular pundit on football shows including Match of the Day. But at first, he says, the reception was not what he had hoped for. “You should have seen some of the stuff they used to say: ‘He can’t finish a sentence. What’s he doing on there?’” says Wright. At the time, there were few black chatshow hosts on British TV and I ask whether he felt the strength of the criticism was because of his race. “I wouldn’t say just race,” says Wright, “but we know that in black culture when you’re younger, you’re told that you have to try twice as hard because you can’t give the establishment the opportunity to say: ‘Well, if you’d worked this hard, you would have been able to do it.’” We meet as racism in football is, once more, dominating the headlines, after a fan was accused of making monkey noises at the Manchester United player Fred during the recent Manchester derby. Wright is clear that racism at football matches needs to be dealt with more vigorously. “Everybody talks about education and we do need to educate young people, but when you look at the people who are racially abusing players now, they’re older people, so education is wasted on those people. Those people need to be punished severely so it can be a deterrent, so people will see that when you racially abuse someone in this ground you are out for life.” In the wake of the incident, Gary Neville suggested Boris Johnson had fuelled racism with his rhetoric. Although Wright doesn’t disagree, he’s not sure how helpful this is. “Boris Johnson may be involved in some way, just because it’s intrinsically linked with the things he says and what he does. But you can’t really point at one person.” As Neville’s comments highlight, football players past and present have become less afraid of making political statements in recent years. The week before the general election the Arsenal vice-captain Héctor Bellerín posted a tweet encouraging young people to vote. Then signed off with “#FuckBoris”. Many of the replies called on Bellerín to leave politics out of the game. “I can’t take people who just sit there pointing their finger [saying] Héctor Bellerín shouldn’t be saying that,” says Wright. “Football and politics are always linked. Why shouldn’t he, somebody who is affected by the government, have an opinion on Boris? “You want to see footballers have more of an opinion,” Wright insists. “Hector used his platform to ask young people to vote. To have a say in what happens in your country. Is that a bad thing? You can’t win.” Today Wright is happy, and keen to move on from – if not to forget – his early trauma. “Sometimes I get into moods and I think, well, what’s going on? Why do I feel like this? I’ve got everything that I need right now,” he says. “There’s a certain Ian that I need to let go of because I’m in a different phase, where it’s very good.”