Madeleines are essentially shell-shaped, so it makes sense to sandwich a pearl between them. Try using any small fruits for the pearl, to add a burst of refreshing flavour. Serves: 6 (12 madeleines) For the madeleine batter: 2 eggs100g caster sugar70g salted butter33g whole milk135g plain flour1 tsp baking powder1 tsp vanilla bean paste For the icing:200g icing sugar40-45g lemon juiceSprinkles of your choice For the glitter pearl:White fondant, edible glitter (alternatively, use small fruits – try sugared fresh cranberries or blueberries) Plus:Extra melted butter and plain flour to grease the madeleine tin To make the madeleine batter, put the eggs and sugar in a large bowl (ideally, that of a stand mixer) and whisk on high speed for about seven minutes. Meanwhile, melt the butter with very short bursts in the microwave so that it is liquid but not too hot. When the sugar and egg mixture is thick and holds a trail, pour in the milk, then sift in the flour and baking powder. Add the vanilla and whisk until just incorporated. Pour in the cooled melted butter, and whisk again until just combined. Do not overmix. Cover with cling film and place in the freezer for 30 minutes. Melt a little extra butter and use this to grease a madeleine tin. Sieve over a little flour, then hold upside down and tap the tray to get rid of the excess. Place the madeleine tin in the freezer, too. Heat the oven to 240C (220C fan)/475F/gas mark 9. Now start the icing. Whisk together the sugar and lemon juice until smooth and runny, but still opaque and able to coat the back of a spoon. Pour into a wide-brimmed cup, and cover with cling film. Spoon the madeleine mix into the prepared tin and tap gently. Place in the oven and immediately turn the temperature down to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas mark 7. Bake for 8-12 minutes or until the madeleines start to brown at the edges and are springy on top. Slide out of the tin and leave to cool completely on a wire rack. When the madeleines are cool, dip one by one into the lemon icing, and immediately cover with sprinkles. Leave to set on a wire rack. Meanwhile, make the glitter pearls by rolling white fondant into small balls, then rolling in edible glitter. When the icing is semi-set, sandwich a glitter pearl between two madeleine shells, using a little icing to adhere. The icing will take a little while to set in place, so poke a toothpick between the two shells to hold them together. You can remove it later.