VfL Wolfsburg’s Maximilian Arnold fired in a stoppage-time winner as they beat Borussia Mönchengladbach 2-1 on Sunday to send them dropping to second place in the Bundesliga after leading the title race for the last two months. The Wolves, in eighth place, showed no respect for Gladbach, who have been having their best season since their last title victory in 1977, and a shot from João Victor hit the post after four minutes. Two minutes after that Xaver Schlager fired them into the lead. Gladbach levelled with a Breel Embolo volley two minutes later and could have scored again early in the second half as Marcus Thuram and Alassane Pléa went close. Wolfsburg then hit the woodwork again before Arnold drilled in the winner in stoppage time. Gladbach drop to second in the standings on 31 points, with RB Leipzig on 33 after Saturday’s 3-0 win at Fortuna Düsseldorf. The champions Bayern Munich crushed Werder Bremen 6-1 to climb to fourth on 27, two behind Borussia Dortmund. In Serie A Cristiano Ronaldo scored twice to set yet another goalscoring landmark and help Juventus to a 3-1 home win over Udinese that sends them back to the top of the Serie A table. The in-form Ronaldo, who has five goals in his last four games, took his tally for the season to 11 in 19 appearances, becoming the only player in Europe’s top five leagues to hit double figures in all competitions in each of the last 15 seasons. The Portuguese forward struck twice in the first half before Leonardo Bonucci headed in Juve’s third on the stroke of half-time. Ignacio Pussetto scored a consolation for the visitors late in the game. “The most important thing was to win,” Ronaldo told Sky Sport Italia. “This is how we should play, with confidence. Individual performances aren’t what matters but the collective effort.” Lyon’s mediocre Ligue 1 season continued as they slumped to a 1-0 home defeat against Rennes on Sunday. Eduardo Camavinga scored the only goal from just inside the box with one minute left to lift Rennes up to fourth on 30 points from 17 games. Lyon, who have been at odds with some of their own fans recently despite qualifying for the Champions League last 16, slip down to eighth with 25 points from 18 matches.