Boris Johnson has put new laws promising higher NHS funding and longer sentencing for terrorists at the heart of his Queen’s speech, after winning a majority that ensures he can get his legislation through parliament. The prime minister’s programme for government is extremely similar to the Queen’s speech from October, but there were a few additions from the Conservative party’s election manifesto. The main new piece of legislation is an NHS funding bill that would enshrine in law a £33.9bn cash increase in funding by 2023-4, in what appears to be largely a symbolic move. A new counter-terrorism bill has also been added in the wake of the London Bridge terrorist attack. It would legislate for tougher sentences for serious terrorist offenders and a 14-year minimum term for the worst. It would also remove the option of early release for terrorists who receive an extended determinate sentence and move the earliest point for discretionary release from halfway to two-thirds of the way through sentence for terrorists who are deemed less dangerous. A third new element was the promise of “espionage legislation”, which would “provide the security services and law enforcement with the tools they need to disrupt hostile state activity”. The details were vague, but it suggested “modernising existing offences to deal more effectively with espionage” and “creating new offences to criminalise other harmful activity conducted by and on behalf of states”. Two other new bills include one that insists on a minimum level of service for the railways, which would prevent strikes bringing trains to a halt, and another on renting that would abolish no-fault evictions and introduce lifetime deposits. The Queen did not dress in formal robes and the ceremonial aspects were pared down, as the event had been quickly put together to make sure it happened before Christmas. It is also only a couple of months since the last Queen’s speech before the election. In his introduction to the new bills, Johnson claimed the legislative programme was designed to “move on” from Brexit and “focus on people’s priorities”, starting with the NHS and making streets safer. More than 30 bills have been proposed, of which a quarter relate to arrangements for the UK’s departure from the EU. This includes the crucial EU withdrawal bill that will ensure Johnson’s Brexit deal with Brussels is approved by parliament. The new Brexit deal is essentially the old Brexit deal with a new chapter on the protocol on Ireland and Northern Ireland and a few key tweaks to the political declaration. Here is a link to the full text. The backstop has essentially been replaced by a full stop whereby Northern Ireland remains aligned to the EU from the end of the transition period for at least four years. A change can only happen if it is voted on by the Stormont assembly. Stormont will have a key role in future Brexit arrangements. And if there is cross-community support to remain aligned to the EU rather than the UK the consent will hold for eight years. The arrangements in this deal will automatically kick in for a mandated four years if there is a breakdown in trade talks, so it remains a “backstop” but with a permanent tinge. That four-year period will start at the end of December 2020. Two months before the end of the four-year period, that is October 2024, Stormont will be asked to vote on whether to remain aligned to the EU in ways outlined by this deal or not. Under the deal, the UK and the EU are “underlining their firm commitment to no customs and regulatory checks or controls and related physical infrastructure at the border between Ireland and Northern Ireland”. The EU and the UK will aim for a zero-tariff deal with unlimited quotas. The entire UK, including Northern Ireland, will be free to sign trade deals. The line in the political declaration that “the United Kingdom will consider aligning with union rules in relevant areas” in any future trade talks has been ditched. Northern Ireland will remain legally in the UK customs territory but practically in the EU customs unions. There will therefore be no customs checks on the border but tariffs will be payable on certain commercial goods. No customs duties will be payable on “personal property” being transited from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. That protects online shopping and all items bought for personal rather than commercial use. Customs duties will be payable on goods imported from the UK for commercial use unless it can be demonstrated that the goods remain in Northern Ireland or are for personal use, as above. A system of rebates will allow importers to be reimbursed. The commitment to frictionless trade between Northern Ireland and Great Britain is restated. EU law on VAT will apply in Northern Ireland. The island of Ireland is considering a single market for electricity so homes in Northern Ireland can get their energy from a supplier in Northern Ireland or the republic. There were fears this could be disrupted by Brexit. Under the Johnson deal, the provisions of union law remain so nothing will change. This guarantees that the UK will remain in line with EU conventions on climate, environment and workers rights in a future trade agreement. Lisa O'Carroll Brexit correspondent Other key elements of a speech widely trailed in advance included further plans for tougher jail sentences and controversial proposals to oblige people to show photographic ID before they are allowed to vote. A new immigration bill would make EU citizens “subject to the same UK immigration controls as non-EU citizens”, thus ending free movement, and introduce an Australian-style points-based entry system, while another bill would update or replace EU regulations on financial markets. Aside from temporary work visas, such as the one-year version used by many young Britons and others to work in lower-skilled jobs such as agriculture and hospitality, Australia has a strictly capped limit for permanent migration of 160,000. Of these spaces, about a third are intended for those moving for family or humanitarian reasons, with the rest based on skilled migration. There are two types of permanent visa – people who are sponsored by a specific employer, and those who apply independently. Both routes require the applicant to accrue 65 points to move. Points comes from a range of factors, among them: Some critics of the Australian system argue it is a blunt tool, and that the strict points-based criteria can mask other skills and qualities. The cap can also cover a significant backlog in processing people. However the idea of introducing a similar system in the UK post-Brexit has been repeatedly floated by prominent Leave supporters like Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage. Peter Walker, political correspondent Eight bills outlined were devoted to law and order, reflecting the Tories’ election focus on crime and punishment – a direction that has prompted alarm from prison reform charities. Under one measure, violent and sexual offenders would serve a minimum of two-thirds of their sentence before becoming eligible to be released on licence, compared with half under current guidelines. Another would significantly increase the six-month maximum jail term for foreign offenders who returned to the UK in breach of deportation orders. On top of that, there will be a new review of the criminal justice system in an effort o improve “efficiency and effectiveness”, at a time when charities and unions are warning that the system is crumbling and desperately needs more funding. A series of other bills outlined by the Queen had either already been before parliament or had been discussed in depth, for example on domestic abuse, no-fault divorce, a measure to oblige restaurants and other businesses to pass on all tips to staff, and tougher regulations on fire safety in high-rise buildings in response to the Grenfell disaster. As Johnson walked from the Commons to the Lords to hear the Queen outline his programme, the outgoing Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, walked alongside him in silence. Responding to the speech, John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, said: “This is more pomp and ceremony – the second Queen’s speech in three months – from a government hopelessly out of touch with the needs and hopes of people in this country. “There is nothing new in this Queen’s speech for our NHS and public services, or people struggling this Christmas, except for strong suggestions that this government wants to slash regulations on its way to making the UK a Trump-supporting tax haven. “There is a woeful lack of ambition on regional investment and infrastructure – and Labour will continue to show up the government for what it is: a government for the few and not the many.”