From the collection Kin, Cinnamon Press, 2018 On the night of the votethunder boomed across the city,its echo crumbling into the distance. I slept badly, wokenby livid flashes of light,nagging dreams and premonitions. We don’t believe in portents anymorebut maybe, just this once,the lie was so enormous it shook the old gods from their slumber. From Black Cotton, published in Sussex by Waterloo Press, 2019 (seathepoet.com) just here to TAKEYOUR jobs just here to CLAIMYOUR benefits just here to RAPEYOUR women just here to NURSEYOUR folks just here to RAISEYOUR children just here to HARVESTYOUR food just here to REPLACEYOUR neighbours just here to TOLERATEYOUR hatred just here to RUINYOUR language just here to BLEEDon YOUR streets From Carol Ann Duffy’s most recent collection Sincerity, Picador Poetry, 2018 They rise above us, the ex-ministers,in private jets, left wing, right wing, drop lowto Beijing, Kuwait, the Congo, Kazakhstan;their deals and contracts in the old red boxes,for sentimental reasons. Beyond our shores,they float on superyachts, Nostrovia!, guests of the mortal gods; the vague moon a bitcoin.We are nothing to them now; lemmingsgoing over the white cliffs of Dover. And when they are here, they are unseen; chauffeured in blacked-out cars to the bars in the heavens – far, glittering shards – to look down                             on our lucrative democracy. Though they have bought the same face,so they will know each other. Both the following Andrew McMillan poems were written for the Guardian Do open the shutter of the bedroom so that more light may enter – Goethe it’s an unusually-busy nightfor the ambulances         so I checkthat you’re still lucid    and then get toldto call a taxi to A&E which is unusually busyfor a weeknight    at 7pmand so we wait     for hours     get usheredinto the unusual brightness of the triage room     and then back outto wait again    as your body attemptsto come to terms with what's inside of itand they decide it's best to send you home until the vomiting beginsbut the hospital wards are fullunusually overstretched with bodiesof the dying and the not-today-dying so you are taken to a roomwhere an old man is crying out in his sleepand a curtain is drawn between youI sleep on the tiled floor like a dog at your bedside               at 5am an orderlycomes to take you to a ward    and thoughit isn’t yet visiting hoursunusually    they allow me to stay for a while               a text comes through from homethat in the night our new niece arrivedinto the world   so much life arrivingevery day    too bright    too bright     I let you sleep  “Floods have the potential to cause fatalities, displacement of people and damage to the environment, to severely compromise economic development and to undermine the economic activities of the European Community”: Directive 2007/60/EC of the European Parliament sometimes the world untucks itself    goes feralgives us rain     a month’s worth in a single hourstress fracture     the dwellings built beneath the dammust be evacuated        the structure must beemptied to a stable level     people work all night with pumps and ropes     with the precisionof surgeons         all night the rain hacks downin short bursts     like an incessant cough     the dambuckles     permanently on the edge of failuresome people still refuse removal     hold tight inside their muggy living rooms     here’s the thingmister presenter-of-the-local-newshere’s the thing     I’m staying put     I’m waitingfor the clouds     or else that dam     or else myself                                                                                       to break * President Erdogan has repeated his threat that Turkey will “open the (flood)gates” for migration into the European Union.  Both poems from Vidyan Ravinthiran’s The Million-petalled Flower of Being Here, Bloodaxe Books, 2019 At Durham station we glance from face to face,guess how each voted. Lateryou see a white man square up to a brown, passit on and ask should I have mentioned that?It seems to me my Facebook friends down south are madat finding themselves, all of a sudden, a minorityin their own country. Their conventional snobberiesconcerning where I live are of a piecewith isms they’d disclaim. You work for the universityalongside women who did not go to university,who hail from Pity Me and Killhopeand would Leave. All our talk now has this shape:at lunch a colleague tells me of her motherwho always orders food she cannot bear. How to speak the name – the trocheeor iamb – of the coolest man I’d ever met;who wore, in the Tunisian heat, a pale-gold, glittering suit?The translator sat between Faraj and meon the gorgeous balcony, where the flies were fewer.Stumped smiles, gestures, recognition. Farajwas Libyan. Militia rule; rocket firediverted his flight to Tripoli. But I was thereto English his poems of love-struck, ironical passionin which none of this appeared. I couldn’t helpbut lend each perfumed, elusive loveryour ached-for silhouette … Carefully, after an explanation,he put into Arabic my small poem about small people: repressionand fear in the country of Nigel Farage. Both poems from John Hewitt: Selected Poems (eds Michael Longley and Frank Ormsby), Blackstaff Press, 2007 At the frontier the long train slows to a stop:small men in uniform drift down the corridor,thumb passports, or withdraw for consultation;the customs officers chalk the bags and leave us to shut them. We pass here into another allegiance,expect new postage stamps, new prices, manifestos,and brace ourselves for the change. But the landscape does not alter;we had already entered these mountains an hour ago. Your famous city stood, plucked out of time,a dream-pavilion set in porcelain,where the masked dancers paced in stately mimewith grace no later age can now attain.Then towards disaster all seemed swiftly drawn,your cruel firestorm fuelling men’s fears,to shards all shattered, all those dancers gone,in the dark Europe of my middle years. But now that darkness breaks, and I have stood,shoulderd with thousands in your Altmarkt Square,to swear my silent oath of brotherhood,and join my lonely prayer to your vast prayerthat by the common will of common menno war shall ever darken day again. From Elaine Feinstein’s collection The Clinic, Memory, Carcanet Press, 2017 The light is sullen today, yet people arebustling in the rainy street under my window, poking in the Cypriot grocers for aubergines,buying their strings of garlic and onions; they can choose between the many seeds onthe bread: rye, sesame, cumin. Across the road, the pharmacy windowsare lettered in brass like a Victorian shop. In the coffee house with its heavy green and goldpottery, they serve bean soup with sausages and the accents of old Vienna minglewith California. In the countryside every one of us would be found peculiar.We’d leak away. In Englands Lane (through road for taxis and the Camden hoppa)this city music and a few friends keep me sane. From View With a Grain of Sand, Selected Poems, Faber, 1996, translated by Stanisław Barańczak and Clare Cavanagh Oh, the leaky boundaries of man-made states!How many clouds float past them with impunity;how much desert sand shifts from one land to another;how many mountain pebbles tumble onto foreign soilin provocative hops! Need I mention every single bird that flies in the face of frontiersor alights on the roadblock at the border?A humble robin—still, its tail resides abroadwhile its beak stays home. If that weren’t enough, it won’t stop bobbing! Among innumerable insects, I’ll single out only the antbetween the border guard’s left and right boots,blithely ignoring the questions “Where from?” and “Where to?” Oh, to register in detail, at a glance, the chaosprevailing on every continent!Isn’t that a privet on the far banksmuggling its hundred-thousandth leaf across the river?And who but the octopus, with impudent long arms,would disrupt the sacred bounds of territorial waters? And how can we talk of order overallwhen the very placement of the starsleaves us doubting just what shines for whom? Not to speak of the fog’s reprehensible drifting!And dust blowing all over the steppesas if they hadn’t been partitioned!Or voices coasting on obliging airwaves,that conspiratorial squeaking, those indecipherable mutters! Only what is human can truly be foreign.The rest is mixed vegetation, subversive moles, and wind.