In 2019, I spent a lot of time waiting for a buzzer, in vast, open spaces and sometimes next to carefully commissioned graffiti, where a bowl of curried cabbage or an egg sarnie plus a bottle of pop costs £12 – sorry, that’s a yoga fire vegan curry or an egg sando. The names are alluring, the prices hysterical: welcome to the world of the food hall. An industry bigwig recently told me that the demise of actual restaurants will not be down to Brexit, but to the Generation Z attitude that pledging loyalty to a particular place that serves a three-course, sit-down menu is a quaint, vintage notion. Newness is all. Creating fresh memories, and social media content, around eating is now crucial to our self-worth, apparently. “Why would you open a restaurant if you could open a bubble waffle stand that dished out amazing-looking cheap carbs at nine quid a throw? And when your clientele have all taken a photo of that, you can just start making something else.” “Because, because … people like proper chairs, cutlery, their regular dinner,” I spluttered, wriggling furiously in the grip of reason. “And they still want somewhere to go on dates or to take small kids?” “Grace,” she replied, “they are not dating in restaurants. And they are not having babies.” And with that I was silenced. Welcome to the era of the “incubation-focused mezzanine kitchen space”, enjoy the communal tables, bus your own food and then eat it sitting a metre away from the owner while he’s conducting HR appraisals. But if this is the final hurrah for traditional hospitality, then it’s going out on a terrific high. Over the past 12 months, I ate gnocchi at Bottega Caruso in Margate, a love-filled, family-run joint that made me giddy. A day trip to Folkestone was made wondrous by the 26-seat nirvana that is The Folkestone Wine Company, with its seafood, raspberry french toast and Appassimento Salento by the glass. I loved The Yan in Grasmere, where a trek through the mountains brings you to a delicious pit-stop that does Cumberland sausage sharing platters. In London, I spent numerous Sundays with the long-suffering Charles slurping belt noodles and nibbling wood ear fungus at Xi’an Biang Biang in Spitalfields. I still rate Wagamama, Itsu, Leon and Busaba highly. Don’t ask me to feign shock about the end of Jamie’s Italian, Prezzo or Levi Roots’ Caribbean Smokehouse. Britain in 2019 has some great casual dining: Nando’s is still a crowdpleaser, and the food at Brewdog is surprisingly good. Casual dining crunch be damned: the Big Mamma group, which has dazzled London with Gloria and Circolo Popolare, proved that an 11 quid margarita pizza and a silly cocktail served with panache in a meticulously styled palace of bric-a-brac will draw queues down the street nightly. That said, if casual isn’t your thing, 2019 also brought a plethora of places in which to burn money: Lucky Cat by Gordon Ramsay, The Betterment by Jason Atherton and Siren by Nathan Outlaw are all living proof that investors know there are still big bucks to be made at lunchtime. At Peter Sanchez-Iglesias’s Decimo, the small version of the tortilla with caviar costs £45, and at Arros QD, Quique Dacosta’s lobster paella is £85 for two. I filed 52 columns this year, and ate out at least 150 times; the ticker-tape parade of restaurant receipts that I loosely term an office tells a story of how easy it is in Great Britain to spend £225 on dinner for two and still walk away with a virtually empty belly. Oh, your ears will be full to the brim of each dish’s description and of tales of the chef’s commitment to banning clingfilm or importing veg – and did you know he is currently making his own plates out of reclaimed tampon inner tubes? Or that this is a woman-only kitchen crew, and the pastry chef made the croquembouche while literally pumping her own breasts? This was a year when it was vital that the cognoscenti thought very deeply about our dinners. And I do – but sometimes I just can’t be bothered, which is why my favourite meal of 2019 was at Darby’s, a Robin Gill restaurant tucked behind the brand new US embassy in Vauxhall. They’re fancy and Irish; they do Guinness, chablis, oysters, lobster brioche rolls and seriously buttery mash. They serve brown butter waffles with smoked salmon and cultured cream, and truffled baron bigod cheese with fig and walnut sourdough. I certainly didn’t have any big, deep thoughts about anything when I waddled out of Darby’s. Pass the Gaviscon, here’s to 2020.