Arts organisations will for the first time have to provide data on the socio-economic background of employees as a step towards tackling working class gaps in their workforce. Officials at Arts Council England (ACE) said it would start monitoring for the first time next year, adding to the data it collects around gender, ethnicity and disability. Concern is regularly voiced that the arts is dominated by people from better off backgrounds. A Labour party report in 2017 called it a class “crisis” and quoted actor Cush Jumbo, a star of The Good Fight and next year Hamlet at the Young Vic. She recalled nearly leaving drama school in her first year “because I felt so uncomfortable, so working class. “I remember being told by the teacher who I was studying received pronunciation with that my accent was lazy, that south Londoners had lazy mouths and lazy accents,” she said. Maxine Peake has also spoken about the class prejudice she has experienced in the industry, revealing the pressure she was under to sound more posh in the first series of the BBC One barrister drama Silk. A report titled Panic last year estimated that only 12.4% of people working in film, TV and radio had working class origins. For publishing the figure was 12.6% and for music, performing and visual arts it was 18.2%. Simon Mellor, ACE’s deputy chief executive, said there was “a growing body of evidence that people from lower socio-economic backgrounds are under-represented in publicly funded culture”. That was “a significant concern” he said. Gathering better data was an “an important step in understanding the scale of the problem and helping us to consider what steps we can all take to challenge the barriers that people face in entering and progressing in our industry.” From next year people who work for ACE’s national portfolio organisations, will be asked: “Thinking back to when you were aged about 14, which best describes the sort of work the main/highest income earner in your household did in their main job?” Abid Hussain, ACE’s director of diversity, said research had been carried out to alight on the most appropriate question. “It has taken a bit of time to develop and get it right but we are quite excited that it’s going to be a question that people will have interest in responding to.” He hopes to start publishing socio-economic data in ACE’s annual diversity report in 2021.