The NHS is warning those making new year resolutions not to fall for “quick fix” diets and fads that boast of taking the pain out of getting slim and fit but are too good to be true. Prof Stephen Powis, the national medical director of NHS England, said he applauded the intent to get in shape, but that diet pills, “tea-toxes” and appetite suppressant products, sometimes endorsed by celebrities, are at best ineffective and at worst can be harmful. Tea-tox diets involve drinking specific types of herbal tea throughout the day, sometimes along with a change in the foods people eat. It is claimed that they “detox” the body and help weight loss. Experts say, however, that the body has its own detox mechanisms, such as the liver and kidneys, which are constantly working to expel toxins. Some of the herbal teas have been found to include senna, a laxative. Earlier in the year, concerns were expressed about celebrities endorsing misleading weight loss and “get fit quick” products online. The furore led Instagram and Facebook to take action, changing their rules to block some advertising from under-18s and take down claims for “miraculous” weight loss products. The move was welcomed by the actor Jameela Jamil, who runs a body positivity campaign and has criticised celebrities such as the Kardashians for promoting supplements and “detox” teas containing laxatives. Powis said the “quick fix” products played on young people’s anxieties. One in four say their appearance is their top concern. “It’s always a good time to try to get in shape, and new year’s resolutions are a great time to make a change, but the reality is there’s a slim chance of success with diet pills and detox teas – and people could end up doing more harm than good,” he said. Products promoted for rapid weight loss by curbing the appetite while reducing fatigue can have damaging side effects including diarrhoea and heart problems, said NHS England. They can also interfere with the contraceptive pill, potentially leading to unplanned pregnancies. Powis urged people to lose weight gradually and look after their health, pointing to the online resources the NHS offers to help with weight loss, cutting down on drinking, quitting smoking, getting more active and eating more fruit and vegetables. “Making new year goals and shifting a few excess pounds after Christmas can be a good idea but is much easier to maintain when done gradually and safely,” he said. “Alongside cutting-edge treatments and improved access to care, the NHS long-term plan is helping people to stay in control of their own health, including the revolutionary diabetes prevention programme which helps people to lose weight safely, while nhs.uk has helpful tips, including a 12-week weight loss plan, alongside recommended apps to help boost fitness.” The British Dietetic Association runs regular assessments of celebrity-endorsed diet fads, which are often featured on the NHS website. In its latest roundup, published this month, it identified some of “the wildest diet fads … this past year so you can be sure to avoid them in 2020”. They include: • IV drips, backed by the singer Rihanna and the model Chrissy Teigen. These are intravenous drips delivering vitamins, which are supposed to burn fat as well as cure a hangover. The BDA pointed out that any IV insertion carried a risk of infection and blood clots, especially in unqualified hands – and that it’s possible to have too much of some vitamins. • Beyoncé’s 22-day diet. This is based on the premise that it takes 21 days to break with old eating habits. “If you had the skills and knowledge on how to eat a plant-based diet, then you could do this on your own, using your own recipes and adapting your current recipes, without the expense,” said Anna Daniels, a registered dietician, who observes that this vegan diet has been criticised for its unusual ingredients and preparation times. • Hair gummies. Members of the Kardashian family have promoted these “over-priced multivitamins” for luscious hair. “Another celeb, another false nutrition claim”, was the BDA’s observation.