Pakistan needed only 16 balls on the final morning to beat Sri Lanka by 263 runs in Karachi and complete their first Test series victory on home soil for 13 years. The 16-year-old Naseem Shah took five for 13 to become the second youngest player to take five wickets in a Test innings as the tourists, chasing 476, were dismissed for 212 in the second Test. His compatriot Nasim-ul-Ghani was four days younger when he took five for 116 against West Indies in Georgetown in 1958. Starting the day 212 for seven, Sri Lanka lost their last three wickets without adding to their overnight total. Naseem had Lasith Embuldeniya caught behind and Vishwa Fernando trapped lbw either side of Yasir Shah dismissing Oshada Fernando for 102. It was the first time Pakistan, having relocated to the United Arab Emirates owing to safety issues, won a Test series in their own country since beating West Indies in 2006. “Definitely we needed this performance. Special thanks to the Sri Lankan team and the Sri Lankan board from the bottom of our hearts” for touring Pakistan, the elated home captain Azhar Ali said at the presentation ceremony. “They probably don’t know how much happiness they have given us by playing here. It was a special series for us and boys played special cricket.” Abid Ali, who smashed a century in the drawn Rawalpindi Test and another in Karachi to finish the series as its top scorer, was adjudged player of the match as well as of the series. Abid was one of the four centurions in Pakistan’s second innings, only the second instance when each of the top four batsmen got a hundred in the same innings. The series held major significance for a host nation deprived of international cricket. Pakistan had been forced to play their home series mostly in the United Arab Emirates since 2009, when the bus carrying the Sri Lanka team was attacked by terrorists in Lahore. Six policemen and a driver escorting match officials were killed. Pakistan hosted Twenty20 and one-day matches but the Test series required a longer stay for Sri Lanka of around 15 days. The Sri Lanka captain, Dimuth Karunaratne, praised the level of security and promised to return. “It was 200%,” Karunaratne said of the security. “Really good. They were like fathers for us. They kept talking to us and they were right behind us every time. “When we were going out to eat or something, they were there. We were feeling secure and safe here. They’ve done a really good job. Pakistan fans are really good – they kept supporting us. What I can say is that its really safe here and that all the other countries playing cricket – they can come and play Tests, T20s or one-dayers – its safe to play in Pakistan.”