When Arnold Schoenberg died in 1951, Ralph Vaughan Williams wrote that the composer “meant nothing to me – but as he apparently meant a lot to a lot of other people I daresay it is all my own fault.” To English composers working in the 1920s – such as Vaughan Williams, Herbert Howells and Gerald Finzi – the sounds of European modernism, and especially the 12-tone music of Schoenberg, Berg and Webern, came to symbolise disorder and chaos. Following the first world war, stability and reassurance, folksong and archaic modality, the refuge of unspoilt rural idylls, had become the prevalent direction of English music. Folksong earthed music in fundamental truths – the very same roots that Schoenberg’s atonality, apparently, weeded out. Vaughan Williams deserves respectful understanding. As an ambulance driver during the war, he had witnessed Europe at its most destructive. Flos Campi (Flower of the Field), his 1925 work for viola, chorus and chamber orchestra, was his shell-shocked memorial to the fallen. But, almost a century later, the instinctive suspicion within the UK’s mainstream classical music culture for central European music feels far less forgivable. On 11 December, the London Philharmonic’s Isle of Noises season plays its final concert at the Royal Festival Hall. The same evening, at the University of Westminster, the London contemporary music festival hits the midpoint of its latest season – and it’s hard to imagine two more radically divergent perspectives on music made in England. Isle of Noises, trailed as an “exploration of landmark classics of British music”, has been running throughout 2019, and has focused on the bucolic tonality of Elgar, Vaughan Williams, William Walton, Arnold Bax and George Butterworth. The LCMF has become noted as a jamboree of composed music, free improvisation, electronics and sound art, and on 12 December Cosey Fanni Tutti, late of Throbbing Gristle, will be sharing a programme with Michael Finnissy, a British composer who has engaged seriously with the experimental instincts of Europe. Since the 2016 Brexit referendum, the UK has suffered a collective breakdown over national identity and our relationship to Europe, and it should perhaps be no surprise to see the 48/52 divide reflected in our musical tastes. Timothy Walker, chief executive and artistic director of the LPO, has spoken positively of Brexit as a “disrupter”. Walker qualified his words by saying they should not be read as implicit support for Brexit, and he can programme whatever music he likes – but something about Isle of Noises hasn’t felt quite right in the current climate. This exploration of “British” music has (apart from Haydn, Handel, Sibelius and Shostakovich) been exclusively English, sending the message that the only “landmark” classics that matter are those preserving a narrow definition of what it is to be English. Any concert on a programme promising “English music” is unlikely to contain the modernist-minded Brian Ferneyhough or Harrison Birtwistle. The English Symphony Orchestra, led by conductor Kenneth Woods, specialises in reviving the great English symphony, typified by the tweedy, bygone scores of David Matthews. English music has solidified into a genre with unfortunate Rees-Moggian overtones that wishes away the totality of music created in England. Yes, English music is Elgar, Vaughan Williams and Walton. But music made in Britain is also Elisabeth Lutyens and Humphrey Searle, giving British music a shot in the arm in the 1950s by applying what they had learned from Schoenberg and Webern. English music is also Cornelius Cardew, working for Stockhausen and falling under the spell of John Cage; it is Jonathan Harvey assembling pieces at IRCAM, Pierre Boulez’s electronic music studio in Paris; it is Christopher Fox and Laurence Crane dealing with the aftermath of European experimentalism (and of Morton Feldman). When William Glock took over as controller of the BBC Proms in 1960, he attempted to redress Euroscepticism by placing Messiaen, Stockhausen, Nono, Boulez and Ligeti at the heart of his programmes. Conspiracies quickly spread. Glock, it was rumoured, maintained a blacklist of traditionally minded British composers, a myth that crumbles when confronted by the evidence: Glock included works by Lennox Berkeley, Alan Rawsthorne, Robert Simpson and Malcolm Arnold. He also embraced neglected Renaissance composers and even extended a Proms invitation to prog-rock group Soft Machine. Yet for all these sincere efforts to inform, educate and entertain, Glock, who died in 2000, is regularly criticised. Simon Heffer, writing about classical music in 2012, described him as a “narrow-minded snob”. In his 2009 book Ten Days that Changed the Nation: The Making of Modern Britain, Stephen Pollard posits the claim that Glock was responsible for “the death of classical music as a generalised cultural pursuit”. But Glock recognised music as an internationalist pursuit, and bequeathed a legacy of openness, on which events such as the LCMF have built. Wrap British music up in a blue passport if you like, but sound doesn’t care. It has freedom of movement across borders – and that is never going to change. • The London contemporary music festival runs until 15 December. The final event in the LPO’s Isle of Noises season is on 11 December in the Royal Festival Hall, London.