Tottenham showed their fortitude by withstanding a suffocating barrage from Wolves before powering to a scrappy victory, courtesy of a last-ditch winner from Jan Vertonghen. After two wonderful strikes from Lucas Moura and Adama Traoré and a frantic, physical to-and-fro by both teams in the dying moments, the Belgian grabbed the winner with a last-minute header in a game otherwise dominated by the home side. “It’s one of these victories where quality is not enough,” said a relieved José Mourinho. “If you’re not a team, a real team, in the real sense of what the word ‘team’ means, it’s impossible. They are very, very good. I tell that before the match, and I tell the same after the match.” Throughout his short tenure in north London Mourinho has pointed out the difficulty of sweeping into a team in the middle of the season and attempting to impart his methods with so little training time, and the enduring question mark has been just how he should configure his midfield pairing. Sunday seemed to reflect Mourinho making a decision for now as Eric Dier and Moussa Sissoko retained their places after Tottenham’s 5-0 obliteration of Burnley last week. This was the first time Tottenham have fielded an identical team in consecutive games since 2017 and it led to Dier giving one of his best defensive performances of the season to help keep Wolves at bay. Tottenham have been defined this season by the individual brilliance of their purring front four and this time it was Moura’s turn to take the attention with a gorgeous strike with just eight minutes gone. The away team had withstood an early spell of possession from Wolves, before seizing on a loose ball and breaking fast. Son Heung-min provided Tottenham with their first big chance, firing a left-footed shot from close range. Wolves’ keeper Rui Patrício was equal to the first shot, but Dier picked up the ball and immediately found Moura, who dribbled at the defence, left two defenders behind and then hammered the ball into the roof of the net. At a time when traditional top-four candidates Arsenal, Chelsea and Manchester United continue their journeys to rediscovering their identities of old, it is always striking how clear Nuno Espírito Santo’s Wolves team are in how they play their football. Their cohesion meant that they had the wherewithal to immediately shrug off that opening goal. They slowly grew into the game, powered by the quick passing of Rúben Neves and João Moutinho as Diogo Jota and Traoré blazed down the flanks. The chances quickly arrived and Wolves finished the first half with 61% of possession. The only thing they had to show for their efforts was bitter frustration. They simply picked up where they left off in the second half, moving forward in waves against the Tottenham defence. It was the best player on the pitch, Traoré, who wrestled the game level with a strike equal to Moura’s goal. Raul Jiménez threaded a trademark outside-of-the-boot pass to Traoré on the edge of the area, before the Spaniard glided forward and blasted the ball into the net. The goal sparked the game into life, with an isolated Harry Kane finding more of the ball and tumbling in the box, but shortly after his penalty claims were waved away, Paulo Gazzaniga made a brilliant reflex save from a powerful header by Romain Saïss. Then came Vertonghen. Wolves’ great form this season has been underlined by their historic 11-game unbeaten run, and it fell in such cruel fashion and against the run of play. The home team had played so well that Mourinho sighed deeply while discussing the pain that their players inflicted on him. But playing well is simply not enough and they will have to learn how to close off games if they want to remain in contention for the top four in five months’ time. Mourinho knows that as well as anyone, which is why his goal is always to convert his teams into winners. Stealing victory against one of the better teams in the Premier League this season seems like a good place to begin. “Sometimes football is strange,” said Mourinho. “It could have been the same game but without that goal Wolves would be one point ahead of us and we would not be so happy. “But a winning team starts with that mentality. This match is the perfect example of a match that only a team can win.”