I have been struck by how many emails, texts and, occasionally, even face-to-face messages I have received since news broke that the BBC was to broadcast a Worzel Gummidge reboot over Christmas. All of them shared a single theme: how much they hated Worzel Gummidge as children. Not the book – no one, including me, seems to have read the source material, written by Barbara Euphan Todd and picked as the very first story to be published by a young upstart imprint called Puffin Books in 1941. It is the series that inspired fear and loathing in a considerable percentage of the demographic at whom the 1979 production was aimed, including me. It was partly the light, dry, flutteriness of Jon Pertwee’s Worzel. He was so papery and insubstantial that I didn’t feel I could place any trust in him, even before I found out that he had interchangeable heads. Never trust a man with interchangeable heads, kids. This is a rule I have cleaved to ever since and it has served me well. Beyond that, I, and my compatriots, simply found the series indefinably creepy. One says his overriding memory is of Worzel always being too close to the camera and forever poking his overlong fingers in people’s chests. I am certainly not going back to check. Now I needn’t, ever. For we have a new Worzel, a better Worzel, a Worzel who will surely lodge in the hearts of everyone, even those who have carried scarecrow scars there for 40 years. It is Mackenzie Crook’s Worzel Gummidge, in all senses. He – of course, of course; it was his destiny – plays the birdscarer, in two hour-long adventures the actor has written himself. The first to air is The Scarecrow of Scatterbrook Farm in which John (Thierry Wickens, doing brilliant work in his debut performance) and his older sister Susan (India Brown, known as the excellent Lizzie in the adaptation of Jacqueline Wilson’s bestseller Hetty Feather) arrive from the city – as foster children, this time – for a stay with the Braithwaites. In pleasingly short order, they make the acquaintance of Worzel G. He has assumed they are fellow scarecrows because of how they are dressed. “Giveaway! Absolute triumph!” he tells them. “I know I’m a natty dresser, but I have never seen such a jumble of ill-fitting, oddball clothes so unfitted for the countryside!” He falls into a “sulk” – scarecrow speak for pretending to be lifeless whenever humans are around – but is coaxed out of it by the children’s offering of a cravat from a bag of clothes Mrs Braithwaite is giving to charity and by the urgency of “the weather situation”. The seasons are locked. Summer is going on too long; the trees aren’t turning, the birds aren’t flying south and the harvest isn’t ripening – and the Braithwaites will lose everything if they cannot bring in their crops soon. Worzel holds the key, but he can’t remember what it is. They visit Aunt Sally (Vicki Pepperdine, with a wonderful cracked wooden face befitting her status as a former fairground attraction, now housed in a local museum), who tells him he needs to find it and gather the scarecrows of Albion before the harvest moon the following night to help him unlock the weather. They travel to the Tree of Tree (the one through which all winds and breezes pass – it’s in a supermarket car park) so it can send a message to everyone, but it is clogged with plastic bags. A temporary truce with the crows is called and they pull the bags free and push them into recycling bins. Worzel finds the key, the scarecrows gather to turn it, and all is well. It is an absolutely gorgeous, joyful mix of jokes, plot-with-just-enough-jeopardy, eco-messagery – beyond the plastic bags, a world of eternal summer heat is, of course, our current greatest fear – and modern updates (the children trying to blow out the lights in their new room because they assume that, as they are in the country, they are oil lamps, is emblematic of the deftness of touch that characterises the whole thing). And it manages to stay rooted in something older, too – even older than the 70s series, children. There is something of the ancient wildwood spirit conjured as the scarecrows gather and dance under the harvest moon; something elemental is evoked, just lightly, just briefly, and you can feel folk memory rising. This is a Worzel for our time and maybe, just maybe, of all time too. And next up, on Friday night, there is Michael Palin as the Green Man. Surely, surely his destiny, too.