Name: Princess Anne. Age: 69. Appearance: Tireless, stalwart, cross. AKA: Anne, Princess Royal, KG, KT, GCVO, GCStJ, QSO, CD. Is there a cat walking across your keyboard? That is just her full array of orders and decorations, abbreviated. She is the Queen’s second child and the 14th in line to the British throne. But who is she, really? Besides the Queen, she is currently everyone’s favourite royal. More popular than Prince Andrew? By an ever-widening gulf. When did this happen? It is partly to do with actor Erin Doherty’s standout portrayal of the young Anne in series three of The Crown. She comes across well, then? “The most thrifty, feet-on-the-ground, low-profile, unpretentious royal we’ve got,” says Prince Philip in episode four. That really doesn’t sound like something he would say. Rest assured: he almost certainly never did. Exactly. This is all fiction. But the real Princess Anne has also emerged as an unlikely hero during Donald Trump’s visit to Britain, thanks to a video clip. Video, you say? In it, she is part of a conversation in which several world leaders seem to be sharing a laugh at Trump’s boorish indiscipline. At last, something that can unite a divided world: snobbery. Anne remains the hardest-working, most down-to-earth Windsor. Neither of her husbands accepted peerages and her children do not have titles. She consistently undertakes more royal engagements than the other royals. Including the Queen? Yes. Anne is involved with more than 200 charities and organisations. And she likes horses. She does indeed; to the extent that she made the British Olympic eventing team, competing in the Montreal games in 1976. She is definitely the only member of her immediate family to win BBC Sports Personality of the Year. Actually, she does sound rather super. She also survived a harrowing kidnapping attempt in 1974, when an assailant shot four people and ordered her from her limousine. What did she do? She said: “I haven’t got £2m” and got out of the other side. I think I want to hang out with her. She’s so refreshingly blunt! She doesn’t suffer fools gladly, that’s for sure. OK, forget it then. It’s probably for the best. Do say: “It wasn’t her, Donald! Someone else shouted: ‘Moron!’” Don’t say: “Careful, Ma’am: if the wind changes, your expression might stay that way.”