Since it’s the season of goodwill, let’s hear it for companies that got it right. Even John Lewis, whose failings have become a dismayingly common theme in my post bag: Our old dishwasher no longer worked when reinstalled in our new kitchen. Neither kitchen supplier, nor the installer, took responsibility, so we ordered a new dishwasher and installation from John Lewis. It identified a problem with the builders’ electric installation. It offered to take the new dishwasher back with a full refund or leave the new one with us. We opted for this. They removed the old one and fully refunded the installation charge the same day. NB, Wimbledon, London Having searched the Internet unsuccessfully for a replacement pruning saw blade, I contacted the makers, Spear & Jackson. My emails were answered within minutes and they sent me a new blade free of charge. PC, London A wheel on my mother-in-law’s suitcase had been damaged when she landed at Heathrow. We called the manufacturer, Samsonite, to ask if we could buy a new one and they sent a free replacement wheel, plus the tool needed to fit it, within 24 hours. No questions asked or how old it was (10 years at least). DM, Oxford We booked a four-night stay in Venice with EasyJet Holidays. When our return flight was cancelled due to an air traffic control strike, customer services organised a deluxe room for the two nights we were stranded, and made a generous contribution towards our expenses. When there was a problem with the shared water taxi back to the airport they funded a private transfer. A potential disaster turned into a pleasurable experience. JH, Lytham, Lancashire My daughter lost the stuff-sac for my Mountain Equipment sleeping bag, rendering it useless for compact packing. Mountain Equipment said it was sure it could find one. Two days later, three stuff-sacs plus a net storage bag arrived with no charge. My daughter has now been released from the Punishment Room. TB, March, Cambridgshire Thumbs up to Feel Good UK for the Bike Home Motorcycle Cover I bought six months ago. When I finally got around to opening the parcel, the fabric was faulty. I contacted the company, just to let them know, not expecting anything. They sent a new cover immediately! JL, Sompting, West Sussex An ad from Velux warned that a certain type of its window could shatter. Years ago, one of our own did just that and we replaced it out of our own pocket. We emailed Velux mentioning this and, although we had no receipts, within three days £199 was paid to our account. P&LE, Swansea If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions