New Zealand’s booming tourist industry is threatening to ruin its most popular landscapes and could see the country face the kind of overcrowding seen in cities such as Amsterdam, Venice and Barcelona, a new report has warned. International visitor numbers are approaching four million and could rise to 10–13 million every year by 2050, said the report by the parliamentary commissioner for the environment, Simon Upton. “The sheer numbers of people are eroding the sense of isolation, tranquillity and access to nature that many overseas tourists seek when visiting New Zealand,” Upton said. “We need to ask, are we in danger of killing the goose that laid the golden egg?” The report found that while “tourism is often seen as an environmentally benign form of economic development” this had led to the sector being “shielded from the scrutiny attached to other industries such as agriculture.” Increasing pressures from tourism have impacted six main areas, the report found: visitor density and loss of natural quiet, water quality degradation, solid waste generation and management, infrastructure development and landscape modification, biodiversity loss and biosecurity risk, and greenhouse gas emissions. The pressures were manifested in huge selfie-queues on mountain-tops, crowded roads and tramping huts, and people defecating on the side of roads, lakes or city parks. “We didn’t get to where we are overnight,” said Upton. “The phenomenon of crowded sites, crowded skies and crowded parking lots is the result of more than a century’s worth of promotional taxpayer subsidy.” Policies to mitigate the impact had been “insufficient”. The problems were worst at New Zealand’s best loved places such as Mount Cook, the Tongariro crossing and Mount Roy in the southern alps. Uptons said the industry’s growth was vulnerable because of the pressures it imposed on the landscape and environment – land that was quickly losing its sense of peace, and tranquility. Professor Regina Scheyvens, an expert in development studies at Massey University, said New Zealand had been immune to the problems of “overtourism” seen in Europe but that was no longer the case. “Current government policies of geographical and seasonal dispersal of visitors are a useful step in the right direction. In weighing up priorities, the wellbeing of our environmentally-blessed but economically challenged regions, including Northland and Westland, should be prioritised,” Scheyvens said. “Using the international visitor conservation and tourism levy to invest in these places, and the people living there, is critical.” Scheyvens said quotas would be needed to control numbers in the country’s most popular spots. Scheyvens also said Māori cultural knowledge should be better utilised by the industry, such as requiring every tourist boat on the Whanganui river – granted legal personhood in 2017 - have a local Māori guide onboard. Professor Michael Lueck, an expert in tourism at Auckland University of Technology, said the report was “desperately needed” and the nessecity for managing tourism numbers urgent. “It appears that the main problem is the sheer number of tourists, and we need to look at slowing this growth. The often cited ‘high-value tourism’, or ‘quality over quantity’ does not always work, but it would be fairly easy to, for example, limit the number of cruise ships coming into the country,” Lueck siaid. “These put a disproportional burden on New Zealand’s infrastructure, environment, and culture, while the economic benefits are comparatively small.” 