“I have not attempted to write what pretends to be a complete or comprehensive history of the oceans,” David Abulafia states in the preface to The Boundless Sea. As the book is over a thousand pages long, and is subtitled A Human History of the Oceans, the uninitiated reader, perhaps already wary at the prospect of the voyage to come, might wonder what a more comprehensive study could entail. Yet Abulafia steers us through the most surprising of waters. He has ventured into this territory before, in his award-winning 2011 history of the Mediterranean, The Great Sea. That book was thrillingly alive with stories of how Europe and Africa evolved through their seafaring history, but his new title is an even grander adventure, beginning with the Pacific Ocean in 176,000BC and coming (almost) to the present day. If it has a central theme, it is the way mankind has wrestled with the oceanic vastness to travel, trade and survive, and that our ends have been both noble and wicked. Clearly, Abulafia is fascinated by the endless, ever-shifting water, and cites an Aboriginal saying to the effect that “the sea is alive, like a person. So you must respect it.” It is the seamless melding of the personal and the universal that makes The Boundless Sea so compelling This is a book written with deep scholarship, but also with lightness and dexterity. One moment the reader is riveted by an account of the “North Sea Raiders”, the Viking pillagers who struck terror into northern Europe throughout the first centuries AD; the next, Abulafia is describing, with lyrical vibrancy, how the Irish saint Brendan – actually a composite of several people – had his adventures immortalised in the text the Navigatio Brendani. It is the seamless melding of the personal and the universal that makes The Boundless Sea so compelling, as the reader meets explorers, brigands, religious fanatics and adventurers. Of course, the human obsession with travelling the world is inextricably linked with colonialism and oppression. Abulafia notes, in his chapters on slavery: “Admitting that black rulers sold slaves to white merchants has not come easily to historians of the slave trade.” As far back as 1717, agents of the East India Company were being instructed to treat slaves humanely, reminded that “they are men”. And yet this apparent compassion was a simple reflection of commercial realities: a dead slave brought in no money; a live one could be exploited for decades to come. There are amusing observations: pirates, whether of the Caribbean or elsewhere, really did tie red cloths round their heads and drink bottle after bottle of rum; Columbus was disappointed, as well as entranced, to find naked natives on his travels, rather than the dog-headed horrors he had expected, and wrote in his logbook: “I have not found any monstrous men, as many expected; rather, they are all people of very beautiful appearance.” This book must be among the favourites of the year. It is rich, humorous and insightful, and Abulafia, emeritus professor of Mediterranean history at Cambridge, manages the art of letting his readers believe they are every bit as learned as he is for the happy days, or weeks, that reading this behemoth will take. This is a journey that few will want to end. • The Boundless Sea by David Abulafia is published by Allen Lane (£35). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15