Clubs are split over ditching the “loop” fixtures: some say they need the income, some who rent stadiums actually lose money every home game. It’s noticeable who is already shortening their season. While Leeds, Wakefield and Castleford played Boxing Day friendlies, Catalans, Toronto and Wigan don’t start until the third weekend of January – just a fortnight before the real thing. The stars of Warrington, Toronto, St Helens and Catalans are likely to play just one friendly each. Only Catalans are taking a pre-season game “on the road” – their clash with Toulouse will be in beautiful Carcassonne. Perhaps Super League should follow the NRL and force clubs to spread the word in pre-season. NRL teams are going to Rockhampton and Mudgee, Port Macquarie and Casey (it’s a Melbourne suburb, apparently), as well as to Papua New Guinea, Palmerston North and Rotorua. Bringing in England half-back Luke Gale from Castleford and exciting young Huddersfield hooker Kruise Leeming, Leeds have made a major show of intent to transform their attack. Gale partnered Robert Lui against Wakefield on Boxing Day. Leeming could make that a potentially thrilling triumvirate at the heart of a revitalised Rhinos in 2020. The amiable Salford coach pulled off a near miracle last season, taking the mix-and-match Red Devils to Old Trafford. But he has lost half that team and will have to start all over again. Another play-off season will rubber-stamp the former Wales half as one of the best coaches in the game. The former England boss has started with a blank sheet of paper, wiping Hull KR’s slate clean after a dismal 2019 and signing 20 new players. Getting them to click in a couple of months would be some achievement. Committing quickly to a new pairing from his four new half-backs will be key. With beIN Sports ending their league coverage, Dragons’ home games are unlikely to be shown here or in France. The club’s chairman, Bernard Guasch, thinks that may have a short-term positive impact on attendances but he is rightly worried about the lack of long-term exposure. Sky have committed to screening just one of their opening 14 games. The demise of the Catalans’ deal and Toronto’s promotion means Sky are only showing two British games most weekends in 2020 rather than three. The opening weekend, Easter and Magic will see almost every game televised, something common overseas but anathema on these isles. Warrington CEO Karl Fitzpatrick says Super League may ask for every game to be broadcast live in the next Sky deal. Unlikely. Sky love Super League on Thursday nights but it has often been bumped off Sky Sports Main Event on Friday night, meaning viewing figures crash. They still average a decent 120,000 (slightly less than Premiership union on BT) but that is with up to three Super League games being played at the same time. Saturday evening slots – especially in summer – remain wide open. The mix of experienced Super League talent, strong Championship players and Sonny Bill Williams may take time to gel. Williams should bring the right attributes if his interview with Jenna Brooks on Sky Sports is anything to go by. Entertaining, insightful, reflective, undeniably passionate and surprisingly amusing, he is a huge asset before he’s even stepped on to the training pitch. Adam Hills’ magnificent Take His Legs documentary was the most watched rugby league programme on British TV this year. PDRL is already at a stage where the involvement of able-bodied players is being questioned. Every Super League club should run a PDRL team by 2021. Whitehall’s commitment to Northern Powerhouse projects should help the Rugby League World Cup in 2021 and maybe we will see increased investment in Warrington, Wakefield, Leigh, Barrow, Dewsbury and Keighley – all of which turned from red to blue. Kicking off earlier and finishing in summer, rather than mapping the Super League season, would give the Championship two or three months to exploit a rugby league fanbase that can otherwise go five months without a competitive game to watch. The champions would also have time to recruit for the following season. The clue could be in the half-back recruitment. Leigh have brought Jarred Sammut’s Wigan frustration to a premature end, Tim Sheens has lured Matty Smith home from Catalans to lead his young Widnes side around, while London are giving an opportunity to Castleford’s Corey Aston. But the smart euros will be on Toulouse, who have hardly changed a squad that went close last season. Allowing up to 10 amateurs to register with a League One club’s reserves could be the first step towards ending the anachronistic split between clubs who pay a player £50 a game in League One and those who give him expenses and free drinks in a BARLA clubhouse bar. Credit to both London and Newcastle for running reserve and academy teams next season but that is going to severely stretch them. Expect to see more clubs follow Huddersfield in making their reserves a joint venture with dual-reg clubs Halifax and Hunslet. Avoiding school holidays and the August bank holiday weekend should help the attendance, and playing in football’s close-season should boost its profile. Wembley hosting Euro 2020 prevented an even earlier final but expect the final to be in June 2021 with compressed rounds or a pre-season start. The hugely respected TV presenter takes over from Tony Adams next summer but unlike Adams, Balding has a long history in the game and a large number of RL friends and major contacts. Shame that a deal with her main current employer BT Sport seems highly unlikely. Some pundits fear the addition of Warrington and Huddersfield to a league that already had a huge disparity in class between the top four and the bottom two will be detrimental to the game as a whole. But if more women start playing, it should be a positive in the long run. Former England international Gemma Walsh has left Wigan to finish her career playing alongside her wife Emily Rudge, St Helens’ Players’ Player of the Year and England captain. Saints were beaten in the semis of both cup and league by double-winners Leeds in 2019. Within a week I wept watching former Scotland union star Doddie Weir, New Orleans Saints’ hero Steve Gleason and then Rob Burrow on TV, all battling the dire impact of motor neurone disease soon after magnificent playing careers. The income from this column will be donated to Burrow’s fund so please share it if you can. Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook