Mizu is a pan-Asian restaurant in an expensive hotel in the north of the Lake District. It is also the Japanese word for water, which is something we have in abundance from late September to April, when living here requires tenacity. Daylight appears in ludicrously short bursts, all your clothes are damp, on radiators and/or smell of wet collie, and entertainment comes via observing the frequent rescue of tourists from Helvellyn, and eating. Restaurants, however, can be a problem. I’ll distil decades of lived experience into a small grunt: the reputable, forever-namechecked ones are usually fine-dining, once-in-a-lifetime joints, while the very good, hearty, jolly, family-friendly places are rare and, rightfully, always booked up. Well, either that or they shut at 3.30pm. This leaves a whole lot of substandard, this-will-do-they’re-only-tourists cash pits. The difference in hospitality between the Lakes and the relatively nearby Ribble Valley is notable. Mizu, which opened last year at the Lodore Falls Hotel & Spa, is most certainly plugging a gap in the Lakes, where authentic Japanese, Thai, Malaysian and Korean food is scarce: there are just a handful of Japanese places round these parts, though each town may have a small Cantonese. Temporary visitors won’t mind enjoying Cumberland sausage and Kendal mint cake instead – when in Rome, etc – but after an extended stay, it’s safe to say you will pine for sating, umami-drenched ramen, abrasive wasabi, soothing coconut, chilli, ginger or merely the culinary cuddle found in a handful of ajinomoto (MSG). With its offering of “Asian-inspired” dishes, Mizu is, apparently, the answer to all this. Its chef, Kasun Jayasooriya, worked at the highly reputable Sake No Hana on St James’ Street in London, yet his menu is a far cry from the agadashi nasu tofu and the zeeland yellowtail sashimi served in Mayfair. At Mizu, I order a plate of “Asian sausage”, imagining it to be a welcome rip-off of the rustic, northern Thai banger you get at Ben Chapman’s Kiln, teeming with kaffir lime, coriander root, galangal and lemongrass. Instead, I am sent a plate of pigs in blankets lying in a puddle of sesame sauce. And here all hope evaporates. The “sushi” is largely California rolls containing mayo or cream cheese, and none of it feels freshly, just-that-minute rolled. The menu section marked “sticks” – they mean yakitori – features chunks of sweet potato that give nothing of the grill, as well as prawns and pork belly. Mizu, with its katsu curry, gyoza, bao – just the buns, which you can order as a side – feels a bit like a Wagamama without any of the diligent service one expects from that chain (I took my gang to the branch at Newcastle Metro Centre last month, and we had a complete ball). There is not merely a fault in training at Mizu, but an absolute dearth of it. Other places in the Lakes that position themselves as luxurious include Simon Rogan’s L’Enclume, Forest Side in Grasmere and The Samling in Windermere, and, just for fun, I try to imagine Rogan dealing with everything that occurs at Mizu. We arrive for our 7.45pm table, but there’s no welcome at the door. Eventually, we’re pointed towards the sofas, to wait until they’re ready, “so the kitchen doesn’t get too busy”. Drinks are forgotten, tables go unwiped between courses, and no one seems to know very much about the menu. “Is this caviar?” I ask, pointing at a blob of roe balanced on some radish that comes with the breadcrumbed teriyaki lamb cutlet. “Spicy mayonnaise,” the server says. The “big plates” are better than the sushi and sticks, even if their presentation is flawed. “Steak & tempura” is an 8oz steak half marinated in dashi and half dipped in tempura (ie, battered). It is, quite frankly, bizarre. The lentil sauce in the Sri Lankan parippu fish curry is gorgeous, but a grey piece of pan-fried cod plopped skin side up on a beige sauce will not win any hearts on Instagram. Weirdly, however, Mizu makes an outstanding vanilla creme brulee, with a crunchy top and just the right amount of warm, sweet, pleasing give below its surface. But it also does a chocolate lava cake that claims to feature Japanese umeshu hot chocolate sauce, yet tastes just like a Gü pudding, though on the plus side it would definitely pacify a child. Mizu is a restaurant for visitors from all over the world who are passing through the Lakes, and who will wake up in the morning, open their window and see a lovely mere and a mountain, and think, “Oh, never mind. We’re on holiday.” Plus ça change, plus c’est la même bloody chose. • Mizu Lodore Falls Hotel & Spa, Borrowdale Valley, Keswick, Cumbria, 0800 840 1246. Open all week, noon-2pm, 6-9pm. About £40 a head à la carte, plus drinks and service. Food 3/10 Atmosphere 3/10 Service 2/10