Most of the latest data released is shocking and once again shows the barriers disabled people face every single day (Disabled staff paid 12% less, ‘damning’ official figures show, 3 December). Almost three years ago we highlighted that loneliness and isolation among disabled people is a critical issue, with one in four feeling lonely every day. However, it seems not much has changed in terms of loneliness and life satisfaction – it is still a major issue. Many of the contributing barriers, such as the need for accessible transport and buildings, financial support and appropriate social care still exist, and in areas such as social care the situation has even worsened. A lack of understanding and awareness of disability is also a significant obstacle; nearly half of non-disabled people feel that they do not have anything in common with disabled people, and 26 % admit to avoiding engaging in conversation with a disabled person. It’s time society was made truly accessible, and this includes providing the right social care to disabled people so they can be full and active members.Richard KramerChief executive, Sense • The Office for National Statistics findings show businesses are failing those with a disability. Business leaders have continued to underestimate the value of disabled people for too long – people should not be excluded for simply being different. It’s disappointing to see that the area where this disparity is the greatest is London, where disabled people are being paid 15.3% less than non-disabled employees. It’s time that businesses stand up and ensure disabled people are fully included. We’ve seen over 200 CEOs commit to this by joining The Valuable 500, but others need to make closing the gap a priority – the gap needs to close and businesses need to be the ones to do it.Caroline CaseyFounder, The Valuable 500 campaign • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition