Peter Siddle has retired from international cricket, ending a 67-Test career. The Australian seamer was expected to formally announce the decision on Sunday after informing Australian team management of the call. One of the national side’s hardest toilers over the past decade, Siddle made his Test debut in 2008 and his 221 wickets are the 13th most by an Australian. He is the last Australian bowler to take a Test hat-trick, famously achieving the feat on his birthday during the 2010-11 Ashes at the Gabba. The Victorian was part of Australia’s 5-0 Ashes whitewash of England in 2013-14 and often led the attack in times of great change. He played a role in this year’s drawn Ashes series in England, taking seven wickets in three Tests. The Australian coach, Justin Langer, described Siddle as a true team man. “He is an unbelievable bloke and an extremely good cricketer. He is the everything of what a team player is. He has given his heart and soul to the Australian team and the game of cricket. “We’ll always be thankful to him for what he’s given to the national team, and for the critical role he played in helping us retain the Ashes in England this year. He’s going out when he’s still playing well which, in a perfect world, is something every athlete wants to do.” The Australian captian, Tim Paine, said Siddle had been “the heart and soul” of the team. “He has a massive heart and is a fantastic bowler. He’ll be very much missed around the group. He’s been unbelievably good for our younger fast bowlers over the last 18 months and been a great support for me during that time as well. “It’s sad to see him leave international cricket, but the time is right for him. He’s had a wonderful career, he’s achieved a lot and I know he’s still got plenty to offer in domestic cricket.” The 35-year-old harboured ambitions of playing Test cricket again after being overlooked at the start of the summer and was called into Australia’s extended squad for the Boxing Day Test. However, he was released back to Big Bash duties after Australia opted to go with James Pattinson in their XI and made the decision to retire shortly after. The call also ends Siddle’s international white-ball career, in which he played 20 ODIs and two T20s for Australia. He will continue to play out the season for Victoria and the Adelaide Strikers.