The advocacy group Time’s Up has accused NBCUniversal of protecting powerful men and punishing women who speak out, following the departure of Gabrielle Union as a judge on America’s Got Talent. Union was reportedly fired from the show last month after experiencing what was described as racially insensitive situations and, along with fellow judge Julianne Hough, being subjected to “excessive notes” on their physical appearance. Hough, who also left, has since said she had a “wonderful time” on the show. Tina Tchen, the chief executive of Time’s Up, said Union’s story “follows a pattern of NBCUniversal protecting the careers of powerful men at the expense of women who speak out”. Tchen, the former chief of staff to Michelle Obama, said: “Not only did Union reportedly endure and witness racist and inappropriate behavior – including racially insensitive comments and excessive criticism about her physical appearance – but it also appears she was punished for speaking out: the company labeled her as ‘difficult’ before ousting her from the show altogether.” “Union’s experience shows NBCUniversal still has a lot of work to do to change its culture so discrimination, harassment, and retaliation are no longer tolerated at the company.’ Fellow judge Simon Cowell is also executive producer of the show through his Syco Entertainment production company. This year’s finale drew about 10 million viewers, 3 million fewer than last year. A statement from NBCUniversal, Syco and Fremantle, another producer of the show, read: “We remain committed to ensuring a respectful workplace for all employees and take very seriously any questions about workplace culture.” It added: “We are working with Ms Union through her representatives to hear more about her concerns, following which we will take whatever next steps may be appropriate.” Union, 47, also received support from fellow actor Eva Longoria, who wrote on Instagram that Union was treated in an “unacceptable” way. She wrote: “It’s time for NBCUniversal to commit to long-term, concrete action to fix its toxic workplace culture and ensure safety and equity for all its workers.”