Sydney’s smoke issues have forced the cancellation of the traditional Sydney to Hobart lead-up race for safety reasons, while a Sheffield Shield cricket match and a Sydney Kings basketball training session were affected by the hazy conditions on Tuesday. The Cruising Yacht club of Australia made the decision to call off the Big Boat Challenge with thick smoke blanketing Sydney Harbour and causing visibility issues. Supermaxis Wild Oats XI, Black Jack, SHK Scallywag and InfoTrack, plus smaller boats Naval Group and URM, were listed to contest the race scheduled to start at 12:30pm (AEDT). “We’re very disappointed to abandon the 2019 Grinders Coffee SOLAS Big Boat Challenge but for the safety of spectators, public and competitors, we made the call,” CYCA Commodore Paul Billingham said. “The safety of all competitors, in addition to those working on the harbour, is extremely important to us and our number one priority. The best available information is that nothing about the conditions will change in the short term so delaying the start wasn’t an option. “Our thoughts, of course, are with those worst-affected by the bushfires – and those fighting the fires across the state.” The smoke meant that air quality and visibility during the domestic cricket match between New South Wales and Queensland at the SCG proved as big a talking point as the on-field action. Bowlers from both sides sweated it out in conditions more commonly associated with Delhi, where smog regularly smothers India’s fixtures. Match officials and medical staff monitored readings throughout the day but there was never any indication of play being stopped because of the haze. Trent Copeland gets the huge wicket of Usman Khawaja!Tune in: https://t.co/hQ9T4sRU6I #SheffieldShield pic.twitter.com/Wy0yqU7m5R A Smokey SCG... #sheffieldshield #NSWvQLD pic.twitter.com/dGGM5dQ1y9 The start of a recent NSW second XI game in Sydney’s west was delayed because of poor air quality but the air-quality index was more concerning in that case. Meanwhile, the smoke has forced basketball club, Sydney Kings, to consider alternative training bases. The NBL leaders proceeded with their two-hour run at Auburn Basketball Centre on Tuesday despite the dilapidated venue being filled with smoke, but more forecasts for poor air quality has prompted the franchise to look at holding temporary sessions at Qudos Bank Arena.