Meow! The claws have been out for Cats since the first trailer dropped in July, prompting some 8m YouTube hate-watches and a deluge of online snark and awe. Cats with breasts! Taylor Swift with digital fur! Judi Dench with digital fur, wearing fur! Humans the size of cats the size of rats! It was the biggest collective WTF? of 2019. Cats-shaming brought us together. None of which means that Tom Hooper’s wildly ambitious musical is actually going to be a disaster. Far from it. When it comes to predictions of movie failures, the public tends to have both a terrible track record and a conveniently short memory. Remember “Creepy Paddington”? The 2014 movie’s rendition of the cuddly bear – as a sort of photorealistic stalker from the uncanny valley – was greeted with a similar degree of gleeful disdain at first sighting. People began to insert Paddington into horror movie stills. Then the movie came out and it was a triumph, and everyone forgot about Creepy Paddington. Indeed, many of the most groundbreaking movies have been preceded by similar prophecies of doom. The pricey Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was dubbed “Disney’s folly” by critics. When George Lucas first screened Star Wars for friends, they told him it was rubbish. He made plans to be in Hawaii during its opening week. Reports of mishap and overspend on the set of James Cameron’s Titanic were so regular that Variety magazine made up a special “Titanic Watch” logo. If Cameron were making Titanic today, we would be sharing memes of dollar signs hitting icebergs and gifs of “Creepy Rose”. Let’s not forget: Cats was an absolutely terrible idea to begin with. A bunch of TS Eliot poems set to music, sung by humans pretending to be dancing animals, in legwarmers. With no plot to speak of. No one except Andrew Lloyd Webber saw “hit” written all over this concept, and even after remortgaging his house and investing millions in the 1981 show, he wasn’t sure he hadn’t made a dreadful mistake. Some would argue he did, but the numbers tell another story. That does not mean the Cats movie will be a triumph. Predictions of doom can come true: nobody imagined Alita: Battle Angel or the Shaft reboot would be huge hits in 2019 – and they weren’t. But Cats has pedigree, brand-recognition and an all-star cast to set against the online haters. And, for all our complaints about how formulaic Hollywood has become, Cats is a rare leap into the unknown. Even if it doesn’t land on its feet, it will be a nobler failure than its critics are prepared to acknowledge. We have become good at applauding cinema’s risk-takers in retrospect, but when it comes to supporting them in advance, we would rather hiss. Talking of which, when is the new Avatar trailer out? Cats is in UK cinemas from Boxing Day