Charities helping the most vulnerable in society have reported an increase in support after the Conservative victory in the general election. Shelter, Refuge, the Trussell Trust and the Biscuit Fund have all confirmed they have seen a sharp increase in donations and/or registered supporters as a result of the election outcome. While unable to give exact numbers, the UK homelessness and housing charity Shelter said it had seen an increase in the number of people signing up as supporters since the result. Refuge, which helps victims of domestic abuse, said there had been a 52% increase in donations since polling closed, from £144 an hour to £220 an hour. The Biscuit Fund, which raises money to provide in-need families with supplies ranging from fridges to food hampers amid welfare cuts, said it had also had a considerable boost in support. Between Friday and Saturday, the charity has received almost £3,000 in donations – a number that a spokesperson has described as “significant and very welcome”. The UK’s largest food bank charity, the Trussell Trust, said it had been “overwhelmed” following a huge uplift in donations. While it could not yet give an exact figure, a spokesperson confirmed that hundreds of people have got in touch to set up a monthly donation or make a one-off payment. The boost in support comes as many across the country have expressed despair at the Conservatives, who have overseen nearly a decade of deep cuts to public services since they came to power in 2010, winning the election. The impact of austerity has been clear and well-documented: latest figures show that a child becomes homeless in Britain every eight minutes, and the estimated number of people who died homeless has increased by 51% between 2013 and 2018. Furthermore, 800,000 more children from working households are living in poverty since 2010, and food bank use has risen by 23% in the last year. Emma Revie, the chief executive of the Trussell Trust, said: “We’re overwhelmed by the wave of support we’ve seen. Thank you so much to everyone who has been donating – we’re incredibly grateful. We know we can reach a future where no one needs a food bank, but we can’t do it alone. We must work together – this can change.” Sandra Horley CBE, the chief executive of Refuge, said: “Now that the general election is behind us, we implore the incoming Conservative government to work on addressing violence against women and girls. The government needs to make this a priority and commit funds and resources to doing so. “Survivors have waited too long already. The domestic abuse bill, which was lost due to the snap election, needs to be quickly reinstated and strengthened to be a truly transformative piece of legislation. “We need an immediate commitment to new funds for refuges, which face closure up and down the country. No woman or child should be turned away when they seek help, survivors need to know that help and support is there for them.”