In September 2005, Kate Watkins was a single mum raising four children. That year, her story was followed by the Guardian, where she was featured discussing the challenges of family life. She had already met her future husband, Stuart, but she didn’t know it. “When my eldest girl, Alice, went to secondary school 14 years ago, she made friends with Stuart’s twin daughters, Lotte and Maddy,” Kate explains. At the time he was married to their mum, but often came to pick the girls up from Kate’s house. “It was just a friendship at the time,” Stuart says. Kate often spent weekends without adult company and was always happy to see him. “When he arrived to get the girls, I’d be so relieved I would ply him with wine just so I could speak to a grownup.” When their daughters hit their teens they began to play up, which meant Kate spent more time with Stuart and his wife. “They were going out clubbing, sneaking out to parties and getting tattoos,” Kate says. “For Stuart it was easier, but I was dealing with it alone.” Stuart laughs. “They weren’t that bad – just normal teenage stuff.” But the drama brought the pair closer. In 2013, Stuart’s marriage ended. He and his ex stayed in the family home, but agreed to start seeing other people. “For a long time after the split I was busy with work, but I always had Kate in the back of my mind.” It was another three years before they truly realised the extent of the connection. At the end of January 2016, Kate went to a tribute concert to celebrate the life of her favourite singer, David Bowie. “I loved him so much my children texted me when he died to check if I was OK,” she says. Stuart was in the adjoining pub having a drink. “My friends wanted to go for dinner and I spotted him,” she recalls. “I was really happy to have someone to stay out dancing and partying with.” Her friend made him promise to look after Kate. “I definitely did – I took her home in a taxi,” he says. That was the night they became a couple. “Apart from the physical attraction, I love the way she chats all day long,” says Stuart. “He’s very funny,” says Kate. “And he’s the cleverest man I know. He keeps me on my toes.” Initially they decided against telling their daughters until they had established how serious the relationship was. “They worked it out after a few weeks and Alice stole my phone to go and prove it to Lotte and Maddy,” remembers Kate. “She was pretty upset at first, but came round to the idea.” When the couple got married in 2018, all three girls attended the vineyard wedding, along with Kate’s three younger children, Ella, Lucy and James, and Stuart’s eldest daughter, Jade. Kate walked down the aisle to a David Bowie song, naturally. “We’ve got seven children between us, so we’re a real blended family,” she says. “At the wedding Ella did a speech where she thanked Stuart for making me so happy.” The couple live in Holmfirth in Yorkshire with Alice and James. Lucy visits during her university holidays and the twins regularly join them for Sunday tea, cooked by Stuart. At weekends they will watch Stuart’s beloved football team, Huddersfield Town. “I loved going to the theatre and reading books; I never expected to like football,” says Kate. “But Stuart really got me into it and his daughter Jade still comes, too.” Kate says their relationship has brought her back to life. “I think we were both just existing before; now we have so much fun together.” Stuart agrees. “I’ve really got something to live for.” • Want to share your story? Tell us a little about you, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.