US President Donald Trump has said he would be “disappointed” if North Korea had something “in the works” as a year-end ultimatum from Pyongyang about the fate of nuclear talks approaches. The nuclear-armed North has issued increasingly strident declarations in recent weeks, even promising an ominous “Christmas gift” if Washington does not come up with some concessions. The top US envoy to the negotiations with North Korea, Stephen Biegun, said in Seoul on Monday that Pyongyang’s rumblings were “hostile and negative” – and Trump said he was watching. “We’ll see. I’d be disappointed if something would be in the works. And if it is, we’ll take care of it,” Trump said at the White House when asked about the situation. “We’re watching it very closely.” The negotiations between Washington and Pyongyang have been largely stalled since the collapse of a February summit in Hanoi between Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong-un. The North has said that if Washington fails to make it an acceptable offer, it will adopt a so far unspecified “new way.” It has carried out a series of tests at its Sohae rocket facility this month, after a number of weapons launches in recent weeks. “It’s a concern – their rhetoric,” US Defense Secretary Mark Esper told reporters, saying further action by North Korea could be likely. Esper said North Korea would probably carry out unspecified tests if they “don’t feel satisfied”. “We have seen talk of tests. I think that they will be likely if they don’t feel satisfied,” Esper told reporters traveling with him from Europe back to Washington. He did not provide details on what type of tests may be likely but added he was hopeful about diplomatic efforts. Experts say North Korea could restart intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) testing suspended since 2017, a move that would be seen as highly provocative in Washington. “I’ve been watching the Korean Peninsula for maybe a quarter of a century now. So I’m familiar with their tactics, with their bluster and I think we need to get serious and sit down and have discussions about a political agreement that denuclearizes the Peninsula,” Esper said. Japan and others have said recent launches involved ballistic missiles, which Pyongyang is banned from testing under UN sanctions. The warning from Trump came as China and Russia are calling on the UN Security Council to terminate sanctions on key North Korean exports such as coal, iron, iron ore and textiles, with the intent of enhancing the livelihood of the civilian population. A draft resolution circulated to council members on Monday by the two allies of the North Korean leader would also lift a ban on North Koreans working overseas and terminate a decision to repatriate all those earning income abroad by 22 December. The council expressed concern when the repatriation provision was adopted two years ago that earnings from the nearly 100,000 overseas North Koreans, according to a US estimate, are being used to support the Norths nuclear and ballistic missile programs.