It was inevitable that we would be making a return to Billericay and Barry to check in on long-distance couple in love Gavin and Stacey. It is a decade since the series finale and the pair’s baby is now 10 years old, while Smithy continues to co-parent his 12-year-old with Nessa as both families descend on Uncle Bryn and Gwen for a chaotic Christmas lunch. It’s a comforting return to the cross-cultural format with a show-stealing performance from Alison Steadman as Pam. Ammar Kalia A tale of natural wonder and mollusc-based empowerment from this 3D-animated adaptation of Julia Donaldson and Axel Scheffler’s book. Sally Hawkins is lovable as the voice of the snail, while Rob Brydon is the kindly humpback whale who agrees to take her on a ride around the world. AK Mother Mildred (Miriam Margolyes) feels called by God to the Outer Hebrides and so the Nonnatus House team head north to set up an antenatal clinic in a draughty, converted church. It’s not quite a manger, but it’s not that far off. Will the local mums-to-be accept the help they’re being offered? Ellen E Jones Lashings of fake snow abound in this yearly Bake Off special, featuring 2017 contestants Yan and Tom and 2018’s Briony and Terry. The four are set to making cake-pops, a sausage wreath and a gingerbread mansion showstopper, but who will get the coveted Hollywood handshake? AK This feature-length doc heads past the diamante-studded stetson to get to the heart of one of country’s greatest singer-songwriters. Dolly takes us through the genesis of beloved tracks such as 9 to 5, and interviewees such as Kylie Minogue and Jane Fonda tell us what Parton means to them. AK In a Christmas when the whole family’s down on Mrs Brown for being nosy and uncaring, cue a homage to It’s a Wonderful Life. She gets Tasered in her own home, meets an imposter Mrs Brown and learns some life lessons. Then a terrible singalong ensues. Ratings: won. Hannah Verdier Finding Dory 3.10pm, BBC OneOK, we found Nemo, so who’s next? This Pixar sequel is pretty much a rerun, but it’s done with such shimmering beauty and soppy charm that it’s easily forgiven. Here, the amnesiac blue tang Dory (Ellen DeGeneres) sets out on an ocean-wide quest to find her family – while chums Nemo and Marlin go looking for her. Paul Howlett NBA: Boston Celtics v Toronto Raptors 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Eastern Conference clash. NBA: Milwaukee Bucks v Philadelphia 76ers 7.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Hoops from Wells Fargo Centre. International Cricket: Australia v New Zealand 11.15pm, BT Sport 2. First day of the second Test from Melbourne Cricket Ground. 