The Scottish government has been warned it will miss its next climate target after failing to take sufficiently radical and urgent action. The Committee on Climate Change, which advises the UK and devolved governments on their targets and policies, said Scotland’s credibility would be damaged unless it took action before Glasgow hosts next year’s global climate talks. The COP26 negotiations have been billed as the most important since the Paris talks in 2015. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, has invested her personal and party’s reputation in taking action on the climate. Lord Deben, the CCC’s chair, said Scotland’s rapid progress on cutting emissions was in danger of stalling because its policies on transport, farming and home heating were insufficiently far-reaching. It risked missing its target of cutting overall emissions by 56% compared with 1990 levels by 2020, he said, and it needed to take urgent and significant action to enable it to hit its target of net zero by 2045. “Scotland has set an ambitious world-leading net zero target of 2045. Now Scotland needs to walk the talk,” Deben said. “The new legally binding target for 2030 – a 75% reduction in emissions compared to 1990 – is extremely stretching and demands new policies that begin to work immediately. “The spotlight is now on Scotland’s plan to deliver meaningful reductions across all sectors of the economy, including buildings, road transport, agriculture and land use. Scotland has outperformed the rest of the UK in cleaning up its economy, resting on the rapid closure of coal. As this chapter closes, the Scottish story must change. But so far we haven’t seen the same progress in other sectors.” He said both the Scottish and UK governments – the latter has a net zero target of 2050 for the UK as a whole – needed to collaborate closely to help each other hit their goals, particularly over heavy industries, green energy generation and carbon capture and storage. Green campaigners welcomed the CCC’s warnings but the Scottish government insisted it was committed to taking the necessary action. “We strongly agree [we] must walk the talk and adopt policies over the coming year that make those targets a reality,” a spokesman said. “The global climate emergency and a green new deal for Scotland are at the centre of our programme for government. However, we recognise that even more will need to be done for Scotland to reach net zero emissions by 2045.”