A former senior Mexican government official who played a key role in the country’s militarized war on drugs has been arrested in Texas on charges that he allowed the Sinaloa cartel to operate in exchange for multimillion-dollar bribes. Genaro García Luna, who ran Mexico’s federal police for six years, was arrested in Dallas on Monday, federal prosecutors in Brooklyn said on Tuesday. García Luna led Mexico’s federal investigation agency from 2001 to 2005, and from 2006 to 2012, he served as Mexico’s secretary of public security, controlling the country’s federal police force. He helped oversee the militarized crackdown on organized crime which was launched in 2006 by the then president, Felipe Calderón, and has continued with slight modifications ever since. According to the indictment against him unsealed on Tuesday, García Luna “received millions of dollars in bribes from the Sinaloa cartel in exchange for providing protection for its drug trafficking activities”. Mexico’s “war on drugs” began in late 2006 when the president at the time, Felipe Calderón, ordered thousands of troops onto the streets in response to an explosion of horrific violence in his native state of Michoacán. Calderón hoped to smash the drug cartels with his heavily militarized onslaught but the approach was counter-productive and exacted a catastrophic human toll. As Mexico’s military went on the offensive, the body count sky-rocketed to new heights and tens of thousands were forced from their homes, disappeared or killed. Simultaneously Calderón also began pursuing the so-called “kingpin strategy” by which authorities sought to decapitate the cartels by targeting their leaders. That policy resulted in some high-profile scalps – notably Arturo Beltrán Leyva who was gunned down by Mexican marines in 2009 – but also did little to bring peace. In fact, many believe such tactics served only to pulverize the world of organized crime, creating even more violence as new, less predictable factions squabbled for their piece of the pie. Under Calderón’s successor, Enrique Peña Nieto, the government’s rhetoric on crime softened as Mexico sought to shed its reputation as the headquarters of some the world’s most murderous mafia groups. But Calderón’s policies largely survived, with authorities targeting prominent cartel leaders such as Sinaloa’s Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán. When “El Chapo” was arrested in early 2016, Mexico’s president bragged: “Mission accomplished”. But the violence went on. By the time Peña Nieto left office in 2018, Mexico had suffered another record year of murders, with nearly 36,000 people slain. The leftwing populist Andrés Manuel López Obrador took power in December, promising a dramatic change in tactics. López Obrador, or Amlo as most call him, vowed to attack the social roots of crime, offering vocational training to more than 2.3 million disadvantaged young people at risk of being ensnared by the cartels. “It will be virtually impossible to achieve peace without justice and [social] welfare,” Amlo said, promising to slash the murder rate from an average of 89 killings per day with his “hugs not bullets” doctrine. Amlo also pledged to chair daily 6am security meetings and create a 60,000 strong "National Guard". But those measures have yet to pay off, with the new security force used mostly to hunt Central American migrants. Mexico now suffers an average of about 96 murders per day, with nearly 29,000 people killed since Amlo took office. “García Luna stands accused of taking millions of dollars in bribes from ‘El Chapo’ Guzman’s Sinaloa Cartel while he controlled Mexico’s federal police force and was responsible for ensuring public safety in Mexico,” said US attorney Richard P Donoghue. “Today’s arrest demonstrates our resolve to bring to justice those who help cartels inflict devastating harm on the United States and Mexico, regardless of the positions they held while committing their crimes.” On two occasions, cartel bagmen personally delivered bribe payments to García Luna in briefcases containing between $3m and $5m, the indictment said. That allegation was first made in court during the trial earlier last year of Sinaloa kingpin Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán. “According to financial records obtained by the government, by the time García Luna relocated to the United States in 2012, he had amassed a personal fortune of millions of dollars,” the indictment said. Prosecutors also said García Luna, who moved to the United States in 2012 and is now a Florida resident, also lied about his past criminal conduct on behalf of the Sinaloa cartel when he applied for naturalization in 2018.