The Premier League has ended its unexpectedly blighted search for a chief executive by turning in-house and appointing Richard Masters, who has been filling the role temporarily since the departure of Richard Scudamore last year. Masters, who stepped up from the managing director role he had under Scudamore from July 2015, has a career background in the commercial selling of football, having joined the Premier League as director of sales and marketing in 2006 and previously been the Football League’s commercial director. The Premier League has moved quickly to make Masters’ role permanent and end the recruitment saga a fortnight after the latest mishap, the resignation of David Pemsel, the Guardian’s former chief executive. He accepted the job in October but resigned before starting it, following the publication by the Sun newspaper of some of his personal messages. Pemsel’s resignation followed the withdrawal from the post of the first person appointed, Susannah Dinnage, the global president of Animal Planet, part of the Discovery group of TV channels. She was described as “the outstanding choice” when appointed in November last year but she withdrew a month later before starting work at the league, deciding to stay in broadcasting. After Dinnage’s withdrawal it became surprisingly difficult to fill the job of running and commercially selling the most watched and by far the most financially lucrative football league in the world. In January another candidate, Tim Davie, was reported to have turned down the position and decided to stay at the BBC, where he was chief executive of the commercial division BBC Studios. People familiar with the process said that some well-qualified people were becoming wary of joining the league at a time of generational change in the broadcasting industry and more difficult internal relations between the “big six” clubs, who have attained a greater share of the international TV revenues and the other 14. The league’s own perspective is that it needs to get right the next sale of its media rights, which begin in the autumn, at this point where traditional TV companies around the world are being joined and “disrupted” by digital platforms such as Amazon, which showed its first Premier League matches last week. The clubs are also keenly aware of changing viewing habits, particularly among a younger generation, with the ability to watch bite-sized highlights on social media. These changes coincide with serious moves towards reshaping the game’s structure after the agreed calendar concludes in 2024. Plans by the European Club Association and Uefa to expand the Champions League, on hold after concerted opposition, represent another challenge to the Premier League’s dominance. Pemsel was hailed as the ideal executive to navigate through this changing landscape, after his successful role in helping to turn the Guardian round financially in the digital era for news organisations. After his resignation, the league has chosen to conclude the process by staying with the experienced interim appointment. Bruce Buck, the Chelsea chairman who chairs the Premier League nominations committee, said: “The clubs have seen Richard rise to the occasion, dealing with our various stakeholders and partners with aplomb and skill. As interim chief executive, he has faced challenges head-on and has proved himself. The clubs believe that this is the right appointment now in the long-term interests of the Premier League.” Masters said: “I feel privileged to be given the opportunity to lead the Premier League in what will be one of the most exciting stages of its development. I have thoroughly enjoyed working with the clubs and our partners and other stakeholders over the past year. This is one of the most incredible jobs in the world of sport and I now look forward to leading the League in the many opportunities and challenges that lie ahead.”