Sometimes it is not words but light that drives a show. That is not usually the case at the National, traditionally a verbal theatre. Yet, as directed by Katy Rudd, Joel Horwood’s adaptation of The Ocean at the End of the Lane gets its dynamism and intricacy from one of the mighty talents of today’s theatre: lighting designer Paule Constable. Neil Gaiman’s novel about childhood hauntings and growing-up terrors depends on bewilderments, illusions, surprises. A disembodied hand frisks along the floor and wags out of an empty dressing-gown sleeve; illuminated doors spring up all around the stage to frame a frightener who seems to leap unconfined from one place to another. Pale hybrid shapes loom, stretching and bending across the stage like dinosaurs made out of bubblegum. Samuel Wyer (costume and puppet designer), puppetry director Finn Caldwell and Jamie Harrison, the “magic and illusions director” (maybe he should just be called “magician”?), devised these creatures and effects, but they are given definition by Constable, who surrounds them with shimmer and with darkness. The evening, which is framed as a recollection of childhood, contains a suicide, family tension and an escape and rescue by a bewitching, spell-casting girl and her granny. Justin Salinger is sharp as the man who looks back; Samuel Blenkin, Jade Croot and Marli Siu, angled between anxiety, awkwardness and strength, destroy the idea that twentysomethings playing children must be embarrassing. Pippa Nixon – lumbered with the most predictable role (witchy substitute mother) – is plausible and slippery as the hero’s insinuating antagonist: no wonder she made such a tantalising Ariel in Dominic Dromgoole’s 2016 production of The Tempest. Memory and imagination, inner and outer worlds merge. The swirling gloom and glitter in which Constable encases the action captures this instability. Her lighting is as absolute a carapace as any set design. Ella Hickson is unlocking British theatre with her sceptical look at big subjects and her smaller-scale scintillations. True, Oil (2016) could have done with more lubrication – but she has since delivered extraordinary explosions: the theatre-bending The Writer; the ear-changing Anna; and now Swive, which is Elizabethan for “have sex”. Poised and pugnacious. Socking it to royalty. Says the Washerwoman to the Queen about the crown: “You do know, on some level, it’s just a hat?” Hickson and director Natalie Abrahami are from the beginning out to unsettle our pieties. The warmth of the Jacobean-style Sam Wanamaker Playhouse is gorgeous: the lit candelabra are lowered; the shadows lap; the wood panelling glows as Abigail Cruttenden comes on to announce herself as Elizabeth I. Then a backdrop is torn away to show that what we are viewing is a fake. This theatre is only a few years old. Everything is provisional. The play, which takes Elizabeth from sharp teenager to precarious queen, is acted within walls of chipboard. Chipboard! The theatrical material of the month: Cyrano de Bergerac at the Playhouse uses the same. Can we now only take the truth in cheapskate mode? To view the difficulties for women in power through a Tudor lens is to see a world in which the point of a female is to be a fleshy papoose: in a royal family nothing succeeds like succession. What can only be called period detail is neatly dispensed: the laundress examines Elizabeth’s sheets to report to the Spanish whether the queen still bleeds monthly. Yet the dialogue is furbelow-free and often provocatively anachronistic: “To fuck without my permission, is treason.” Elizabeth’s glittering farthingale is emblazoned – like a 16th-century version of a 21st-century T-shirt – with a picture of her own beruffed figure. Her intelligence is delicately suggested as a girl by Nina Cassells and as an older woman by Cruttenden, exact and glacial in phrasing and pronunciation. The result is both startling and authentic. I remember when the Globe was routinely reviled for being crudely repro. Well here it is: unfamiliar and subtle. More royalty outsiders (well, who isn’t really?) in Teenage Dick. Mike Lew describes his play as “bespoke”: he was commissioned by Gregg Mozgala, who runs a company aiming to examine the disabled experience, to write a version of Shakespeare’s Richard III set in a high school. Dick (and most of the time he is one) is a very able disabled boy running for class president. He is sneered at (“freak”), subtly patronised (his teacher eagerly tells him she had a brother with Down’s syndrome). He is furious and therefore cruel; clever and therefore brilliant at manipulation. He gets a rival’s test results rigged, takes down the school jock, seduces and destroys the class hottie. Lew’s script comes with the instruction to “cast disabled actors for Richard and Buck”. So Buck (a benign version of Shakespeare’s Buckingham) is played elegantly, insouciantly by Ruth Madeley, who uses a wheelchair. Daniel Monks, who has hemiplegia, is a magnetic antihero: zingingly nasty; lurching into sentimentality; dancing like a dervish; lit up by a sniggering glee, which means you never know when he is putting his malevolence on. Shakespeare’s Richard III is rarely played by a disabled actor, though two years ago Mat Fraser, whose arms are shortened as a result of thalidomide, was a ferocious king for Northern Broadsides. At the Sam Wanamaker, Sophie Russell plays the king with no external hump – rather as James McAvoy does not strap on a big nose to play Cyrano at the Playhouse. Turning this on its head, Michael Longhurst’s production, which puts its troubled cast in a bouncingly bright design by Chloe Lamford, has “project” written too obviously all over it. But the project is a good one: it expands the look of the stage – and the way it is looked at. Plays will build on this. Star ratings (out of five)The Ocean at the End of the Lane ★★★★Swive ★★★★Teenage Dick ★★★ • The Ocean at the End of the Lane is at the Dorfman, London, until 25 January• Swive [Elizabeth] is at the Sam Wanamaker Playhouse, London, until 15 February • Teenage Dick is at the Donmar Warehouse, London, until 1 February