Bath resisted a strong fightback by Sale to win a thriller at the Rec. The home side led at half-time thanks to two penalties from fly-half Rhys Priestland and claimed a 13-0 advantage when Jonathan Joseph scored a try that Priestland converted. But tries from Akker van Der Merwe and Byron McGuigan, both converted by Robert du Preez, sent Sale in front before a final Priestland penalty won it for the home team. Two injury worries for both teams in the opening seconds - with Sale’s World Cup winner Faf de Klerk needing attention for a leg knock and Joseph going down at the same time - threatened to take the shine off a fascinating encounter. Thankfully, both got back on their feet as Bath raced out of the blocks quickest. Errors by the visitors saw Priestland boom over two medium-range penalties to give his side a 6-0 lead, while dashes by Anthony Watson and Semesa Rokoduguni needed solid Sale defence. But Bath could not kick on and with scrum-half De Klerk back to his best at the back of loose and tight situations Sale had their best attacking period of the match five minutes from the interval. Denny Solomona lost his footing as he was tackled five metres from the home line and swift ball movement pushed Bath back to their own posts before another Sale error saw the hosts clear the danger. Bath responded after the break when they went over for a scorching touchdown which Priestland converted. Full-back Tom Homer began the move with a chip and chase into the Sale half and from the ruck Joseph was put away, feeding Priestland on a run to the corner before returning the pass to his centre to cross on the left. Sale suddenly found their feet again and put their best pressure of the game on their opponents as they went over twice to take the lead before the hour. Van der Merwe was at the side of a ruck that attacked Bath’s line from a lineout five metres out and slid around to score. Just before the hour, Sale were back inside the Bath 22 with the ball going through the back division before Du Preez fed McGuigan to go over in the corner but when Sale infringed with nine minutes to go, Priestland stepped up to land his third penalty, which proved to be the decider. Sale pushed hard to get a penalty or within drop-goal territory but Bath held out.