This week, Gwynedd council raised concerns that Welsh people of colour will have no tick-box option to indicate they are Welsh and minority ethnic in the 2021 census, as a result of the survey format designed by the Office for National Statistics. This is a bitterly disappointing and frankly astounding omission. It implicitly embeds the dangerous assumption that people of colour aren’t Welsh, or that those who can speak Welsh have to be white. This feels to me like the ONS are denying me my identity. People of colour have been an important part of Wales’ history for centuries. Tiger Bay in Cardiff is home to one of the UK’s oldest black communities. I wonder how many people also know that there has been a black presence in Wales since the 16th century, as recounted in Alan Llwyd’s book Cymru Ddu: a History, which my mother bought and read to me as a child and which I have returned to many times as an adult. Born in Oxford, I moved with my mother and sister to rural west Wales at the age of three. I feel Welsh. My education was entirely Welsh medium. I don’t think it’s widely known in England how alive, vibrant and important our Welsh language is. It was the language of my childhood – in and out of school. Today, it remains the language in which I am most myself, the language of my emotions and thoughts. I am a Welsh woman. I am also mixed race – my father is of Bajan heritage and I have family in Barbados of whom I am proud, but Wales will always be my home, and the land, the people, the language and culture are what make me who I am. I recently found out I have autism, and like many of the growing number of people diagnosed as adults, have found so much of my life to date suddenly making sense in a new and more meaningful way. As a shy little girl, and the only brown face in my school until my sister joined me the following year, I very quickly became fluent in Welsh. I remember being given a worksheet that explained the words for emotions and the weather and natural objects, and suddenly things made sense and I could communicate things to myself in a way I had never been able to do before in English. Of course, speaking Welsh meant I fitted in quickly. Being given this language and culture was like a gift of identity for me. The Eisteddfod – and music and singing generally – were a huge part of daily school life, and learning and singing traditional folk songs and poetry, and later, Welsh literature (which I studied for A-level) gave me an even deeper and richer connection to Welsh language and culture, enabling me to express my thoughts and emotions in a way that made sense to me – not only to myself internally, but to others, too. Through my TV and music work, I have visited many schools where I meet Welsh children who also have other racial and ethnic family heritage, and I often think back to when I was that shy little brown girl, afraid of my own shadow, and how much I would have loved to see a grown-up black Welsh woman speaking to me in our language. When I was a child, I used to worry that if people heard our mum speaking to us in English, they might think we were on holiday, and didn’t actually belong in the seaside town where we lived. I am sensitive to the idea that people might assume that I am not a Welsh speaker and worry that this is the case if I am spoken to in English by people whom I know are Welsh speakers. How can the ONS reinforce the challenges already faced by BAME people in Wales, as we nervously wonder what might happen in the current political climate? I have never felt more Welsh, proud and accepted than when my sister (Eadyth Crawford, also a singer-songwriter) and I performed the Welsh song Calon Lan and the Welsh national anthem on the balcony of the Red House building in Merthyr Tydfil at the YesCymru event this summer. The census decision robs me of my right to identify as a proud black Welsh woman. Kizzy Crawford is a Bajan-Welsh singer-songwriter Comments on this article are premoderated to ensure that the discussion remains relevant to the issues raised by the contributor.