What a radiant week for fresh twists on familiar plays. The show-off dangers of radical adaptations are obvious, but a seizing-by-the-scruff-of-the-neck version can take you deep into the heart of the original. Cyrano de Bergerac is newly ventriloquised in Martin Crimp’s capering couplets, dazzlingly staged by Jamie Lloyd. Edmond Rostand’s play, written in 1897 but set in 1640, is rapped into the 21st century. Yet every fibre vibrates to Edmond Rostand’s ideas about outward illusion, inner voices – and the spellbinding power of speech. It has a star at its centre – James McAvoy firecrackers across the stage – but its plea is for the importance not of celebrity but of art. You don’t hear that very often these days. Rostand’s plot – silver-tongued hero woos the woman he loves for his dull-witted chum – is truly rendered but stripped of most trad attributes. No hat-doffing, no arms akimbo, no bandy-legged swordfights. No outsize nose. McAvoy’s Cyrano is propelled by a dynamic combination of confident display and unexplained self-doubt. He is a verbal volcano and a commanding presence, bunched up in black like a battery pack. Fighting takes the form of poetry slams: combatants see each other off with great jousts of words. There is hardly any manly running around; there is often stillness; Soutra Gilmour’s design – plywood walls and orange stackable chairs – is aggressively non-plumey and plain. Yet the stage is vibrant. Audience and actors are clinched together in – I can hardly believe it – rhyme: like two halves of a couplet. There is an excited, concentrated listening to Crimp’s escalating rhyme feats: “attitude” swims into “latitude“ then sends itself up with “platitude”. You can get high on this stuff. Not least because Vaneeka Dadhria’s magnificent beatboxing – gulping, pulsing, hissing, ticking – continuously gees up the rhythm. Beatbox (given another life I would try to make it my profession) is a rising theatrical force: brought to the National by the wonderful Grace Savage five years ago and gloriously incarnated in BAC’s Frankenstein. It is the ur-stage sound: made on the spot by human beings; both internal and explosive. And perfect as part of the landscape in a play about sound and words. These characters are their voices: when soldiers die they take off their mics. Anita-Joy Uwajeh is a wonderfully poised and edgy Roxane; Michele Austin a gorgeous, punchy presence, who puts the poetry into patisserie, as a gourmet maker of both lemon tarts and tart verses. Tom Edden also shines, delivering his rap with a gimlet sneer. This is the first of a new Jamie Lloyd season. It makes me agog for more. Rebecca Frecknall is proving an exceptional reimaginer of familiar and neglected works. Last year her strung-out production of Summer and Smoke shivered Tennessee Williams to his core. In tackling John Webster’s The Duchess of Malfi, she goes some way to remaking the playwright Bernard Shaw called “the Tussaud laureate”. Frecknall finds – at least before the plot goes really bonkers gory in the second half – an unexpected stealth and stillness, and reveals a celebration of settled love before the expected riot of violence. Who would have thought the scenes between the Duch and her lover could be so delicate and so assured in their eroticism. Khalid Abdalla and Lydia Wilson, the knockout performances of the evening, meet for the first time in a lingering – so lingering it tingles with embarrassment – silence. She is intent, he is palpitating with nerves; they uncoil and wind around each other first with gestures and eventually with words. In this stripped-back text, clusters of phrases sing out new. This is a vital Webster paradox: in a brutal world – murdered children, taunting fake killings, splenetic, grotesquely strutting chaps – the manoeuvres of the brain trace ingenious and intricate verbal patterns. Chloe Lamford’s design – using what is becoming an almost routine Almeida glass box – does not always live up to this intricacy. It makes its points: everyone is caged; everyone is on display; no one wants to be a Damien Hirst stuffed sheep, and people get a chance to claw against a glass wall. Why though – apart from the chill effect – is half the action apparently set in a latrine? Amid so much that is thought anew, some things are on automatic pilot, including some of the minor characters. Not though Leo Bill, who is an increasingly interesting, splutteringly truthful and doomed Bosola. Just when you think Webster is all torture and teasing he, as Frecknall shows, comes up with a subtle swerve. Inua Ellams’s Barber Shop Chronicles has been one of the eye-opening wonders of the past few years. Whirling around the country until last week, it was powered into the National by the innovative Fuel theatre company. As is Ellams’s new version of Three Sisters, which transplants Chekhov’s play to the Biafran war of the 1960s. His sisters long to return not to Moscow but to Lagos; their despair is projected not as lassitude but as frustrated power. Ellams’s analysis of this crucial, seldom discussed war is rigorous: he exposes filthy work by the British and reveals extraordinary activism by Biafran women. The class division in Chekhov between old and new orders – skeweringly focused when the sisters sneer at their future sister-in-law’s dress – becomes more violent and overt when seen as a clash between women belonging to different warring factions. What is gained is dramatic reverberation. What is lost is the sad twist at the centre of Chekhov, that being discriminating fades into discrimination: the exercises of taste entail snobbery. It has been one of Rufus Norris’s founding tenets as artistic director to make the National Theatre open to different voices and spectators. He succeeded on this press night: the subject was not geographically timid; the audience was not mostly white and middle-aged. Nor was it silent: Chekhov was repunctuated as the Lyttelton groaned and sighed at snubs and snogs. Vibrancy is in the air – but not always on the stage. Katrina Lindsay’s set includes a fiercely glowing African bush and knockout costumes: buttercup yellow curvy, lime-green tent, marvellous snap-up handbag. Natalie Simpson is serpentine sardonic as the middle sister. But too much of the acting drags its feet: the audience respond before the performers react to each other. The dialogue is often swamped in explanation. There is a skinnier, swifter drama calling to be let out of this fascinating but over-deliberate play. Sometimes adaptations need another adaptation. Star ratings (out of five)Cyrano de Bergerac ★★★★★The Duchess of Malfi ★★★★Three Sisters ★★★ Cyrano de Bergerac is at the Playhouse, London, until 29 February 2020 The Duchess of Malfi is at the Almeida, London, until 25 January 2020 Three Sisters is at the Lyttelton, London, until 19 February 2020 This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.