Hundreds of thousands of protesters have filled the streets of Hong Kong in a mass show of support for an anti-government movement that shows no signs of flagging as it enters a seventh month. The march on Sunday was mostly peaceful, in a rare break from the escalating violent scenes of recent weeks. Chanting “Reclaim Hong Kong, Revolution of our time!”, a sea of protesters formed a mile-long human snake winding for blocks on Hong Kong Island, from the Causeway Bay shopping district to the Central business zone. It was the first time in nearly four months that the march organiser, Civil Human Rights Front, had been given police permission for a mass demonstration. The organiser of million-strong marches in June estimated that 800,000 people participated in Sunday’s march. Police said 183,000 turned up. Buoyed by the landslide victory of pro-democracy politicians in the district election two weeks ago, protesters were in high spirits, and there was a relaxed, carnival-like atmosphere. Some chanted “Five demands, not one less!”, referring to a set of as-yet-unfulfilled political demands, including democratic reforms and an independent investigation into police brutality. Others directed their hostility towards riot police officers who were standing guard, calling them “dogs” and chanting “Hong Kongers, revenge!”, while making obscene gestures at them. Violent confrontations between police and protesters in the past few months have resulted in mutual hostility. Some protesters spray-painted anti-China graffiti on a Bank of China building while others attacked a pro-Beijing bank. A Starbucks cafe, run by a franchise company seen as pro-China, was also vandalised. As darkness fell, tensions escalated as riot police and a large group of militant protesters confronted each other in the financial district of Central, the end point of the protest route. Black-clad protesters occupied a major thoroughfare and got behind makeshift barricades built with plastic roadside barriers, umbrellas, metal sheets and bamboo poles. A box marked with the message “Do not kick, it may explode” was spotted on the road. Riot police officers pointed non-lethal shotguns at people gathered there and ordered them to leave. A water-cannon vehicle was standing by. Police said protesters threw petrol bombs outside the high court and the court of final appeal and spray-painted the outside walls of the high court building, which “seriously challenged the spirit of the rule of law”. Local media reported that the message “Rule of law is dead” was emblazoned on the building. Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, has said her government will formally withdraw the bill that ignited months of protests. Hong Kong residents had feared it could be used by China to extradite people for political reasons. They want guarantees that it cannot be reintroduced at a later date. Protesters want the government to officially recognise that their movement has been a series of legitimate protests, rather than a riot, as has been stated in official communications. Hundreds of people have been arrested in recent weeks, and the protesters are demanding that all of them be freed, and that no convictions should stand against any of them. Police use of force has escalated since the demonstrations began, while protesters have also resorted to increasingly violent measures. Demonstrators say an inquiry into police brutality is the number-one priority. Hong Kong's chief executive is currently selected by a 1,200-member committee, and nearly half of the 70 legislative council seats are filled by limited electorates representing different sectors of the economy. The protesters want to be able to vote for their leaders in free and open democratic elections. Many protesters expressed anger that the Hong Kong authorities have ruled out further concessions despite the landslide victory of the pro-democracy camp in district elections, widely seen as a vote of no confidence in the government. The extradition bill that sparked the wave of protests was belatedly scrapped in September, and the Hong Kong leader, Carrie Lam, said no further concessions would be made, despite growing calls for an independent body to investigate police brutality. “So long as there is no ‘one man one vote’, people cannot use civilised means of topple an unqualified ruler,” said a 49-year-old teacher who was marching with his two children. “I don’t endorse violence, but I understand people’s frustration because they have lost faith in the rule of law.” “I want Hong Kong to return to the normal Hong Kong,” said 58-year-old Ming Lui. “If Hong Kong is to turn into China, I’d rather die. We won’t win, but I will fight till the end of my life.” Joseph Cheng, a retired political scientist at the City University of Hong Kong, said the return of peaceful protesters on the streets indicated that ordinary Hong Kongers remained critical of the government, despite the recent violent clashes that drew criticism of militants. “People are saying the government is responsible for all this,” he said.