Twenty-three women who have accused Harvey Weinstein of sexual assault have said the disgraced movie mogul is “trying to gaslight society”, after he told the New York Post his “pioneering” work on “movies directed by women and about women” was being forgotten. “Harvey Weinstein is trying to gaslight society again,” the statement said. “He says in a new interview he doesn’t want to be forgotten. Well, he won’t be. He will be remembered as a sexual predator and an unrepentant abuser who took everything and deserves nothing.” The Collins dictionary defines gaslighting as an “attempt to manipulate a person by continually presenting them with false information until they doubt their sanity”. The term derives from Patrick Hamilton’s 1938 play Gas Light, which was filmed as Gaslight by George Cukor in 1944. The actors Rosanna Arquette, Ashley Judd and Rose McGowan were among the women who signed the statement. The others were Jessica Barth, Zoe Brock, Rowena Chiu, Caitlin Dulany, Dawn Dunning, Lucia Evans, Louisette Geiss, Louise Godbold, Larissa Gomes, Dominique Huett, Katherine Kendall, Jasmine Lobe, Sarah Ann Masse, Emily Nestor, Tomi-Ann Roberts, Erika Rosenbaum, Melissa Sagemiller, Lauren Sivan, Melissa Thompson and Paula Williams. Weinstein is due to go on trial on 6 January in New York, on charges of rape and sexual assault. He has pleaded not guilty and could face a life sentence if convicted. About 70 women have made allegations of sexual misconduct against him. Weinstein denies all allegations but has reportedly reached a $25m settlement with more than 30 accusers. “He will be remembered by the collective will of countless women who stood up and said enough,” the statement by the 23 women continued. “We refuse to let this predator rewrite his legacy of abuse.” On Monday morning, McGowan tweeted: “I didn’t forget you, Harvey. My body didn’t forget you. I wish it could. I refused to sign an NDA after it happened because I knew I would come for you. And I did. This is about stopping a prolific rapist. You.” Arquette wrote: “I’ll never forget when you Harvey Weinstein … when you told me that I was making a big mistake and I told you I’ll never be that girl. I’ll never forget when you told me look what you did for an Oscar winner’s career (a lie ). I’ll never forget the fear and deep trauma of Annabella Sciorra’s voice on the other end of the phone because she was raped by you.” Weinstein, 67, recently had spinal surgery and has used a walker when seen in public. In his interview with the Post, he said: “I feel like the forgotten man. “I made more movies directed by women and about women than any film-maker, and I’m talking about 30 years ago. I’m not talking about now when it’s vogue. I did it first. I pioneered it. “It all got eviscerated because of what happened. My work has been forgotten.” On Twitter, Arquette said: “It’s a shame you’ve abused your power because you did have some great taste in films but you’ve hurt, threatened and destroyed so many people’s careers and still continue playing the sympathy card. We know the powerful people who feel sorry for you, but why? Blackmail?” Douglas H Wigdor, a lawyer for three women who allege misconduct by Weinstein, issued a statement on Sunday night. “One cannot feel sorry for Mr Weinstein,” it said. “While he sits perched in an executive private hospital suite and asks New Yorkers to recognize his prior accomplishments which justifiability have been overshadowed by his horrific actions, his complete failure to accept responsibility, and his recent efforts to force survivors to accept an inadequate and paltry civil settlement. “Mr Weinstein’s latest public relations stunt on the eve of his criminal trial provides even more motivation to continue to prosecute the claims that will expose him for who he is. I personally look forward to cross examining him once his fifth amendment rights are extinguished in the criminal trial.”