Fabian Schär crossed, Andy Carroll flicked on and, finally, the wait ended. The ball bounced to Miguel Almirón, his left-foot half-volley was unerring and, as the Gallowgate End turned giddy with excitement, Steve Bruce raced down the touchline, fists pumping thin air. Almost a year after arriving from Atlanta, Almirón had scored his long-awaited first goal for Newcastle and the power of his smile seemed capable of switching on Tyneside’s entire complement of Christmas lights. As the wild celebrations – during which the match-winner was hugged by every outfield teammate and a ballboy – eventually subsided, the referee, Simon Hooper, was obliged to book the £21m Paraguay playmaker for whipping off his shirt and whirling it above his head in sheer exultation. Small wonder Hooper seemed to be apologising as he did so – not that Almirón can ever have been happier to see a yellow card brandished in his face. “I did a José Mourinho but my hip nearly came out,” said a laughing Bruce whose side rose to ninth. “I’m delighted for Miggy, he’s a great player, a great pro and a great lad; you want people like that to succeed.” Hats off to Bruce for bringing the best out in Almirón by tweaking his formation and enabling him to operate in the hole, his preferred position. It involved a shift from 3-4-3 to 3-4-1-2, which may sound like tactical semantics but succeeded in surprising Roy Hodgson and leaving the Crystal Palace manager’s centre-halves, James Tomkins and the out-of-position Cheikhou Kouyaté, initially unsure as to who to pick up. All darting runs and clever through-passes, Almirón excelled, effectively joining the dots for a sporadically impressive Newcastle. The downside for Bruce was that, bar the moment when the Paraguayan’s pass left Isaac Hayden clean through and apparently certain to score before falling over, his side were creating half-chances rather than clear-cut openings and looked really dangerous only if Almirón or Jonjo Shelvey were in possession. The resultant lack of service left his twin strikers Joelinton and Carroll increasingly disconnected and chasing scraps with Carroll gradually relieving the pressure on Hodgson’s defence by dropping deeper in search of the ball. Palace started slowly, created precious little and were well below their best yet still conjured the first half’s most menacing moment. Almost inevitably it involved Wilfried Zaha, whose first-time shot was smartly saved by a rapidly reacting Martin Dubravka after Christian Benteke had slid a pass through to the, for once, unmarked winger. Generally, though, Javier Manquillo shone at right wing-back, keeping Zaha uncommonly quiet and challenging Almirón for man of the match honours in the process. Manquillo needed to be on his game as, albeit incrementally, Hodgson’s team were improving and Bruce had Dubravka’s swift advance and narrowing of the angles to thank for preventing James McCarthy dinking the ball home after being played in by Patrick van Aanholt. By now Palace had closed down Shelvey, negating his influence – Carroll and Joelinton looked ever more like strangers – and Hayden appeared uncomfortable in Newcastle’s new midfield shape. Bruce duly replaced Hayden with Sean Longstaff and, a little later, Joelinton with Dwight Gayle, but Palace retained the momentum. Only an amalgam of intelligent defending from Paul Dummett and the returning Florian Lejeune and Dubravka’s reflexes ensured parity until Schär’s ball in, Carroll’s cushioned onward header and Almirón’s flawless, 83rd-minute connection altered the power balance irrevocably. As the latter removed his shirt, Zaha and Van Aanholt temporarily seemed to lose their heads, engaging in a briefly ugly altercation. “They could have defended the cross better and I’m sure they were disappointed,” said Hodgson, diplomatically. “They might have had words but you expect that. We were heading for a very good point, maybe three and the result’s harsh … but that’s football.”