For me, blinis are the ultimate party food – though they’re standard breakfast fare in their native Russia, the very name conjures up visions of ice-cold martinis and slinky cocktail dresses (though, strictly speaking, these are actually oladushki). Whatever you’re planning to wear to eat them, however, know they are very much worth making yourself before you get changed – those ready-made rubber frisbees are no way to celebrate. Prep 20 min, plus cooling and proofing Cook 4 min a batchMakes About 35 150ml milk70g buckwheat flour70g strong white flour1 tsp salt2 tsp caraway seeds (optional)2 eggs4g dried yeast100g soured cream25g butter, for frying Heat the milk in a small pan until it’s just below the boil. While it’s heating, in a large bowl whisk the two flours (buckwheat gives blinis their characteristic nutty flavour, while the white flour keeps them nice and light) with the salt and caraway seeds, if using. Separate the eggs, and put the yolks in a small bowl and the whites in a large one. As soon as the milk begins to bubble, turn off the heat and leave it to cool down to blood temperature. This scalding helps to denature the whey proteins in the milk, which will ultimately make your blini fluffier, but if the milk is still too hot when you add the yeast, it will die, and render your efforts pointless. Stir the yeast into the warm milk, then whisk in the egg yolks and soured cream, mixing vigorously until they’re well combined. Pour the milk mixture into the flour bowl, stirring as you do so, until you have a fairly smooth paste. Be careful not to overwork it once it’s mixed, though, or your blinis will be tough. Cover the bowl with a clean tea towel and leave in a fairly warm, or at least not draughty, place for an hour or so, or until it looks spongy (it won’t rise dramatically, but the batter should have grown slightly in the bowl, and there ought to be a few bubbles visible on the top. Whisk the egg whites to soft peaks, then gently fold them into the batter mixture using a large metal spoon or a rubber spatula, being mindful to keep as much air in the mix as possible. Once they’ve been well combined, cover the bowl again and leave for another two hours. Melt the butter in a large frying pan over a medium-high heat. Once it’s hot, drop teaspoonfuls of batter in batches into the pan, and cook them until bubbles rise to the surface and golden brown underneath. Carefully flip over and cook for another minute or so, until golden brown on both sides. Repeat with the remaining batter. Blinis are best eaten warm from the pan, otherwise they can go rather stodgy, so either serve them in batches as you make them, or store them in a warm oven, wrapped in a tea towel to keep them soft, until you’ve used up all the batter. They can also be frozen once cooked: defrost and microwave briefly to reheat. The simplest way to serve blinis is topped with a dollop of soured cream and a few fish eggs or a curl of smoked fish or cooked meat, and perhaps a pinch of chopped chives or some freshly ground black pepper. Smoked mackerel, kipper or salmon paté, or chunks of pickled herring are even simpler options. Make a Finnish egg butter: boil two eggs for eight minutes, then peel and finely chop. Beat into 80g softened butter and season generously, then spread on blinis and top with capers or chopped cornichons. Or, for a more colourful choice, make a beetroot puree: whizz up four cooked beetroot with 100ml soured cream, add horseradish sauce or black pepper to taste, and finish with a little chopped dill.