Ellyse Perry has been crowned the international women’s cricketer of the year, as Australia scooped the pool at the ICC awards. Perry claimed the Rachael Heyhoe-Flint award for the second time in three years, and was also named the ODI player of the year. Alyssa Healy also claimed the Twenty20 award, while Meg Lanning was named captain of both sides. It comes after a stellar year for Perry, where she was Australia’s best player as they retained the Ashes in England. The allrounder scored 783 runs at 97.87 across all formats, while also taking 28 wickets at just 16.5. “It’s an amazing honour and I’m a little bit shocked, given how many amazing performances there have been across the year,” Perry said. “It’s amazing to be acknowledged and I do truly appreciate it. It’s a really nice way to finish the year on a personal note.” Meanwhile Healy’s award marked the second time straight she’d been named T20 player of the year, after blitzing the 2018 World Cup last year. Perry, Healy, Lanning and pace bowler Megan Schutt were also named in both the T20 and ODI teams of the year, with Jess Jonnasen also featuring in the latter. It comes ahead of a massive year for the Australian women’s side, who are trying to win a World Cup event on home soil for the first time since 1988 with the T20 version. “It’s been an amazing year for the Australian team,” Lanning said. “A home T20 World Cup is an opportunity that doesn’t come along often. But we are looking forward to and embracing the challenge of performing well in front of our home crowd.” Women’s Cricketer of the Year: Ellyse Perry (Australia) ODI Player of the Year: Ellyse Perry (Australia) T20I Player of the Year: Alyssa Healy (Australia) Emerging Player of the Year: Chanida Sutthiruang (Thailand) ODI Team of the Year: Alyssa Healy (wk, Australia), Smriti Mandhana (India), Tamsin Beaumont (England), Meg Lanning (capt, Australia), Stafanie Taylor (West Indies), Ellyse Perry (Australia), Jess Jonassen (Australia), Shikha Pandey (India), Jhulan Goswami (India), Megan Schutt (Australia), Poonam Yadav (India). T20I Team of the Year: Alyssa Healy (wk, Australia), Danielle Wyatt (England), Meg Lanning (capt, Australia), Smriti Mandhana (India), Lizelle Lee (South Africa), Ellyse Perry (Australia), Deepti Sharma (India), Nida Dar (Pakistan), Megan Schutt (Australia), Shabnim Ismail (South Africa), Radha Yadav (India).