VAR technology should only be called on to reverse “clear and obvious” mistakes regarding offside, according to the general secretary of the law-making International Football Association Board. The weekend’s Premier League fixtures featured a number of marginal offside decisions which were checked by VAR, with goals ruled out for Wolves, Crystal Palace, Norwich, Brighton and Sheffield United. Lukas Brud said the Ifab will reissue guidance on best practice regarding VAR to competitions which use it, probably after its annual general meeting at the end of February next year, which will include information on offsides. In general terms, that advice will be that technology cannot definitively make a ruling on offside as it can over whether a shot has crossed the goal line, and that therefore VAR should only be used to correct “clear and obvious” mistakes. “Clear and obvious still remains - it’s an important principle. There should not be a lot of time spent to find something marginal,” Brud told PA Sport. “If something is not clear on the first sight, then it’s not obvious and it shouldn’t be considered. Looking at one camera angle is one thing but looking at 15, trying to find something that was potentially not even there, this was not the idea of the VAR principle. It should be clear and obvious.” The Ifab stressed the guidance on offside will not be new advice, and will be a routine update to stakeholders that has nothing to do with events in England this weekend. Wolves captain Conor Coady spoke out after his side were denied an equaliser just before half-time at runaway leaders Liverpool on Sunday. Neto’s goal was ruled out because Spanish wing-back Jonny was ruled offside, based on video evidence, in the build-up. “It’s horrible for me, it’s tough to take,” Coady said. “A lot of people are going to tell me that they have come to the right decision and they might have. But what is it, an armpit that’s offside, or a toe, or something like that?” Sheffield United were denied a goal against Manchester City - the fifth time this season VAR has ruled out a goal they have scored. Blades manager Chris Wilder said: “Yet again we had another goal disallowed by VAR. That’s about eight or nine over the weekend, this is not a situation helping the game.” His opposite number Pep Guardiola said VAR was “a big mess” and added: “Hopefully next season it can do better.” The Premier League has been contacted by PA for comment.