Malta’s prime minister, Joseph Muscat, is under renewed pressure to quit immediately after a European parliament delegation said the integrity of the Daphne Caruana Galizia murder inquiry remained at risk while he was still in power. Muscat was “not convincing” over why he should delay his resignation until mid-January, said Sven Giegold, a German Green MEP who took part in a two-day emergency mission to Malta. On Wednesday the person alleged to have organised Caruana Galizia’s murder told a court that a business tycoon ordered the killing with the words: “Get on with it. I want to kill Daphne.” Melvin Theuma described events leading up to the journalist’s murder, including how he arranged payments to three men alleged to have carried out the fatal car bombing in October 2017. He said the instruction “get on with it” came from Malta’s richest man, Yorgen Fenech, who he said was the “true mastermind”. Theuma told the court that Fenech gave him €150,000 to hire hitmen to carry out the killing, the Times of Malta reported. Fenech has been charged with complicity in the murder but denies any wrongdoing. Malta’s prime minister, Joseph Muscat offers a presidential pardon to Melvin Theuma, a taxi driver from Birkirkara, in return for sharing potentially crucial evidence about the murder of the journalist Yorgen Fenech, a prominent Maltese businessman, is arrested onboard his yacht as it is heading out to sea. Fenech is released on bail and placed under round-the-clock police surveillance. The Maltese prime minister’s chief of staff, Keith Schembri, and the tourism minister, Konrad Mizzi, resign. The economy minister, Chris Cardona follows them. They have all denied any wrongdoing. Schembri is arrested. Details emerge that one of three men awaiting trial for the murder claimed they originally planned to shoot the journalist through a window where she often sat while working at home. Schembri is released. Muscat emerges from a marathon cabinet meeting at 3am on Friday to announce he will stay in the job until the murder investigation is complete. The European parliament agrees to send an 'urgent mission' to Malta over the case. Fenech is charged with complicity in Caruana Galizia’s murder. Muscat resigns. In a televised address he says he will stay on until a new leader of his ruling Labour party is elected in January. The European parliament delegation welcomed progress in the murder inquiry but said its integrity remained at risk while Muscat stayed in office. “The next 40 days will be crucial, also for trust in the integrity of the investigation,” said a statement from the MEPs. Giegold said on Thursday that Muscat told the group that he would not be in a position to destroy evidence in the case. The MEP described their encounter this week as “not a friendly meeting” . Giegold said Muscat seemed quite different to the “very self-confident” man he recalled from previous meetings. “This time it was totally different. He was on the defensive. He admitted misjudgment when it came to his chief of staff, Keith Schembri.” Schembri, who is said to have links to Fenech, was arrested and released last week in connection with the murder case. He has denied any wrongdoing. Giegold said EU leaders would find themselves in a difficult position if Muscat attended a European council summit next week. “The decision to stay on for four more weeks puts Malta into difficulty and puts Europe into difficulty, because who wants to shake hands at the Euro summit with this prime minister,” he said. The MEP said Malta’s troubles went beyond the Caruana Galizia case. He also criticised the new European commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, for not focusing on wider problems in the EU’s smallest member state. On Wednesday Von der Leyen said she was “concerned” about the “recent developments in Malta” and called for “a thorough and independent investigation free from any political interference” into Caruana Galizia’s murder. The European parliament team argue that Von der Leyen’s executive, whose task is to uphold EU law, has not gone far enough. Giegold said Von der Leyen had “failed” this first test, arguing that weak rule of law was a systemic problem. The commission needed to ask “why are there no prosecutions when it comes to corruption, money laundering, large cases of financial crime,” Giegold said. “Our call is to start a dialogue with Malta and the rule of law framework immediately What this means is to ask systematically questions on the state of the rule of law, force the [Maltese] government to answer and then enter into dialogue into which reforms are needed,” he said. “Von der Leyen, if she doesn’t act, she will get into a real problem of credibility when it comes to rule-of-law issues.”