The Hearts manager, Daniel Stendel, insists his return to Germany had no bearing on the 2-0 derby defeat by Hibernian. Two first-half goals from Martin Boyle gave Hibs all three points at Tynecastle and left the home side rooted to the bottom of the Premiership. Eyebrows had been raised before the match when Stendel returned to his homeland for personal business after the 2-0 loss to Hamilton and left his assistant, Andy Kirk, to oversee preparations for the derby. The former Barnsley manager also gave the players Christmas Day off despite playing the next day. Stendel, who is still searching for a first win following four games in charge, dismissed any notion that it was a factor in Hearts’ 12th defeat of the season. “I cannot and would not explain [the reason for going back to Germany], it was long [agreed] before I signed here. I know it’s a difficult situation but when you see the game it was not the reason we did not win.” Stendel is the club’s first manager in 82 years to lose his first four games. Hearts were playing catch-up after just six minutes when Boyle coolly volleyed Scott Allan’s hopeful cross into the net from close range. The playmaker then raced clear of the Hearts defence to slot past Joel Pereira in the 31st minute. Hearts dominated possession in the second half but good goalkeeping by Ofir Marciano and poor finishing ensured the visitors left with a clean sheet. The Hibs manager, Jack Ross, was naturally thrilled with Boyle’s match-winning contribution– a well-taken volley followed by a composed one-on-one finish. “He’s been really good since I came into the job. Celtic extended their winning run in the league to 11 matches with a 2-1 victory at St Mirren. The leaders broke the deadlock in the 22nd minute, Callum McGregor firing in the rebound after his first shot had hit a post. James Forrest doubled their lead 10 minutes later, slamming home after going round the goalkeeper Vaclav Hladky. Cameron MacPherson scored in the 89th minute for St Mirren but Celtic held on. Alfredo Morelos came off the bench to score a 65th-minute winner as Rangers beat Kilmarnock 1-0 to prevent Celtic from increasing their five-point lead at the summit. Jermain Defoe kept his starting place despite Morelos being available after suspension but the Colombian made a big impact after his introduction. Seven minutes after coming on to clinch all three points, Morelos latched onto Joe Aribo’s through ball and poked the ball past Laurentiu Branescu. Declan Gallagher headed home a stoppage-time winner as Motherwell came from behind to beat 10-man Ross County 2-1. Blair Spittal put the hosts ahead at half-time, before Lewis Spence was sent off. It took until nine minutes from time before substitute Ross MacIver found an equaliser, but Well went on to snatch victory through Gallagher. Fourth-placed Aberdeen saw off Livingston 2-1 courtesy of Connor McLennan’s first-half strike and a Bruce Anderson effort, while Alistair McCann’s first goal for St Johnstone earned them a 1-0 win at Hamilton.