I don’t know. What are you planning to do at the age of 80 after retiring from the quarter-decade in Labour politics you put in after a stellar 35-year acting career? Limber up with a Radio 4 series adapted from Zola’s novels, have a crack at King Lear and reap a harvest of rave reviews, then win a Tony for your part in a Broadway revival of Edward Albee’s Three Tall Women? Then congratulations – you are Glenda Jackson and I claim my five pounds. Now she has turned to television. In Elizabeth Is Missing (BBC One; adapted from Emma Healey’s bestselling novel), Jackson plays Maude, who becomes set on discovering what happened to her friend Elizabeth (Maggie Steed), who vanished one day after they had been gardening together. Maude is in the throes of Alzheimer’s – her home is festooned with labels, reminders and instructions, her pockets stuffed with notes to self – and this new disappearance becomes linked in her increasingly chaotic mind with a much older one. It is that of her sister Sukey (played in flashback by Sophie Rundle, alongside Liv Hill as the young Maude) who went missing in 1949 and was never seen or heard of again. Technically, then, it is a murder mystery. There is a victim, an unknown fate and clues and red herrings strewn hither and yon. But that is all almost a McGuffin itself. Elizabeth Is Missing is really a portrait of dementia, the charting from within and without of the disintegration of mind and memory and its effects on the sufferer and her family. There is sterling support from those playing Maude’s increasingly stricken daughter Helen (Helen Behan) and her granddaughter Katy (Nell Williams), with lovely distinctions in their attitudes towards Maude – Katy’s generational distance enables her to take Maude much more as she finds her, while Helen’s grief for her mother and anxiety about her care corrodes her patience. But of course – of course – it is Jackson who commands the attention. And she is wonderful, in that vanishingly rare way that can come only from next-level talent as razor-sharp as it ever was plus 40 years of honing your technique, whetting both blades on 80 years of life experience. Maude’s decline is as nuanced as it is relentless. The increasingly feverish fumblings for things and for words. The cantankerousness shading into unreasonableness and finally violence, the frustration into despair, wordless screams becoming voiced, the thumb that creeps more often towards the mouth to suck for comfort. It is a harrowing, compelling, unsentimental, altogether magnificent performance. It will surely win awards, but, unlike on many other occasions, you don’t think about that as it is unspooling before you. And oh God, what a face she has. And what a voice. And what a presence, all diminished and unleashed at will. By the end, we have the answers to the mystery, or mysteries. The clues – missing notes, smashed glass in fireplaces 70 years apart, footprints in the soil now and then – entwine and illuminate each other for Maude, even as outwardly she becomes more confused and unreliable. As she loses control (collapsing in bitter tears alone when she wets herself, howling in protest when Helen has to lock her in the house for her own safety) and must move in with Helen to be taken care of full-time, the ravings of a woman driven mad by grief after losing a son in the blitz begin to make sense and lead her towards peace, at least in Sukey’s regard. As well as a study of the relentless sorrows and horrors of dementia, Elizabeth Is Missing provides a meditation on what endures – joy and (especially inexplicable) loss, a sense of place and of home – or recurs down the generations. The shadow, for instance, of male violence lurks everywhere, from Sukey’s imagined fate at the hands of her fiancé or the creepy lodger to the fear Elizabeth harbours of her own son. The mystery element and its resolution for Sukey and Elizabeth are not too complicated, psychologically or practically, and nor do they need to be. The real drama exists elsewhere, in bravely impressionistic form held together by superb writing, a complex but immaculate structure and Jackson’s mesmerising, heartbreaking (and funny – as when she cannot remember who the prime minister is but “I know I don’t like him”) performance at its heart. We will see its like again, I’m sure, but it may take another 80 years.