It’s Christmas morning – the pitter-patter of eager little feet has told me so – and the prospect of a grand feast is looming, but only one thing really matters right now: breakfast. Assigned to kitchen duty, I take it upon myself to make something special yet not terribly time-consuming. It gives us all the sustenance we need to power through the pre-dinner preparations, as well as a lovely precursor of flavours to come. Now I am ready to follow my plan, to prepare and produce the festive grub. Whether it’s turnip cake or a more traditional roast turkey that’s gracing the centre of your table this year, make sure you stay fuelled and committed, leaving ample time to be joyous and merry. Prep 10 minCook 35 minMakes 12, to serve 4 65g sultanas1 orange, zest finely grated, to get 2 tsp, and juiced, to get 50ml 2 large eggs, separated50g caster sugar200g ricotta150g Greek feta, finely crumbled1 tsp vanilla bean paste or extract60ml whole milk150g plain flour1½ tsp baking powder⅛ tsp salt40g unsalted butter To serve120g Greek-style yoghurt100ml maple syrup Put the sultanas and orange juice in a small saucepan on a medium-high heat, bring up to a simmer, then turn off the heat and leave to plump up. Put the egg whites in the bowl of a stand mixer with the whisk attachment in place. Beat on medium speed for four to five minutes, or until you have medium-firm peaks. Transfer the whites to a bowl, then put the egg yolks, sugar, ricotta, feta, vanilla and milk in the stand mixer bowl and beat on medium speed for two minutes, until smooth. Add the flour, baking powder and salt, and whisk for 30 seconds more – the mixture will be quite thick. Drain the sultanas, discarding the juice, then stir into the batter using a spatula. Gently fold in half the egg whites, then fold in the rest until just mixed through. Transfer the mixture to a piping bag (don’t worry if you don’t have one; you can also shape the pancakes with a spoon). Melt 10g butter in a large, nonstick frying pan on a medium heat. Snip off the tip of the piping bag to give you a 2cm opening. Once the butter is melted and hot, pipe 8cm rounds of the mixture into the pan (or use two spoons to scoop heaped tablespoons of the batter into the pan, then flatten them slightly to create a round). Cook three or four pancakes at a time, for four minutes on each side, or until golden and cooked through (to speed things up, use two frying pans, if you like). Keep warm while you cook the remaining batter, adding 10g butter each time. In a small bowl, mix the orange zest into the yoghurt. Divide the pancakes between four plates, drizzle with the maple syrup and serve with the yoghurt alongside. Given that the pancakes, and their accompanying yoghurt, are sweet, I’d go for prosecco rather than champagne with Yotam’s Christmas breakfast dish, even one in the so-called extra-dry style, which, ironically, is still sweeter than a brut – Mionetto does a good one, available for £12.95 on Amazon (shop around, though: you may be able to find it cheaper elsewhere). The Co-Op’s Borgo Molino Prosecco (£10, 11%) would do the job nicely, too, and comes in quite a cool-looking bottle. FB This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.