Jamie Oliver has filmed so many Christmas specials over the years you would think he might be sick at the sight of a turkey but, ever the professional, he returns for another go at the festive bird, this time basting it in herby butter and sage-and-sausage stuffing. He also takes us through time-saving tricks for Christmas Eve prep, whipping up a sumptuous cauliflower and broccoli cheese and a luxurious smoked salmon paté with his usual hands-on zest for life. Ammar Kalia Gary, Gabby and Clare present highlights of another cracking year from Aberdeen. Winners are kept under wraps, but the smart money is on cricketer Ben Stokes for his World Cup final and Ashes heroics. Dina Asher-Smith’s sprinting brilliance might get her somewhere near, too. Ali Catterall Celebrities and fans contribute to this examination of what drove Christie to become such a successful writer, aiming more at her psyche than her upbringing. The conclusion is that she was a polymath whose talents extended far beyond penning whodunnits. Jack Seale Trekkies rejoice: Starfleet is back on free-to-air, and there are still more planets to be discovered. This CBS reboot premiered in 2017, and sees the USS Shenzhou encounter a suspicious foreign object in Federation space, triggering a potentially disastrous series of events. Galactic romps galore. AK Fans of Philip Pullman’s original novels are divided over the daemons – are they featured enough? Do they look right? – but the production is spectacular. That is doubly so in this penultimate instalment, as Lyra is separated from her friends and Mrs Coulter plots her next move. Ellen E Jones IRS suit Hugo has dreams of becoming a general director but the father of his daughter’s best friend – a mobster just released from prison and straying dangerously from the straight and narrow – might have other plans for him. An enjoyable, if somewhat predictable, opening to this simmering Dutch drama. AK Borg vs McEnroe, 9pm, BBC Two Ace performances drive Janus Metz Pedersen’s gripping account of the 1980 Wimbledon men’s final, still among the greatest tennis matches ever. Sverrir Gudnason is the cool Swede Björn Borg, aiming for his fifth championship; Shia LaBeouf the raging John McEnroe. A tale of ice and fire. Paul Howlett Champions Cup Rugby: Exeter Chiefs v Sale Sharks 12.30pm, BT Sport 2. Coverage of the Pool 2 match from Sandy Park. Premier League Football: Manchester United v Everton 1pm, Sky Sports Main Event. With Arsenal v Man City to follow at 4pm. World Cup Ski Jumping 2.35pm, Eurosport 2. From Klingenthal, Germany.