Troy Deeney struck twice to hand Watford a vital 3-0 win over relegation rivals Aston Villa. The Watford captain grabbed his first three minutes before half-time and added a second from the penalty spot in the 67th minute, 10 minutes after his teammate Adrian Mariappa had been sent off. Ismaïla Sarr scored a third not long after to make it back-to-back victories for Nigel Pearson at Vicarage Road and take his side to within three points of Premier League safety. Villa now look in trouble, their fifth defeat in six league games leaving them in the relegation zone and two points above 19th-placed Watford. Dean Smith was unhappy with his players’ commitment and said it was not the first time in recent weeks he had felt that way. “The last few games I have questioned it,” he said. “Second half at Sheffield United I didn’t think we showed enough and first half today we definitely didn’t show enough.” Tom Heaton was called into action inside the first minute when he produced a superb point-back save to deny Christian Kabasele. The hosts dominated during the opening exchanges and, despite a brief rally from Villa, it remained that way for much of the first half – though Ben Foster had to be alert in the 25th minute, diverting Wesley’s downward header over the crossbar after Conor Hourihane’s smart cross. Minutes later Wesley appealed for a penalty after a clash with Craig Cathcart, but VAR ruled that no foul had been committed. Watford went close five minutes before half-time when Sarr dribbled inside two opponents but his side-footed shot was deflected wide by Kortney Hause. Villa cleared the resulting corner, but Watford kept the ball alive and Abdoulaye Doucouré flicked on for Deeney, who directed his close-range effort straight at Heaton. The striker should have scored, but made up for his miss in the 42nd minute when he scuffed home from six yards after Doucouré had been denied by the visitors’ goalkeeper following a poor clearance from Ezri Konsa. Deeney, a boyhood Birmingham fan, cupped his ears to the Villa supporters and the home side deservedly led 1-0 at half-time. Pearson said: “I’m really pleased with the concentration levels, the quality we played with at times, the commitment of the players and they showed incredible unity to find a way to win when we had to deal with a bit of adversity.” Smith introduced Trézéguet for the ineffective Jota at the break and his side’s cause was helped when Mariappa received his second yellow card in the space of six minutes for a cynical foul on Henri Lansbury, the first being a similar challenge on Jack Grealish. Pearson reacted by withdrawing the substitute Nathaniel Chalobah for Craig Dawson and shortly afterwards his side grabbed the crucial second goal their play warranted. After Sarr sent Deeney away, a backtracking Douglas Luiz brought down the home captain. VAR checked the incident, but the penalty stood and Watford’s No 9 drilled down the middle to make it 2-0. It was dreamland for the hosts four minutes later when Étienne Capoue won possession from Grealish, linked up with Deeney and crossed in for Sarr. Smith believed there was a foul in the build-up. “You can slow it down and think there is no contact with Jack, but there is contact on him [from Capoue]. “The penalty as well, it is shoulder to shoulder. Troy knows what he is doing, he is clever and has gone down easily. If the referee walks over to the screen and looks at it again, he can say ‘sorry I made a mistake’ but unfortunately they don’t want to do that here. “My future is not in question for me at the moment. All I will do is get the players ready for the next game. We always knew it would be a tough season.”