You’ll probably have worked out that the grand feast is essentially a theatrical build-up. Festive drinks are followed by little teasers, a few bites to whet the appetite, but not too much: you need to leave room for the main act. Cheeseboards are, for me, a thing of the past, if only for the fact that I can’t help but go back for more, so now I replace the cheese with just a few rich snacks (you’ll note butter features everywhere this week) to kick-start the party with just the right degree of plenty. This year, I’m making salty anchovy crostinis and the most indulgent hush puppies, and later, because even dessert needs a pre-dessert, a chocolate salami for the final, dramatic close. This is a great little festive snack to hand around at a party, together with your favourite sparkling wine. The butter is quite rich, so two soldiers per person are more than enough. Prep 15 minCook 10 minMakes 12, to serve 6 7 anchovy fillets, drained and roughly chopped1 small garlic clove, peeled and roughly chopped½ green chilli, seeds and pith removed, finely chopped 75g unsalted butter, well-softened to room temperature1 lime – zest finely grated, to get 1½ tsp, and juiced, to get 1 tsp 3 slices sourdough bread, well toasted or grilled Olive oil, for drizzling ½ tbsp parsley leaves, finely chopped, to serveBlack pepper Put the first four ingredients into the small bowl of a food processor with the lime juice and a teaspoon of the zest. Blitz until smooth, scraping down the sides of the bowl a few times as you go. Refrigerate if not using straight away; you’ll need to bring it back up to room temperature when using. Cut the toast into 12 6cm-long x 2cm-wide soldiers. Spread each soldier with about 10g of the butter mix, drizzle with a little oil and finish with the parsley, the remaining lime zest and some freshly ground black pepper. Hush puppies are tasty bites of fried cornbread batter from the American South. They’re made with everything you’d find in cornbread, but they are fried instead of baked so are wonderfully crisp. The maple butter gives these a sweet/salty edge, but if that’s not your thing, serve them with melted salted butter and hot sauce instead. Prep 10 minCook 25 minMakes 24, to serve 6-8 as a snack 170g coarse polenta (not quick-cook) 65g plain flour1 tbsp caster sugar1½ tsp baking powder¼ tsp bicarbonate of soda1 tbsp coriander seeds, roughly crushed in a mortar½ tsp chilli flakes1 tsp flaked salt 120g plain yoghurt2 large eggs10g fresh coriander leaves, roughly chopped120g stilton, roughly crumbled700ml sunflower oil, for deep-frying For the maple butter80ml maple syrupFlaked salt120g unsalted butter, fridge-cold, cut into 1½cm cubes Put the first eight ingredients in a large bowl and whisk to combine. In a small bowl, whisk the yoghurt, eggs and fresh coriander, then stir into the large bowl with the cheese until just combined. Do not over-mix. Heat the oil in a medium saucepan on a medium-high heat. Once hot, form ping-pong-ball-sized balls of the mixture (each weighing roughly 25g), making about 24 in total. Drop six or seven balls one by one into the hot oil, and fry for two to three minutes, or until golden all over and cooked through. Transfer to a tray lined with kitchen paper and keep warm while you cook the remaining two or three batches (turn down the heat a little if they brown too quickly). While you’re frying the hush puppies, make the maple butter. Put the maple syrup and a pinch of flaked salt in a small saucepan on medium-high heat. Bring to a simmer, then turn the heat to low and add a quarter of the cold butter cubes. Whisk to incorporate, then repeat until all the butter is used up. Don’t let the sauce boil at all, or it’s likely to split. Set aside until ready to serve. Serve the hush puppies warm with the butter alongside, for dipping. This chocolate salami won’t stick around for long – one bite leads to another, and the rest is history. You can make this a day ahead, ready to be cut and served as a sweet treat after Christmas dinner. Prep 20 minCook 20 minChilling 5 hr-plus Serves 8-10 90g unsalted butter, cut into 2cm cubes100g dark chocolate, roughly chopped130g milk chocolate, roughly chopped 30g golden syrup1 tsp vanilla bean paste, or vanilla extract75ml whole milk1 tbsp espresso or strong brewed coffee200g ginger nut biscuits, roughly chopped100g pecans, roasted, salted and roughly chopped 15g icing sugar Set a heatproof bowl over a pan of gently simmering water on a medium-low heat. Add the first five ingredients and cook, stirring every now and then, until melted and combined. Remove from the heat and stir in the milk and coffee until smooth. Fold in the biscuits and nuts, then transfer to the fridge for 25 minutes, until cooled but not set. Get ready a large sheet of greaseproof paper, and spoon the cooled chocolate mix on to it. Use the paper to help you roll out the chocolate into a 30cm-long x 6cm-wide log or salami shape. Twist the ends of the paper to enclose the chocolate mix, then put on a tray and refrigerate until set – about five hours. Remove from the fridge a few times during that period, and roll the salami again in its paper wrapping, so it keeps its rounded shape. Sift half the icing sugar on to a large piece of greaseproof paper, then unwrap the log directly on to it. Sift the remaining sugar on top of the salami, then use your hands to rub the icing sugar all over the sides. Arrange on a wooden board, cut into slices and serve.