Sheffield United remain unbeaten on the road this season as both these sides continue to enjoy impressive runs in the Premier League after sharing the points at Molineux. The winners knew they would climb to fifth in the table and early on that looked like it would be Chris Wilders’s side after Lys Mousset struck in the second minute. Sheffield United had chances to extend the lead and they were punished for failing to take them when Matt Doherty headed home the equaliser. “It means a lot for Matt to score,” the Wolves manager, Nuno Espírito Santo, said. “He had some bad news about a dear friend of his. It was a bad moment in his life so I wish him well. It meant a lot for him and it meant a lot for us as a team.” Wolves extended their unbeaten run to nine league matches while Sheffield United are undefeated in seven. Max Kilman was handed his full Premier League debut for Wolves and the 22-year-old’s inclusion meant 10 of the team began both the victory at Bournemouth the previous weekend and the draw with Braga in Portugal on Thursday. It may have accounted for their slow start as Mousset scored after only 62 seconds. George Baldock’s cross from the right was brought down by the Frenchman who then fired his shot into the bottom corner from eight yards. A couple of free-kicks in dangerous positions, one resulting from a foul that saw Leander Dendoncker receive a yellow card with three minutes gone, kept Wolves under pressure. However, Wolves survived any further damage and would have been level after 13 minutes had Dean Henderson not produced a fine save to tip Raúl Jiménez’s powerful header over the crossbar. The Blades missed a host of chances to extend their lead either side of half-time. Jiménez then collected the ball in the right-hand channel and clipped a cross to the back post where the unmarked Doherty stooped to head past Henderson. Wilder said: “Lys Mousset showed he can finish against Man United and he showed it again. His partnership with David McGoldrick is going brilliantly too. We’re doing a lot of things right at the moment – both with and without the ball.”