In this election, no one has a good word to say about tribalism. The Economist complains that politics today is “about tribalism as much as economics”, while in the Times, Clare Foges has welcomed the death of the political tribe. In the New Statesman, Jeremy Cliffe says that our leaders are “motivated not by practical matters but by tribal hatreds.” Metaphors of tribalism cut both ways. When you say that your tattoo is tribal, you’re associating it with something old, authentic and exotic. When you say that your teenager has found their “tribe” at school, you mean that they have found a social group to belong to – not that they’ve decided to re-enact the pig-killing scene from The Lord of the Flies. But in politics, the connotations of “tribe” are clearly negative. The word is meant to signify an attachment to politics that is unhealthily excessive – like a primitive religious cult. The implication is that the tribally political believe in their politics too much, putting faith above reason. Unscientific in their approach, they naively prefer the simplicity of what they already know; they are unwilling to embrace “change”. The metaphor of political tribalism thus suggests that certain kinds of political outlook are irrational. At the same time it promotes an alternative, in the form of the detached observations of a sophisticated individual mind. But here the metaphor of the tribe is itself hindering our thinking. The way we tend to talk and think about our politics puts citizens in a paradoxical position. We are, much of the time, objects of politics: those whose attitudes, aspirations and lifestyle policy will be applied to by the state. We are the people whose votes the parties want. Political advisers, analysts and commentators study us carefully. They try to name our different species: “Essex man”, “Worcester woman”, “Workington man” They want to know what makes “ordinary people” tick so that they can predict our vote and figure out how to change it. At the same time that we are objects of politics, we are also asked to be observers of it. News reporting provides ongoing commentary on the action, as if politics were a race we observe from the stands. Parties propose policy and commentators interpret it for us, telling us which part of the electorate it is aimed at and how much it seems to be winning us over. Opinion polls appear not as representations of what we ourselves might be thinking, but rather information about something happening somewhere else, involving other people. This is the space that critics of “tribalism” think we should occupy: apart from the action, reviewing it as if not part of it – theatre critics who dislike too much drama. It’s a view that brings out the “colonial” mindset embedded within the metaphor of tribes, which makes politics seem to be about keeping the uncivilised in check. As if political disagreement mostly turns on a lack of understanding – as if it could be resolved easily if everyone calmed down, put things in proportion and listened carefully while the facts are explained to them. In other words, we are all being asked to take a step back. But that is also a step away from concerning ourselves with our actual interests. Politics and policy directly affect our lives, but they don’t affect us all in the same way. Changes to benefits, trade agreements and government spending make day-to-day life harder or easier, depending on where we live, what we do for a living, how rich we are. Remainers aren’t opposed to Brexit simply because it hurts their feelings. It makes earning their living more difficult. Brexiters aren’t simply failing to see things clearly. They too have found their interests compromised. But the critique of tribalism asks all of us to set this aside – to make less of a fuss. Resolving political disagreement isn’t simply a matter of getting people to change how they see things. It means addressing the actual conflicts of interest between different people and parts of the country, finding a way to broker a solution between them. That does require people to be reasonable, to balance their own interests with an appreciation of everyone else’s. But it also requires them to be conscious of their particular interests and dedicated to political action in the service of them. If we are going to find ways to resolve conflicts by giving everyone something of what they need, then we need to be closely involved – we need to be more passionate about politics, not less. When we think of ourselves only as objects of politics or its detached observers, we don’t see ourselves as participants. The institutions that enable our participation – professional associations, trade unions, national and regional civic organisations – have been deliberately undermined over the past 30 years. And the idea that one might commit, passionately, to the political life of a community has been displaced by the belief that we should pursue our individual interests, in competition with each other. Rather than put our tribes aside, we must be more and better committed to them. It is only by defending the interests we all share that we can protect our own. • Alan Finlayson is professor of political and social theory at the University of East Anglia