Q My husband and I own a home worth about £400,000 which is now totally mortgage free. He commutes a long way to work each day and as we have two young children, we are considering moving to the town where he works. Property there is more expensive, but the schools are good and the children would benefit from seeing more of their father during the week. Ideally we would like to make a step up and buy a detached family home, which in the area we want (where there’s a school we like) would cost about £725,000. We would need to borrow £325,000 to do this. I am a stay-at-home mum but my husband earns £48,000 per year plus about £8,000 in commission. I have heard about mortgages where you can borrow more than the typical 3.5 times annual income which we would probably need to apply for. We feel we can afford to stretch our finances to take on the extra borrowing as we have no other debts or loans and have some savings in the bank. We could accommodate the repayments in our monthly household budget. Can you please advise us on how to access these type of mortgages, where do we find them and how can we maximise our chances of being approved for the mortgage loan?XF A To get a mortgage of £325,000, you would have to be able to borrow just over 5.8 times your husband’s total salary (including bonus) which, surprising as it may seem, is not an impossibility. According to independent mortgage advisers, Clifton Private Finance, a few lenders are prepared to offer a loan-to-income ratio of six times salary but only to qualified professionals. So to be eligible, your husband would have to be working as an accountant, actuary, barrister, dentist, engineer, medical doctor, optometrist, pharmacist, solicitor or vet. All is not lost if your husband does not work in one of those professions because another lender will go to six times income provided the mortgage is no bigger than 60% of the value of the property. With a mortgage of £325,000 on a house worth £725,000, you would be well within that limit. But the main hurdle in getting any kind of mortgage is showing that you can afford it and also that you could continue to afford it if interest rates went up. The fact that you have no other debts and money in the bank will definitely help as does the fact that childcare costs are not a drain on your finances. But whether those things will guarantee that you’ll secure the mortgage you want is quite another matter. Because you are looking to borrow in a pretty niche part of the mortgage market, it would make sense to use a specialist mortgage adviser who can knows which lenders – some of whom may not deal directly with the public – will look favourably on your situation and so can help tailor your mortgage application accordingly.