The British Museum has unveiled a year-long programme of events to mark the 850th anniversary of the murder of Thomas Becket. The archbishop of Canterbury was murdered on 29 December 1170 in what the museum described as “one of the most shocking crimes in European history”. The programme for Becket 2020 includes performances, talks, film screenings and religious services. The year of events will culminate with a major exhibition about Becket, which will open at the British Museum in October. Naomi Speakman, the exhibition’s co-curator, said: “The story of Thomas Becket’s life, death and legacy has all the hallmarks of a Game of Thrones plot. There’s drama, fame, royalty, power, envy, retribution and ultimately a brutal murder that shocked Europe. “These events had repercussions that have echoed out through time and we’re delighted to be telling this important story for the first time in a major exhibition.” Becket was killed in Canterbury Cathedral by four knights after what was interpreted as an order from King Henry II. Becket was made a saint by the Pope just over two years later and his shrine in Canterbury became a destination for pilgrims from across Europe before it was destroyed on the orders of Henry VIII in the early years of the Reformation. The British Museum said its exhibition, the title of which has not been decided, would present “Becket’s tumultuous journey: from London merchant’s son to archbishop; and from a revered saint in death to a traitor in the eyes of Henry VIII over 350 years later”. It will showcase more than 100 objects associated with the archbishop, including manuscripts, jewellery, sculpture, stained glass and paintings. The exhibition will include loans from around the world, as well as artefacts from the museum’s collection. The programme of events will include a new production of TS Eliot’s Murder in the Cathedral, a verse drama that depicts the assassination, performed in Canterbury Cathedral, as part of an initiative with the Marlowe Theatre in October. The cathedral will stage a choral evensong service to commemorate Becket’s martyrdom on 29 December 2020.