A convicted IRA member currently in jail on separate murder charges was an “active participant” in the 1982 Hyde Park bombing, the high court ruled on Wednesday in a civil action taken by the victims’ families. Relatives of four soldiers who died in the IRA blast were told that John Downey was liable for the explosion that killed their loved ones. The civil case against Downey was brought by Sarah-Jane Young, the daughter of L/Col Jeffrey Young. He, along with SQMC Roy Bright, 36, Lt Dennis Daly, 23, and Tpr Simon Tipper, 19, died in the IRA attack. Thirty-one others were injured and seven horses had to be put down because of their injuries in the explosion. Downey denied in written evidence he had any involvement in the Hyde Park bombing. The civil case relating to the Hyde Park atrocity was taken in response to the collapse of the original criminal trial against Downey in 2014 after a “letter of assurance” was produced in court. It stated that Downey had been told by the Police Service of Northern Ireland he was no longer wanted for any crimes related to the Northern Irish Troubles. The judge in the first trial concluded therefore that Downey’s arrest at Gatwick airport in 2013 was an abuse of process. Downey’s comfort letter was part of a secret scheme drawn up by Tony Blair’s government to assure IRA fugitives that they were no longer being sought for arrest and conviction over crimes committed prior to the 1998 Good Friday Agreement. The families of the victims’ legal team told the high court there had been clear evidence of Downey’s involvement in the attack including “damning” fingerprint evidence. Lord Brennan QC described the IRA attack in 1981 as “cold-blooded killing, with vicious brutality and maximum harm”. Mrs Justice Yip ruled that Downey was liable for the bombing. Today’s judgement opens the ground for the families to obtain damages and also, possibly, to sue Downey. Their civil action was modelled on the case taken by families of the victims of the Real IRA 1998 massacre in Omagh. No one has ever been convicted directly with killing 29 people in the County Tyrone town 21 years ago, but families won the right in the high court to sue several men said in court to be Real IRA leaders at the time of that atrocity. Downey’s original trial in connection with the Hyde Park bombing collapsed when the judge in the 2014 cause ruling said Downey should not be prosecuted because he had been given a written guarantee that he would not face trial. Downey’s legal team cited an official “on-the-run” (OTR) letter he had received in 2007, which stated he was not wanted by police. His case highlighted the highly controversial practice of OTR or “get-out-of-jail” cards given in secret by Tony Blair’s government to Sinn Féin for more than 180 wanted IRA fugitives. Sinn Féin persuaded the Blair administration that the prosecution of the IRA on-the-runs would endanger grassroots republican support for the peace process. The Democratic Unionist party involved in the 2006 post St Andrews Agreement power sharing administration in Northern Ireland at the time had no idea that the immunity from prosecution scheme for IRA members was in existence. The DUP viewed the scheme as a sign of the Labour government’s duplicity and betrayal. After Downey walked free the then prime minister, David Cameron, ordered an inquiry into the scheme by Lady Justice Hallett. She later ruled that the Police Service of Northern Ireland had made a “catastrophic mistake” in advising the court in the original trial over Downey’s letter. Lady Hallett found that the letters to IRA fugitives were not an amnesty and that future prosecutions of those who held the cards could go ahead. Although the Downey case focused attention on the scheme, its existence was first revealed in the Observer several years earlier. At least one senior Sinn Féin politician is said to hold an OTR card, as well as several leading IRA figures including one man who is suspected of building the bomb that killed 11 civilians at Enniskillen on Remembrance Day in 1987. Downey is currently held at Maghaberry high-security prison in Northern Ireland facing separate charges. The 67-year-old from Creeslough in County Donegal in the Irish Republic is accused of murdering the Ulster Defence Regiment soldiers L/Cpl Alfred Johnston and Pte James Eames in an IRA bomb attack in Enniskillen in County Fermanagh in 1972.