The NFL’s old guard is nearing the end. Advances in training, sleep science and nutrition – not to mention the expansion of the league’s passing rules – allow veteran quarterbacks to play into their late 30s and beyond, but time always wins, eventually. Peyton Manning was the first to go. Tom Brady, Drew Brees, Philip Rivers and Peyton’s younger brother, Eli, will soon follow him. Below, we look at what the future holds for the four veterans. Age at start of 2020 season: 39 Admit it: you were excited when Eli started firing against the Eagles on Monday night. There’s nothing we enjoy more in sports than the last ride of an old gunslinger. Monday allowed us to dream of a final Manning season in 2020: he went 15/30 on the night, throwing for just over 200 yards and two touchdowns. And he did so with his signature panache: ducking and weaving in the pocket, delivering a no-no-no-yes pass with defenders draped all over him. Then the second-half kicked off and we saw the same fossilized Manning we’ve become familiar with in recent years, the one who moves like a long-neglected combine harvester. Manning can still reach his old level in short spurts, but he is unable to do so over the course of a full season. Manning’s career record now sits at exactly .500. Based on the eye test and his individual numbers, he shouldn’t make the Hall of Fame. But two Super Bowl rings (yep, we still seem to be doing evaluations that way) plus his surname mean he’s a virtual lock to get into the Hall, given the makeup of the current voting body. The only thing that would put that in jeopardy is a protracted retirement that would see his overall record dip. Walking away with his legacy intact seems like the wisest choice Should he retire? Yes Will he retire? Yes Age at start of 2020 season: 38 Rivers may be the most fascinating player in the NFL. Whether or not you believe Rivers is a Hall of Famer has become more than a question, it’s become an identity. It boils down to this: are you part of the new age, analytical movement? Or do you believe in the Michael Jordan-era evaluation point: how much did he win? The truth should, as usual, fall somewhere along that spectrum. It’s fair to say Rivers has had a fabulous career: he is, on the whole, objectively a better player than Eli Manning. And yet it’s also fair to say Manning has had a better career. Winning a Super Bowl is the whole point of this thing and winning two matters. Rivers would trade all the think pieces about his brilliance and the passing records for another shot at a championship. Time is running out with the Chargers, and they haven’t been able to cobble together a competent offensive line for much of this decade. When they have, the defense has stunk. The whole puzzle has never come together. Now, Rivers’ play has started to dip, a perfectly natural state of affairs for a 38-year old now in his 16th season. A change of scenery would be good for both Rivers and the Chargers. Rivers is still good. He ranks 12th among qualified quarterbacks in DVOA this season, which is typically the cut-off point for quarterbacks who reach the Super Bowl. He remains in full, obnoxious voice: Can’t you just picture Rivers having one final run with a new franchise, similar to Brett Favre’s oh-so-close run with the Vikings? That possibility feels like it will soon become a reality. But where? How about this: a year with the Patriots. Should he retire? No, aim for a year with a contender Will he retire? No Age at start of 2020 season: 43 In the Tom v Time battle, time is finally nearing victory. Brady hasn’t been good this year, even if he’s been held back by a below-par receiving corps and banged-up offensive line. The lack of help around him has been overstated compared to contemporaries because he is Tom Bleeping Brady. The reality is this: Brady is completing fewer passes than we should expect based on, among other things, the separation of his receivers, the pressure he’s facing and the length of his attempts. He ranks 26th in on-target throw percentage, per Sports Info Solutions. His completion percentage over expectation is sitting at -0.4%, which also ranks 26th per Next Gen Stats. Brady is still above average, which is good enough to win when surrounded by a bunch of strong ancillary pieces. But he’s no longer able to overcome shoddy offensive lines or ill-equipped receivers like he has in the past. How badly does he want to keep playing if that’s the equation moving forward? Who knows? This is a homicidally competitive individual, but at the start of next season he will be closer to 60 than 25. I have reached the age where hangovers last two days, and I moan and creak getting up off the sofa. Can you imagine how a 42-year old feels the day after playing a professional football game? There’s no amount of muscle pliability that helps deal with a 6ft 4in, 260lbs pass-rusher caving in your chest. Brady leaving New England feels like a real possibility. Whether or not he hangs up his jersey is a different question. “I’ve got another seven to eight years. He [Peyton Manning] has two. That’s the final chapter,” Brady wrote to a friend during the 2014 season. Manning instantly fell off a cliff and walked away while he still could. Brady’s timeline would see him play until 2022. Could he squeeze out two or three more seasons? Sure. But he will be diminished, and he may be with a different franchise. Does Brady want one shot to prove he can win without Bill Belichick? Even if he wanted to, could he at this age? Does he want to play a year or two with a different franchise because his hero, Joe Montana, followed that very same path? Or does he want to be a one franchise guy? Rumors of Brady leaving the Patriots at the end of this season have circulated since the preseason, and the star put his Brookline home on the market in August. That’s either a rich couple selling their home because they’re a rich couple and that’s what they do, or it’s evidence that Brady is ready to call it a day. Brady’s legacy is set. If not unanimously considered the greatest to ever play quarterback, he is as near as makes no difference. There’s not much he could add in the next 24 months that would move the needle positively. Should he retire? Yes Will he retire? No Age at start of 2020 season: 41 Brees, more than any player in the league, is playing with house money. His legacy is set. He’s one of the greatest to ever play; the finest Saint in franchise history; the guy who helped a city heal the scars of Katrina; the overlooked draft pick who flourished into a star in one city, was discarded, then became an all-timer for his new team. And he has done all of that without the whiff of a scandal – the Bountygate nonsense never touched Brees’ reputation. Brees is in a perfect position this year. He’s still playing at a really, really high level. He could keep playing this pitch-and-catch game, with one of the best receivers in the league, a great backfield, and overpowering offensive line for three or so seasons. He works with one of the most creative offensive minds in football, Sean Payton, who’s going nowhere any time soon. Brees can set the most fun timeline: a Super Bowl then out. If the Saints win it this year, jog off into the sunset, preserving your body. If not, run it back and operate under the same timetable next year and the year after and the year after that. Should he retire? No, aim for one more Super Bowl Will he retire? No