The last thing I want when I have people over is anything stressful or fancy. In winter, I often make a big vat of soup or stew, which I leave ticking over on the hob, and a bowl of herb oil and good bread for dunking. If I want something more portable, I put stuff on toast and lay it out on big platters: sometimes it’s mashed beans with crispy sage, citrus and olive oil, or forked up squash with dukkah and pomegranate. This year, I’ve been messing around with these pickled carrots, which sit so well on rye toast with a little cream cheese, which have all the colour needed for a Christmas get-together. Next to a bitter, blood orange fizz, it’s all I want in a party. Fresh, bright little toasts that come together quickly. Prep 15 minRest 30 minServes 6-8 For the carrots3 medium carrots (I use a mix of different colours)3 tbsp white-wine vinegar1 tsp coriander seeds, bashed1 tsp runny honey or agave1 pinch smoked salt For the herby cream cheese250g cream cheese or vegan cream cheese3 sprigs thyme, leaves picked1 small bunch parsley, chopped1 garlic clove, peeled; half finely chopped, the other half reserved for rubbing the toastsZest and juice of half a lemonSalt and black pepper2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil To serve8 slices good rye breadTurkish chilli flakes/Aleppo pepper Start with the carrots: peel the carrots using a speed peeler, then use the peeler to make thin carrot ribbons. You can also do this by hand. Put in a bowl with the vinegar, coriander seeds, honey and smoked salt, and mix. Set aside for at least 30 minutes to macerate. In another bowl, mix all the herby cream cheese ingredients, giving it a good whip with a wooden spoon to get some air into it and lighten the texture. Check the seasoning and add more lemon, salt or pepper as needed. Toast the bread, then rub with the remaining garlic clove half. Spread each toast generously with the cream cheese mix, then top with a little pile of pickled carrots. Sprinkle with the chilli flakes and serve straight away. Citrus, bitters and fizz: there is nothing more I like in a cocktail. If you want to make a big batch for a party, you can double, triple or even multiply this recipe by 10: keep the lot in a jug, then pour into glasses and top up with ice. Prep 10 minServes 4-6 200ml Campari200ml blood orange juice 400ml prosecco, cava, crémant or champagne 6 blood orange slices Mix the Campari and blood orange juice in a jug. Fill each glass a quarter of the way up with the blood orange mix, add ice, then top up with fizz and finish with a slice of orange.