Following on from the chaotic, Thick of It energy of the special the BBC’s political editor Laura Kuenssberg filmed last year on Brexit, the saga continues with this second documentary on Boris Johnson’s government, his attempt to secure a deal and then the lead-up to the general election. With the BBC’s impartiality increasingly being called into question, it is not only illuminating on the year’s political wranglings, but also Kuenssberg’s own intensive process. Ammar Kalia Noel Fitzpatrick plays Santa to some injured rescue dogs. While shih-tzu Gabbana receives an operation for her damaged discs, French bulldog puppy Lexi needs her broken leg and neck injury fixed. Meanwhile, 11-month-old german shepherd Bran has developed severe hip problems. Ali Catterall One-off documentary about the London department store that is not quite the success it once was, but still in a showy league of its own. Former employees give insights into looking after VIPs, but with a £2,000 minimum spend to access the Christmas grotto, it is an experience off limits to most. Hannah J Davies After a seemingly predictable start, Gold Digger turned into an addictive drama and it is now the finale, and time to find out what all those flashbacks (and forwards) were about. It is Ben and Julia’s wedding day, and there’s a massive question mark over whether they will go through with it. Hannah Verdier Focusing on the weeks leading up to King Charles I’s execution in January 1649, this documentary series goes into forensic detail to question whether one of the most significant events in British constitutional history was a triumph for equality or the worrying actions of extremists. AK At the beginning of 2019, the comedian and Guardian columnist Romesh Ranganathan invited a panel of his funny friends to make predictions for the year to come. Did any of them come true? With an election, Brexit, the climate crisis and the rest to contend with, it is unlikely they could have foreseen anything in the madness. AK A Most Violent Year, 11.55pm, BBC OneThat year is 1981, when New York hit peak crime. Ambitious Abel Morales (Oscar Isaac) wants to bury his family’s gangster past by going legit. However, his plans hinge on acquiring a waterfront site where wiseguys hold sway, and his wife Anna (Jessica Chastain), prefers more ruthless methods. Paul Howlett T20 cricket: Brisbane Heat v Sydney Thunder 8am, BT Sport 1. Big Bash action from the Gabba in Brisbane. Darts: World championships 12.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Day five’s arrows from Alexandra Palace in London. EFL Cup football: Aston Villa v Liverpool 7.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. The quarter-final at Villa Park.