Jan de Beer’s Renaissance AltarpiecesThere’s nothing more seasonal than a nicely painted nativity and this Flemish artist painted some very fine ones indeed.• Barber Institute, Birmingham, until 19 January. CarsVroom, vroom – this blockbuster for all the family offers some turbocharged holiday spectacle.• V&A, London, until 19 April. TutankhamunA thrill for kids and grownups. Don’t miss the most jaw-dropping selection of great archaeological treasures ever likely to visit Britain.• Saatchi Gallery, London, until 3 May. Bridget RileyA psychedelic mystery tour of Riley’s eye-opening art – like a party in your head, but without the hangover.• Hayward Gallery, London, until 26 January. Inspired by the EastThis essayistic exhibition on how European artists from Rubens to Picasso saw Islam is full of surprising insights.• British Museum, London, until 26 January. Climate Meltdown, by Rubem RobierbArt Basel in Miami took time out from fixating on a $120,000 banana to view Brazilian artist Rubem Robierb’s ice-sculpture, a quote from environmental activist Greta Thunberg. Thunberg’s impassioned September 2019 speech to the United Nations blamed world leaders for not doing enough. Robierb was inspired to make the 36ft-long art work, which floated across the pool at the Shore Club South Beach, before melting. The artist said: “Climate change is the biggest issue of all time because it affects every living being on our planet.” The Guardian chose its best art shows, photography and architecture of 2019 London’s Thames Estuary theme park is a £3.5bn fantasy realm Salisbury Cathedral’s Christmas tableau features a rugby player’s baby A new nativity has been found in Durham Gilbert and George have put their art on plates for charity Steve McQueen and Tate have called for an arts-rich school curriculum Port Talbot locals are underwhelmed by their new Banksy … while animal graffiti artist ROA things big Art Basel Miami might run into trouble tackling climate change China’s biggest photo fair takes place under the state censor’s eye The National Gallery has bought a Gentileschi with £22m in donations The Champs-Élysées is getting a €250m makeover Artists were at the centre of 80s New York Theaster Gates has made an eloquent memorial to Malaga Island Nothing was smoked in the writing of this review The Bloomberg New Contemporaries showcase caps a vintage year Dakar may be hosting the most important show in African history Everyday life can bring spectacular joy Nan Goldin’s game-changing topped our art exhibitions of 2019 Photographers picked their most inspiring images The Aldobrandini Madonna, about 1532, by Titian Move over, magi. Shift it, shepherds. At a time of year when the men who gathered around the stable traditionally feature on Old Master Christmas cards, here is a painting in which a woman adores the infant Jesus. Her impassioned gaze as she kneels beside Mary is charged with such emotional truth that you know she has to be a real person posing. Yet she is painted into a visionary moment as Mary lets her hold the baby in a scene of trusting friendship, overlooked by John the Baptist. This might actually be intended as a subversive Christmas scene, for its pastoral setting with a shepherd and his flock, and the angel of the Lord coming down, suggests we’re seeing an event that preceded the Adoration of the Shepherds. Who was the Venetian woman who could afford to commission a personal religious masterpiece that immortalises her as Mary’s friend? To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here.