In a lecture published in the essay collection Feel Free, Zadie Smith remembers the moment she began to write fiction in the first person. It was a revelation. The “I” had such an immediate “reality effect”, she writes: no longer was it so necessary to build, painstakingly, the “reality” of a third-person world – the “I” cut through at once, and the reader was away. In autofiction, this power is only intensified. How much is factual (for that has its own deep power also, as every memoirist knows)? How much is not? How unsettled does the reader therefore feel? And how much is in the gift of the author – that is, who gets to call it fiction at all? The Indian poet, novelist and activist Meena Kandasamy, bruised by the reception of When I Hit You, an autofictional account of her own short and abusive first marriage, argues that it all depends on who you are and especially where you are from. “To a Western audience,” she writes in the margins of her new novella, Exquisite Cadavers: writers like me are interesting because – we are from a place where horrible things happen, or, – horrible things have happened to us, or, – a combination of the above. No one discusses process with us. No one discusses our work in the framework of the novel as an evolving form. No one treats us as writers, only as diarists who survived. One could of course argue that for someone as au fait with Foucault and Derrida and Barthes as Kandasamy, expecting the author to control the reception of the text is a somewhat naive proposition. And the judges of the Women’s prize for fiction clearly had no doubt about what When I Hit You was intended to be, shortlisting it for last year’s award. One knows, at the same time, that what she says is all too often entirely true. Exquisite Cadavers (“cadavre exquis” was the surrealists’ art version of the parlour game Consequences) is a response to the response – a novella about a young couple in London, Maya and Karim, whose lives are not the same as Kandasamy’s own. In the margins a commentary discusses where the ideas come from and how fictional they are, mixed with anecdotes from her life (look! how different!) with her Belgian partner and one, then two, children. Karim is from Tunisia, Maya mixed-race British. “I make her relatable to the British readers,” writes Kandasamy, in an amusing aside. “I steal a little of every Englishwoman I see to build the composite. Amy Sarah Claire Naomi Gill Lucy Allison and god yes Kate.” Kandasamy, who now lives in London, packs a lot into 100 pages – not just two stories, but opinions about immigration, sexual violence, #MeToo, film criticism, selfhood, the individual’s relationship to history, the damage handed down by families. She does it with acute insight, and often wry humour. She is especially good on difficult relationships, and the gathering trap of liberal identity politics. Karim is a film studies undergraduate in London on a scholarship, looking for a subject for his first film. Everything he suggests, however, is rejected. But a “project embracing and interrogating his identity is encouraged ... As motivation. As art statement. As part of their ‘institutional commitment and mission to include a whole host of diverse voices’ ... What he also hears are their unsaid words. You are here, here in London, on a scholarship, we have covered your tuition, we expect you to listen to us.” Karim retreats into sarcasm. “Sadly, sarcasm, mocking and lampooning are all preserves of equals – someone like him will always be taken only at face value.” The supposed freedom to make art reveals itself to be as “utterly transactional” as the 20 hours a week he spends working in a Turkish restaurant. And Maya, able to pass as white, British born and bred but now in a mixed marriage with an Arab man, is introduced to a world of micro-aggressions. There are insinuations that he might have multiple wives, might have been tortured; clumsy checks that she has not suddenly discovered religion. This spiky, argumentative book is the novel as protest, as polemic, as dark comedy, as game. Occasionally Kandasamy’s tendencies towards assertion and aphorism (“for Maya, disappearance is detonation”) and her references to art-house movies tip into pretentiousness; those allergic to French critical theory will find phrases like “another time bricolage of an earlier holiday” or the sweeping assumptions of one of her epigrams (“the purpose of avant-garde writing for a writer of colour is to prove you are human”) profoundly irritating. Sometimes she is heavy- handed. But her project is also short, sharp and effective, not least in the way events (pregnancy, friends of Kandasamy’s arrested at home, Karim’s worries about his own relations in Tunisia) begin to echo each other. Separation of “truth” from “fiction” is, it seems, really the artificial construct. The world rushes in, exploding her attempt at English domesticity. Which is either another argument for the necessary evolution of the novel – or a rediscovery of how it has always worked. • Exquisite Cadavers is published by Atlantic (£5.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15.