Finnish illustrator Tove Jansson’s cuddly, rotund fairytale creatures return to our screens in all their 3D glory for the second season of this adaptation. Favourites Moomintroll, Sniff and Snufkin are all set to get up to mischief in their 13 episodes in Moominvalley, with well-placed voice acting from the likes of Taron Egerton, Rosamund Pike and Matt Berry. Billed as Finland’s most expensive TV show, with a budget of €20m, this labour of love will surely delight adults and kids alike. Ammar Kalia Stephen Mulhern hauls a big sack of cash around Manchester, asking shoppers to complete daft tasks such as taping objects to themselves or identifying a celebrity Santa to get some wodge. If a lucky local can produce an actual penny from their pockets, they could even win a holiday to NYC. Graeme Virtue The underwhelming music quiz reaches the end of its run. Hosts Marvin and Rochelle Humes do their best to keep things hyped but, basically, we’re dealing with 40 minutes of contestants naming pop songs from their intros – and even the £10,000 prize can’t transform that into a spectacle for the ages. Phil Harrison Celebrity guests, a whooping audience and a bag of pranks are on offer in Michael McIntyre’s likable variety show. A slightly embarrassed-looking Robbie Williams is a game guest, leading the karaoke and dragging the corpse of Christmas songs around the stage. Ian Wright also hands his phone over. Hannah Verdier Jane McDonald is trying her hardest to get you into the festive spirit. For this special she has enlisted the likes of Blue’s Lee Ryan, Aled Jones and Russell Watson to provide a musical backing to the hanging of your Christmas decorations. And there are prize giveaways to look forward to. AK Robbie Williams has done the inevitable and recorded a Christmas album, one that inexplicably features the vocal talents of heavyweight boxer Tyson Fury, no less. Here he performs his questionable new material alongside old favourites for a crowd of avid fans in this live special. AK Looper 12.25am, BBC One Rian Johnson’s ingenious, head-spinning sci-fi thriller has Joseph Gordon-Levitt and Bruce Willis playing the same Kansas hitman Joe. The younger version is contracted to hunt down and kill his older self, until they join forces to terminate a time-travelling crime syndicate. Violently gripping. Paul Howlett Premiership Rugby: Leicester Tigers v Exeter Chiefs 2.30pm, BT Sport 2. The struggling Tigers face last year’s beaten finalists. Premier League Football: Manchester City v Leicester City 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Heavyweight head-to-head. Football: Club World Cup Final 5.15pm, BBC One. From Khalifa International Stadium in Doha.