In the weeks before Christmas, the main street of Braidwood is quiet. Summer is ordinarily peak tourist season, with families from Canberra stopping in on the way to Bateman’s Bay, but the recent bushfires, which still burn nearby, have put an end to travel to and from the coast. Many businesses are simply closed, with handwritten signs taped to the windows— “closed today due to bushfire conditions” – as shopkeepers head out with the RFS or stay in their own homes to defend them if the fire front shifts. Hot, dry winds scatter ash and powdery topsoil over town, forcing locals inside, and the pub, when it’s open, is full of exhausted RFS volunteers, instantly visible in their bright yellow and soot-smeared faces. The town has been absolutely covered in smoke, thick smoke, for weeks The worst days of the fire have passed but there is a lingering feeling of suspended animation in town, with nobody able to predict when the danger will pass. The town’s economic future is a major source of apprehension. Over the past few years, Braidwood, formerly nicknamed “Deadwood”, has become rejuvenated by a steady stream of young families and newcomers, who have moved for lower prices and to join the town’s long-established creative community. But many of the ventures which give Braidwood its particular flavour rely on passing trade; the Kings Highway closure has set businesses up for a very hard new year. The RFS is still being called out, and mosquito squads are travelling out to fight fires as well, with water barrels strapped to the back of utes. Those in town, left worrying about family and friends, are now beginning to contend with how life has changed since the bushfires began — a question that will occupy more and more people as the summer goes on. For Kelly Sturgiss, the bushfires came on the heels of a hard few months; her small business, Sturkella Music, has only recently launched, and she is still recovering from an injury sustained at her second job as a waitress. Broken glass severed a tendon in her hand, which required intensive surgery. Like many small business owners, the ongoing disruption has put her in a financially precarious situation. As a sole trader, her income is irregular, and contingent on the number of hours she works. School closures at St Bede’s Primary school, where she teaches privately, have meant that she’s missed weeks of scheduled music lessons; and road closures have forced her to cancel the lessons she gives in Canberra. Like a lot of people, she mentions feeling guilty for worrying about her own problems when people are losing properties and homes. She knows that she is lucky, but her breathing is audible and her voice rasps; her lungs, affected by a chronic condition, have been struggling to cope with the polluted air. “I am using a lot of Ventolin. My lungs have been very affected. It’s a shame because I’d done a lot of recovery, and now I feel like I’m back to square one.” To help pass the time, she’s opened her house to local kids, holding impromptu jam sessions and giving pointers to anyone interested. “It was really nice to be able to provide that space for children to feel a bit normal, and maybe express their feelings as well.” “I think every man and his dog who’s not in the RFS wishes they could be out there fighting the fires right now,” Karuna Bajracharya says. “When they started, we sat down and thought about what we’re good at — and we’re good at events, so we decided to do a fundraiser.” Bajracharya and his wife, Karuna, run a Himalayan restaurant and bar, The Smokey Horse, which hosts a regular Sunday session. They advertised the event on social media, adding a note asking Canberrans to come patronise Braidwood businesses if they could. The response to this appeal was immediate. “People came to the fundraiser that I’d never seen before, who told us that they’d come because they wanted to support Braidwood,” Bajracharya says. “They went up and down the street buying their veggies and their Christmas presents. That was really touching.” The fundraising event raised $3,000, which he is planning to donate directly to various local RFS branches, alongside a percentage of the bar’s takings from the night. As well as running the venue, Bajracharya has been taking care of the children, while Garung commutes to Canberra for work. Snow was excited about the school closures, but Pema, his older sister, has been frustrated about missing the last few weeks. With telecommunications dropping out, she’s concerned about her friends on rural properties, and ongoing news coverage of the crisis hasn’t helped. “The news just makes everyone sad,” she says. “[The newsreaders] just make everyone scared and feel worse. I think I’m OK because I live in town, but one of my friends was really panicking on the day that got bad. She lives out on a farm and her pop lives out on a farm. I don’t know what’s happened to her now, but she was really worried.” Jacqui Singh moved to Braidwood a few years ago from the Blue Mountains, in order to help care for her partner’s late father. Her kids go to school in town, and are both members of the 1st Braidwood Scouts, where at the last meeting of the year Santa takes a break from his work in the RFS to drive in on a fire truck and deliver presents. “I’ve definitely noticed that it’s been something that the whole community’s feeling,” she says, as children tear around. “I think a lot of people have pulled together, and are trying to make the best of a situation we have no control over.” Singh is the proud owner of new kidney, “Kareem”, which she received three months ago. Before the transplant, she had dialysis at home, using a machine that was ill-equipped to deal with extreme temperatures and which would have made evacuation difficult. She’s thankful that the timing worked out as it did, especially in giving her a period of respite. “One of the blessings of being off work for a period of time is that I have been able to focus on the children a bit more. Kids pick up on your anxiety, so I’ve been trying to manage that so that they’re not stressing out, trying to make school closures into something fun, like a pyjama day. It’s been difficult, though, because of the health concerns from the smoke.” Michelle Heaney and Norma Flack live across the road from each other, and spend their Fridays at the op shop, sorting through donations. Sitting at a table in the back room, they recount the anxiety of the past few weeks, prompting each other when need be. Anybody who denies climate change today needs their head read Flames had reached the tree line behind Flack’s house when helicopters arrived, “like something out of a western”, she says. Though the area has seen bushfires before, Flack had not experienced a fire as intense as this. The recent drought exacerbated the fire conditions, but Flack has witnessed the region become drier over her lifetime. “Our beautiful river is not like it should be,” she says. “It was magical in a good time. We used to say ‘aren’t we lucky?’ Now, all that water is gone.” Heaney, a long-time environmentalist, remembers Christmas beetles so thick she could scoop them out of the air. She’s spent decades trying to prevent a catastrophe like these fires, being sneered at “as either a greenie leftie ratbag or a latté-sipping elitist”, depending on the times. In the wake of the fires, she’s grappling with fury and grief, and the persistent sense that the world she knows will soon be gone. “What can you do?” she asks. “You can’t do anything. You can go out there and protest and they put you in jail, or hit you for $5,000 cause you go out there and speak truth, or what your version of the truth is … Anybody who denies climate change today needs their head read. It’s as real and as potent and as terrifying as they had predicted in the early ’70s, and I know, because I was there.” “The clean-up is always hard, and ongoing,” Felicity Sturgiss says, steering her 60 Series Landcruiser down the burnt-out Little Bombay Rd. Almost every second day since the fires began, she’s been loading up with hay as well as fruit and vegetables she’s collected from local IGAs, and navigating through bushfire-ravaged areas to deliver it to surviving animals. There are several wombats she is feeding, who emerged from their burrows to a devastated landscape. She’s seen a few joeys, photographing those with burns to provide information for animal rescue groups, and to her delight a water dragon has settled in a dry creek bed she’s lined with slices of watermelon. She’s also rigged up watering holes out of a combination of old barrels, lengths of pipe, plastic floats and blue-shell swimming pools, a system that is tiding over birds and insects, as well as (judging from animal trails in the ash) kangaroos, skinks, goannas and an echidna. “Coming out here is about caring for the country,” she says. “And the responsibility we have to look after it.” After leaving Braidwood to study and travel, she’s returned to make a life working with the environment she grew up in. “You don’t have to join a group … just push back a little,” she says. She pauses. “It always feels like you can never do enough. But it’s about learning to cope with the fact that you just do what you can.”