Thankfully our national housing emergency is finally taking its rightful place as one of the top issues in this general election. Over the course of recent weeks – and years – it has risen up the agenda for politicians and public alike. And it’s easy to see why. Just this week, Shelter revealed that 135,000 children in Britain are homeless. The highest number in 12 years, it means that by the end of today, another 183 children will no longer have a permanent roof over their heads. As the cold weather kicks in we are all more aware of people sleeping on our streets, the most visible form of homelessness, which has risen 165% since 2010. Meanwhile, hidden homelessness sees some 85,000 households placed in temporary accommodation. In reality this means families all living in one room, with no space to cook and eat together, or for children to do homework or even play. Some homeless families have it even worse, placed in emergency accommodation – such as hostels and B&Bs – where children and their families are forced to share kitchens and bathrooms with strangers, with locks that don’t work, no heating, and even rats. These statistics are shocking, but getting them right is vital if we are to understand the challenges we face. That’s why it’s so disappointing when senior politicians get them wrong. So when the chancellor of the exchequer says that homelessness has halved since 2008, as he did on Sky News on Thursday morning, it’s important to highlight this as inaccurate. The number of households in temporary accommodation did not peak in 2008, as Sajid Javid claimed, but in 2004. Since that peak, they declined to their lowest point at the end of 2010. Since 2010, the number has increased again, by 77%. As noted above, rough sleeping has increased even more. Every day our frontline workers see the devastating reality of these numbers on real people’s lives, and the fact that homelessness is getting worse, not better. For whoever forms the next government, solving this emergency must be a top priority. And that’s why it is encouraging that every party is now engaging with housing in this election. In their manifestos, all major parties have said they will end rough sleeping over the course of the next parliament and have committed to tackling some of the factors involved, through measures such as banning section 21 “no-fault” evictions. These welcome commitments mean change could be on the horizon. However, we cannot be complacent because we know that at its heart any plan to solve homelessness must also include social housing. Social housing is secure and genuinely affordable. And it’s what’s needed to end rough sleeping, to get households out of cramped temporary accommodation and to offer hope to the millions of young families and older people trapped in expensive private renting. Social housing has fallen out of favour for too long, on the watch of different governments. That’s why society’s most vulnerable are bearing the brunt of the failure to build houses. Last year, less than 6,300 new social rent homes were delivered in England. And this is not an anomaly. For years, the rates of building for social housing have been stuck at historic lows. That’s why Shelter has been calling on all parties to commit to delivering at least 90,000 new social homes a year over the course of the next parliament. It would be a first step on the road to delivering the 3m new social rent homes a year that Shelter’s independent commission on social housing identified as being necessary. Even after 12 December we will continue to push for these much-needed homes. We simply can’t tackle homelessness without them.