To paraphrase the Who’s Won’t Get Fooled Again, a song about the nature of the boss class, meet the new culture secretary, same as the old culture secretary. Having recently resigned as both an MP and the cabinet member for Digital Culture Media and Sport, Nicky Morgan was given a peerage to continue, after yesterday’s mini-reshuffle, her ministerial role from the Lords. Traditionally, when a new cultural overlord is appointed, there is a media ritual of probing what, in the field of arts, they might know or like. Do they prefer Coronation Street or The Archers, a film by Richard Curtis or Greta Gerwig? We already know, though, that Morgan listens to Classic FM while doing her red boxes, greatly enjoys the Gilbert & Sullivan productions by a company in her former constituency of Loughborough, and that her department tweeted congratulations to Phoebe Waller-Bridge for winning an Emmy for Fleabag. So, this time, the bigger question is not what we can expect from the secretary, but what may be in store for her department. Boris Johnson’s chief advisor, Dominic Cummings, is essentially a more feral version of Malcolm Tucker in The Thick of It. For Cummings, everything is tactical – and Morgan’s continuation feels like a two-part move. In the short term, it avoids a new culture secretary being heavily probed about the future of the BBC, which is the most urgent DCMS responsibility. (Although she wouldn’t have been at risk from Radio 4’s Today programme, as Cummings has apparently banned ministers from appearing on it.) We already know that Morgan is “open-minded” on this. However, as a peer can’t speak in the Commons, having to delegate a junior minister to answer questions there, it is probably too radical even for a Cummings-Johnson administration to attempt to reform the BBC – and take other major cultural decisions – through a secretary who can’t be challenged by MPs. Therefore, the strong expectation is that Morgan, who said she left politics to have a “normal family life”, is putting that wish on hold only until a promised bigger reshuffle on 1 February, the day after the UK is expected to leave the EU. Westminster expectation is that this will re-allocate not just ministerial incumbents but the departments themselves. In the light of this, it seems striking that the 2019 Conservative manifesto had no separate chapter or even a paragraph dedicated to culture, as has generally been the case. Ideas for an “arts premium” and “cultural capital programme” (both explained below) appeared in the Education and Environment sections respectively. Spun at the time as the consequence of a deliberately slimmed-down manifesto, it now seems a possible harbinger of a division of the brief across other departments. So Morgan may be the last culture secretary, at least in the current form. But even if the DCMS goes away, the issues facing it will not. Here are the priority emails in the inboxes of whoever gets the political responsibility for them in the next few months. Cultural importsThe most immediately tricky responsibility is the question of visa and immigration arrangements, after Brexit, for the numerous artists, orchestras and theatre companies that currently travel easily through waiver and reciprocation schemes. The 11-month transition period after 31 January, in which protocols will likely remain unchanged, gives a little leeway. But with concert halls and opera houses planning many years ahead, firm answers will be needed soon about how to get an orchestra in to the UK from 2021. Phone lines will be burning from the Barbican and South Bank to whoever is in charge. The Festival of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in 2022The Tory manifesto commitment to create a successor to the 1951 Festival of Britain – celebrating UK-wide creativity in arts and business – would once have seemed the easy part of the arty brief, a less athletic equivalent of the 2012 London Olympics that was the DCMS’s favourite ever job. But with the Conservatives holding only six of 59 seats in Scotland, and the DUP estranged from its former Tory allies over Brexit, the Johnson government has only a technical mandate in half of the UK, while separatist rhetoric is rising. In these circumstances, a celebration of the union seems certain to be subject to sarcasm and protest, and even potentially terrorism. BroadcastingThe biggest issues in television, radio and digital are the form and funding of the BBC, and whether Channel 4, which few voters may even realise is still owned by the state, should be privatised. Channel 4’s unique status – funded by advertising revenue, but owned by the state – is still defensible. Having no shareholders, unlike other ad-funded networks, its programming decisions are not motivated by maximising profit, nor is it vulnerable to takeover or merger, as has happened to several ITV companies. It seems improbable, though, that a right-wing majority government – especially one infuriated by C4 coverage of the election, which included replacing no-show Johnson with an ice sculpture in a climate change debate – will continue to tolerate a Channel 4 that has executives earning vastly more than the most senior ministers. Whoever is in charge of TV in 2022 will get to carry out the “half-term review” mentioned in the current Royal Charter, under which the BBC is run until 2027. Before that, they will have to decide whether to extend or replace Sir David Clementi as chair of the BBC board when his four-year term expires in March 2021, meaning that consultation or recruitment would have to start early next year. Clementi has so far seemed bewilderingly invisible to many in broadcasting and politics. Appointed to oversee and scrutinise the BBC board, he seems to have become its kindly carer, making no apparent intervention even over such contentious matters as the Cliff Richard libel pay-out and gender-equal pay. With Johnson having already pledged a review of the BBC licence fee, it seems improbable that Clementi and the organisation will emerge untouched. The BBC has two protections. Backbenchers and members of the Lords can more easily justify rebellion against policies that were not included in a manifesto. The Tories’ 2019 document contained no plans to reform the corporation or licence fee, and only two brief references to the BBC – requiring it to meet the cost of free licence fees for the over-75s and to spread British culture abroad. So the introduction of reforms not set before the electorate would risk huge opposition. The terms of the “half-term review” of the BBC also specifically rule out changes to the licence fee before 2027 – although, if the nature of the UK were to have changed significantly, through secession or devolution of broadcasting (currently run from Westminster), the current Charter, which assumes a corporation serving Britain, would seem untenable. But, in the coming debates, BBC bosses need to be careful not to define “BBC independence” as being allowed to do whatever it wants, without scrutiny or censure. The arts premiumThe Conservative manifesto pledged that Johnson’s government wants “young people to learn creative skills and widen their horizons, so we will offer an ‘arts premium’ to secondary schools to fund enriching activities for all pupils”. It also included “the largest cultural capital programme in a century, of £250m. This will support local libraries and regional museums. We will maintain support for creative sector tax reliefs and free entry to the UK’s national museums.” So the administration is promising some money for the arts, although there seems some question about which ministers will get to spend it. The last DCMS secretary?As the “arts premium” would be enacted by the Department of Education, one clear possibility is that the Arts and Sports parts of the DCMS will be subsumed into an Education and Culture super-ministry. Since another problem often raised in creative circles is an educational issue – the fear that student fees are preventing actors and artists from poorer backgrounds from pursuing courses – there may be some logic in putting the same people in charge of classrooms and the arts. If the “creative industries” part of the DCMS slate were also transferred entirely to a Business department with which they are already partly shared, that might leave a Digital and Media secretariat, focused on the broadcasting and online industries, or those might return to the Home Office or Business, which previously held them. Regional/populist cultureAs a result of interventions by recent governments (Tory and Labour), Channel 4 now has a corporate HQ in Leeds, and the BBC expanded its premises and presence in Salford, Edinburgh and Cardiff. As the Johnson majority was won through gains in the North and Midlands – attributed by Cummings to the southern establishment not understanding passions higher up the map – the top half of England would logically be targeted by all spending, including money on the arts. Expect pressure on Arts Council England to shift its main HQ from Bloomsbury Street in London to one of its eight premises outside the capital – perhaps in Newcastle or Birmingham. As Cummings’ sneers at metropolitan types include their alleged “elitism”, this government also seems likely to further encourage the funding of popular and populist art forms. The problem is that arts with the biggest audiences are already largely supported by the market. It is beginner or niche projects that need state cash. As huge numbers of UK winners of Oscars, Tonys, Emmys, the Booker and Turner prizes started their careers with some form of public funding or grant, subsidised and popular art are not an either-or. One can lead to the other. Someone at the DCMS – or whatever structures follow it – may need to make this case to Johnson and Cummings.