Dillian Whyte was fast asleep when a passenger had a panic attack and tried to open the emergency door on his BA flight to Saudi Arabia earlier this week. But it is typical of the heavyweight that when he woke up and discovered his brother Dean had intervened to stop the dramatic incident he wished he had got involved. “I didn’t know what Dean had done,” he said. “I was asleep. I’d trained and jumped on the plane so I was a bit tired. When I woke up I heard all about it. I was disappointed he didn’t hit the guy, I would have just knocked him out, to be honest, because that’s no joking matter. My brother gave him a chance but I would have knocked him out clean. I probably would have hit him on the floor as well.” For someone who relishes a tear-up Whyte has barely laced up his gloves in anger since beating Óscar Rivas in July, due to an adverse finding in a UK Anti-Doping sample. The case is still unresolved, although he has been cleared to fight. He laughs when it is suggested his brother is getting more fights than him at the moment – but the frustration is evident too. “It’s been stressful and a few times I’ve thought about walking away from boxing and jacking it in,” admitted Whyte. “I’m not someone to talk about my emotions, but I have been stressed and down and depressed. But my team kept pushing me, urging me to go to the gym and taking the mickey out of me, saying my belly was getting bigger. “I’m a very strong person mentally and physically, but without my team I would have walked away from boxing without a doubt.” But at least one cloud is lifting. On Saturday he returns to the ring to face Mariusz Wach on the undercard of the Andy Ruiz Jnr v Anthony Joshua rematch. “Wach is gonna get whacked,” said Whyte. “He’s very experienced and he knows how to survive. He’s got a very good jab. So it’s up to me to go in there and bring maximum pain, as I do. I will be trying to knock him out. “The last few months have been tough. But you know me, it doesn’t take much to get me in a fight. And I will come to the ring with maximum violent intentions.” Whyte’s only defeat in 27 fights has come at the hands of Joshua and, as he points out, he has also spent more than 600 days as the No 1 contender with the WBC. “Never in the history of heavyweight boxing has someone been mandatory contender for so long,” Whyte laments. “Except maybe Jack Johnson and Sonny Liston.” He hopes he will cross paths again with Joshua, who he beat in the amateurs, for a decider. “We both respect each other but it’s a weird thing,” he said. “It’s like we hate each other, but respect each other. It’s just a job.” He also expects Joshua to regain his WBA, IBF and WBO titles against Ruiz. “Hopefully his head is in the right space and he doesn’t listen to all this negativity because as a country we like bringing each other down too much,” he said. “Someone loses, ‘ah he was rubbish, he was no good’. You weren’t saying that a few months ago when he was heavyweight champion of the world. None of his critics are going to be hall of fame. He will.” As for Whyte himself, he is quietly hopeful of getting his career back on track. “Boxing is a very dark, muddy, murky waters,” he says. “One day you’re floating and the next day you’re sinking. I’ve learnt a lot of lessons from boxing. It’s made me stronger as a person and given me a better life.” He smiles again. “Life is hard, man. But two things I know are to be brave and to fight. Those are the two things I’m good at.”