As founder of Sydney’s Sissy Ball, Bhenji Ra knows her way around a strong beauty look. The contemporary dancer is also deeply interested in reading queer theory – with a bit of self-help on the side. I’m a sample girl. I will go to Mecca and Sephora and be that annoying girl, who takes a million samples because I don’t want to spend hundreds of dollars on product. I just suck it up and I do it. Sometimes I take my own little empty containers and I will fill them up so I don’t have to ask. That’s how I get through. Omorovicza cleansing foam from Mecca is amazing, because you can literally have less than a 5c piece and it will foam so much in your hand. It has lasted me almost a year and a half and I still have it. I use the cleansing foam morning and evening and I always wash my face twice, that’s my little tip.Leanne Betasamosake Simpson is an academic and writer, and she’s also a musician. I just picked up her book, As We Have Always Done. It’s about Indigenous freedom through radical resistance. I love to jump between really corny self-help into intense political First Nations canon writing. Going between those two feels nourishing to me. I like her perspective on reframing resistance and knowledge systems in terms of how we understand our culture and ourselves and prioritising our pedagogy – like learning from the land and learning from what we have always done to survive – as First Nations people. I’m First Nations from the Philippines, and I’m constantly thinking about how I framed myself in the colonial west. She really looks at all the things that have affected our First Nations, whether that be white supremacy or hetero-patriarchy, or capitalist structures. Every single page you read, you’re like, I get it, and she talks about queerness. It’s really looking at the depth of what it means to resist in an Indigenous way. My mum would always have these weird tips around  facial beauty and ageing. Getting older, I somehow turned into her, which is very fascinating. Right now I’m obsessed with facial yoga, lymphatic drainage and I just watch these old Japanese women on YouTube massaging their faces for 30 minutes. I will copy it and it’s because I grew up watching my mum washing her face in this very ritual way, with intense focus. Now, I am embodying that in a way. I feel like every time I do those kind of rituals, whether it be face yoga, or massaging my face or even making sure that I sleep on a certain side, I just feel like I’m my mother. Oh my God, everything is just coming back to my mum now. My mum was very evangelical. We weren’t allowed to read anything. Even Harry Potter was banned in my house when I was a small. I would have to buy these books that were from the Christian bookshop and they would be about “finding God in the Matrix” or “finding Jesus in The Simpsons”. It was so weird and that’s the only way I could understand pop culture. But now my mum has moved away from that and she’s really into self-help and people like Eckhart Tolle. So a few years ago, she gave me Eckhart Tolle’s A New Earth. And I can finally relate to what my mum is saying without being so attached to Christianity. It really looks at the experience of yourself and the ego, but also God and spirituality in this really expanded way. It’s kind of like the 101 book for self-help. I actually carry it around with me everywhere and it has a lot of notes from my mum inside it. Hyaluronic acid, I would say that is my go to. It continues that natural process of building collagen and also nourishing and moisturising skin. There’s all these high end products on the market, like $400 serums but I’m obsessed with the line The Ordinary right now. It’s a really affordable option and it’s really scientific. All of their products come in these cute little canisters that look very scientific. You can like mix them and blend it with other serums and once you understand the science of skin, you realise that luxury products are amazing and feel good, but at the end of the day, you’re just putting a chemical on your face. And you should really just understand how much you should put on and when to put it on. I always re-read bell hooks’ All About Love. For me that was really helpful as a young trans woman of colour growing up and not really having an understanding of my own relationship with love. The book has really helped me map out my history and journey. It offered a perspective in terms of love in a body that has endured trauma or love in bodies that maybe don’t feel like they’re worthy of love. She does an amazing thing where she looks at healing and social justice and love as inseparable parts of your identity, that always have to be in relationship to each other. There’s one copy that just keeps on getting passed around within my community and I don’t know who has it at the moment. But somebody has it, it’s kind of like the Bible, it’s going around. I hope it comes back to me one day, but it’s communal, it’s what I go back to. It’s what a lot of people around me go back to and we always refer to it as it offers such deep healing in this climate. And I love it when it comes back andyou see people will be highlighting the things that they like, or things that jumped out to them. That’s a nice little thing.