It is a true feat to make it through an episode of The Repair Shop without shedding a tear. While the premise of the BBC show is straightforward (members of the public bring broken, treasured items to be repaired by a team of experts), it is also the rarest of TV gems: an uplifting hour about the power of memory and how even simple belongings can become inseparable from our lives. It is also a show that has slowly but surely gained a legion of loyal fans, becoming the comfort TV smash of 2019. Regularly topping 2 million viewers, its celebrity fans include Richard Osman, Kathy Burke and Greg James. Stephen Fry called it “the best programme on British television” and a fine antidote to “the mad digital world”. The Repair Shop’s presenter, furniture restorer Jay Blades, puts the show’s success down to its relatability and heart. “A lot of people are annoyed with TV at the moment,” he says. “There’s too much nastiness, whereas The Repair Shop is all about making things good again. We fulfil people’s dreams. And when we do, they have such wonder written all over their faces.” There are plenty of examples of these awestruck reveals. There was Albert, who bought a portable radio with his wife, Eileen, in the 50s, which became a symbol of their love. When it broke two years after she died, he brought it into the shop and, of course, the team got it working again. “I’m over the moon,” he grinned, tears in his eyes, while his and Eileen’s song – Roy Orbison’s Born to Love Me – played. Then there was Alan’s battered writing box, in which he had discovered the adoption papers that revealed his late sister Ethel was in fact his mother. And – the one that broke me – Jill’s stuffed panda, which had been her only comfort when her father died suddenly, lovingly restored by the toy experts Amanda Middleditch and Julie Tatchell. “You’ve given me a piece of my childhood back,” she said. Visiting The Repair Shop’s Sussex HQ is like stumbling into Santa’s magical workshop. Blades is the jovial leader of the group, usually dressed in his baker boy cap and blazer, while the dozen or so other experts buzz around the barn. “We have such fun together,” says horologist Steve Fletcher, peering busily into a maze of mechanics through several pairs of glasses. “We take the mickey out of each other all the time. This is a massive chunk of my life, but it’s addictive and I want to do it for ever.” Fletcher was the first expert the show signed on, although he initially thought the email from the production company was a scam and almost deleted it. If Fletcher is the kindly patriarch, Will Kirk is the heart-throb – (naturally, Google’s first suggested search result for his name is “Will Kirk partner”). The team are in the midst of repairs for the show’s Christmas special and the pressure is on for Kirk, the carpentry specialist. “We put a bit of our soul into every item,” he says, “so much so that it’s hard to let go. As you’re talking now, in the back of my mind I’m thinking about gluing and drying times.” Is there anything they couldn’t fix? “No, we can fix anything – except for a broken heart. Or Brexit.” The Christmas heart-crusher will surely be 88-year-old Beryl and her teddy bear, which she was given in 1939. She gave it to her firstborn, who in turn passed it on to his baby brother. When he died of cancer this year, the family found the bear among his possessions. “Teddy bears are one of the constants in people’s lives,” says bear repairer Middleditch. “They stay with you no matter how much you change – they haven’t gotten angry or sad, so they’ve stood the test of time.” Blades has been through hardships of his own, too. “When I was brought up, there weren’t many positive role models,” he says. “You’d never see someone like me on the BBC. I was homeless only four years ago after my marriage broke down – so this is something special, and it’s totally surreal. Someone just this morning wanted to take a selfie with me when I was in my trunks about to go swimming – I’ll never get used to that.” Ceramicist Kirsten Ramsay mentions another positive: The Repair Shop is encouraging younger fans to take up a craft. “The show cuts right across the generations,” she says. “We have groups of school kids telling us how much they’d love to do our work. That’s so inspiring to me – that the next generation want to look after what they have, rather than just throw it away.” Blades sees the show as a metaphor for society. “The Repair Shop is so brilliant because we’re saying: ‘Look at this community – we come together, we have a problem and we fix it.’” The sewing machine he has been working on whirs back to life and he gives me a jovial slap on the back. “Now, how beautiful is that?” • The Repair Shop at Christmas is on BBC One on 29 December at 7pm