José Mourinho may be seeking to project an air of love and harmony among an apparently previously unsettled Tottenham squad, but that doesn’t mean they won’t consider offloading those who want to be offloaded. Christian Eriksen, for example, still wants out, and his chairman, Daniel Levy, is happy to assist in that ambition, with Manchester United among possible suitors. The Evening Standard reports that Levy is pushing for the Dane’s sale in January – for less than £40m if necessary – to forestall the risk of Eriksen going for free when his contract runs out in the summer. So who would come into Spurs’ midfield in his stead? On this The Mill has more nos to churn than yeses. Nemanja Matic is a no-no, according to the Manchester Evening News. So too is Bruno Fernandes, due to the whopping £85m release clause on the Sporting midfielder. So enter Roma’s Lorenzo Pellegrini who, according to Calciomercato, is firmly on Tottenham’s shopping list. Oh, and in defence, Spurs have their eye on the young Norwich centre-back Ben Godfrey. Across north London, Marcelino is the latest name to be crowbarred into the managerial frame at Arsenal. The former Valencia head coach, without a club since being ushered out the Mestalla doors in September, has been contacted by Arsenal about the position, according to reports in Spain, though the Gunners may face competition from Everton should Marco Silva’s tenuous grasp on his job be loosened altogether. Talking of Everton, they’re keen on signing the 16-year-old Portuguese sensation Matchoi Bobo Djaló. The Pacos de Ferreira winger became the youngest player to appear in Portugal’s top-flight earlier this season and has also attracted the interest of Southampton, Newcastle and Juventus. With Edinson Cavani’s happiest days at Paris Saint-Germain seemingly now behind him, Atlético Madrid are keen to revive an interest in the Uruguay forward that they first displayed in 2015. Mundo Deportivo says that, with Mauro Icardi now above Cavani in PSG’s pecking order and Diego Simeone still inclined to fill an Antoine Griezmann-sized hole in his attack, such a move could fit for both player and club. Leicester have been linked with a £30m swoop for Burnley’s Dwight McNeill as Brendan Rodgers looks to further strengthen his high-flying squad but the Clarets’ chairman Mike Garlick isn’t having a bar of it. “One thing we won’t be looking to do is put everything we’ve achieved at risk by selling any of our key players,” Garlick sniffed in his programme notes for Tuesday night’s defeat by Manchester City. Wolves, Manchester United and Juventus have also been linked with the in-form winger. And in a reassuring display of interest in the non-league game, Enfield Town’s Muhammadu Faal – second cousin of Joe Gomez, no less – is on several Premier League clubs’ radars. The Sun reports that the striker, who has scored 18 goals in 19 games for the Isthmian Premier Division side, is being sized up by Norwich, Watford, Crystal Palace, Bournemouth and Sheffield United.