Poet and educator Raymond Antrobus was born in Hackney, London, in 1986 to an English mother and a Jamaican father. He is the author of the poetry collection The Perseverance (Penned in the Margins, £9.99), and the recipient of the Rathbones Folio prize, Ted Hughes and Somerset Maugham awards. This month he was named the 2019 Sunday Times/University of Warwick young writer of the year. He was born deaf, and his poetry powerfully explores this experience, as well as issues of bereavement, race and violence. In The Perseverance you write movingly about loss…I guess I’m drawn to elegiac poetry. That loss was such a huge theme in the book wasn’t something I realised until I finished writing it and was redrafting. Most of the poems about my dad were written pretty much in the week leading up to and following his passing [in 2014]. So looking back at that time, it’s a blur. I rarely write at night, but all of those poems about my dad were written at night, which says something about the rhythm and spirit I needed to find him, to access him in the poems. I was writing whatever I had to write on nerve, on feeling. The collection brilliantly explores the idea of persevering. Tell me more about the multilayered title…The Perseverance is the name of the pub my dad used to drink in, in Hackney. When writing the book, all these memories kept coming back of being left outside the pub as a kid, being in my own world. That’s one layer of the title. Also, it [refers to] a spiritual perseverance as well as a perseverance with language and the journey into acquiring language because of the history of illiteracy and deaf people, and how much that is still present. I spent a lot of time in archives; Helen Keller kept coming up but I also learned about Laura Bridgman [the first deaf-blind American child to be formally educated] and Charles Dickens’s short story Doctor Marigold, about this deaf girl, and I wanted to include that. Poems such as Dear Hearing World powerfully explore your experience as a deaf child…Young [deaf] people I speak with ask me: “What’s your advice?” And I say: “You just have to get through it, you have to survive it.” I know what it’s like to have felt ashamed, to try to hide my deafness. I wasn’t owning it. Finding a way to assert that part of me has been a mechanism that my survival has depended on. Dear Hearing World was modelled on another poem, Dear White America by Danez Smith. I wrote it as a rant, but when I started reading it at gigs, people often asked to see it written down. So much of the book was formed in the air at live gigs. The volume includes a total redaction of Ted Hughes’s poem Deaf School as a challenge to his description of deaf children. How did it feel to win the Ted Hughes award?I thought it was a joke at first. My favourite experience with the poem has been talking about it to students between the ages of 11 and 14 in a deaf school. Creativity can be so powerful when it’s put into the classroom. That’s a big thing for me – I don’t separate my identity as a teacher from my identity as a poet. I felt that I got more education outside the classroom. That was part of why I started working in schools Your poem Closure describes your experience of being stabbed aged 17 in Hackney Community College library and needing 21 stitches. Could you tell me more about that?I was treated in Homerton hospital. Same hospital I was born in. It makes me think that The Perseverance is also a homage to the NHS. How does it feel to have your poem Jamaican British added to the GCSE syllabus?Surreal. John Agard’s poem Half-Caste was really important to me. So hopefully, Jamaican British will take up that kind of space for the next generation. Ultimately, Agard’s poem, for me, is about the idea that being just one thing is a lie. I struggled a lot in school. I felt that I got more education outside the classroom. That was part of why I started working in schools – if a poet had come to speak to me about what it was to be young, male and angry, it would have helped. I had a pretty unorthodox upbringing. It’s not until I became a teacher that I realised how lucky I was. My father was a Rastafarian who had this role in the community as a wise man. My mum was very politically engaged, a school governor, and both had bookshelves filled with books that we discussed, so that was my education. When did you start writing poetry?I have been writing things down for as long as I can remember, [from] about six. In some ways, poetry is my first language and is the language I lean on, and always have done. It was an exercise in being still and gathering myself. Which books are on your bedside table?I have Selected Poems of Thomas Gray, The Complete Words of William Blake, Sight Lines by Arthur Sze, I Am Not Sidney Poitier by Percival Everett and The Yellow House by Sarah M Broom. What kind of reader were you as a child?I loved things that were visual, so that’s why the last poem in The Perseverance is called Happy Birthday Moon, named after the book by Frank Asch. I loved my dad reading that book to me. I wrote the poem, thinking: where does my love of literature begin? I think so much of it does begin with that book. My dad had a really deep voice, so I never struggled hearing him. His presence was a huge thing for me – being able to lie on his chest and feel his vibrations as he would read the story, there was a dimension of comfort and closeness in that. My parents would often read to me. My mum would read a William Blake poem and we’d talk about it. My dad would read poems to me by Linton Kwesi Johnson. He put a poem called The Song of the Banana Man by Evan Jones on my bedroom wall and my mum put William Blake’s London on my wall. They both had a passion for poetry. What helps you persevere?The things that keep me most sane are good food, company, books, coffee shops, long walks, good music. It is tough. When I finished the book, I was forcing myself to write stuff, just to prove to myself that I could still write a poem. I was afraid I’d forgotten how to, and I still am. I’m writing this new book of poems and I’m loving writing it, but I have no idea if it’s any good. • The Perseverance is published by Penned in the Margins (£9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p over £15