Donald Trump has accused Iran of orchestrating an attack on the US embassy in Baghdad after dozens of Iraqi Shia militia supporters broke into its compound after smashing a door and storming inside. The angry demonstration followed US airstrikes on Sunday against three camps in Iraq and two in Syria. The bases belonged to the Iran-backed Kata’ib Hezbollah militia group, which is formally part of the Iraqi army. At least 25 fighters were killed and dozens injured. The Pentagon said the strikes were in response to a rocket attack on Friday against a US base in Kirkuk, in which a US civilian contractor was killed and four other Americans were hurt. It described them as “defensive”. An Associated Press reporter at embassy in Baghdad’s heavily fortified Green Zone saw flames rising from inside the compound and at least three US soldiers on the roof. “Iran killed an American contractor, wounding many. We strongly responded, and always will,” Trump tweeted. “Now Iran is orchestrating an attack on the US Embassy in Iraq. They will be held fully responsible.” The US ambassador and staff were reportedly earlier evacuated from the embassy in Baghdad, after thousands of demonstrators gathered outside the building to protest against a US airstrike on an Iranian-backed militia group. Two Iraqi foreign ministry officials said the chief of mission, Matthew Tueller, and several of his US colleagues had left the embassy. There was no immediate confirmation of the claim. It was unclear how many diplomats were still inside. Several demonstrators reportedly climbed over the wall of the embassy, with others trying to push inside the grounds. They shouted “No, no, America!” and “No, no, Trump!”, and “Death to America!”, witnesses quoted by the Associated Press said. The bombings have provoked outrage inside Iraq and are the most serious incident yet in an escalating conflict between American forces and armed Iranian proxies. Iraq’s prime minister, Adel Abdul-Mahdi – an ally of both Iran and the US – said they were an attack on his country’s sovereignty. According to reports, mourners attended funerals for some of the dead militia fighters in Baghdad. They then marched on the city’s Green zone. Local security guards made no effort to turn them back and the crowd kept going until it reached the main US embassy gate. Iraqi special forces were deployed around the perimeter to stop the protesters from breaking in. Mourners threw stones and water bottles at security guards. They draped flags over the fence belonging to Kata’ib Hezbollah and to Hashd al-Shaabi (Popular Mobilization Forces), a powerful paramilitary group of which Kata’ib Hezbollah is a part. Qais al-Khazali, the leader of the Iranian-backed Asaib Ahl al-Haq militia, and many other senior militia leaders were among the demonstrators. On Monday, Iran condemned the US strikes as “terrorism” while pro-Iranian militia leaders in Iraq vowed to carry out further attacks on US forces. Street protests take place regularly in the Iraqi capital. In recent months, security guards have shot dead more than 450 people protesting against rampant government corruption and the growing influence of Iranian-backed groups, including Kata’ib Hezbollah.