In the history of Britain’s love affair with alcohol, the early part of the last decade belonged to the craft beer revolution, while recent years have been dominated by the so-called “ginaissance”. But the latest bacchanalian trend set to hit the UK in 2020 is fizzy water with booze in it, known as “hard seltzer”. The new drink refers to a mildly fruit-flavoured alcoholic beverage, typically canned, tipping the scales at just 100 calories or fewer and with an alcohol volume of around 5%. Hard seltzer has already proven its credentials as a lucrative drinks category in the US, where it has swept across the nation like a carbonated tidal wave. Bestselling brand White Claw expects to hit sales of $1.5bn (£1.2bn) this year. So unquenchable was America’s thirst for the stuff over the summer – helped by the success of a controversial YouTube video, which included the line “ain’t no laws when you’re drinking Claws” – that White Claw was forced to warn of an impending shortage. “It [hard seltzer] grew by 300% in 2017, 200% in 2018 and it’ll probably grow by the same amount this year,” said Bryan Roth, editor of US beer blog Good Beer Hunting. “You just don’t find drinks categories that do that in successive years. The big draw is that almost universally they’re 100 calories, about 5% alcohol, so they fit that space where someone’s looking for a buzz but they’re trying to be conscious of what they’re putting into their bodies.” Increased health consciousness, particularly among younger people, is far from unique to the US. In the UK, millennials and younger drinkers are increasingly abstemious, either giving up drinking altogether, taking a month-long hiatus for Dry January, or carefully monitoring their intake, not just of alcohol but of calories too. In fact, hard seltzer’s success owes more to concern about waistlines. At 5% ABV, it’s as alcoholic as most popular beers, but while seltzers flavoured with mango, pineapple or strawberry may not constitute one of your five a day, they are significantly less calorific. Now a phalanx of brands have the UK in their crosshairs, aiming to capitalise on the nation’s changing lifestyle trends. One of those brands is Balans, made by Swedish brewery Kopparberg, which has already enjoyed success in the UK market with its fruit ciders. “There are an awful lot of people over 30 who have health targets or are very calorie conscious,” said Rosie Fryer, Kopparberg’s brand manager. “They’re not abstaining from alcohol completely but they have that more active lifestyle. “They might have a spin class in the morning but don’t want to miss out on going out with their mates either. “It’s largely to do with calories but it’s also gluten-free, it’s naturally flavoured, it’s low in carbs. But you can still go out and choose to drink if that’s what you want,” she said. “I think by Spring next year you’ll see it on a lot of shelves.” Balans won’t have a free run at UK wallets though. White Claw is expected to make a splash on UK shores in 2020, hoping to replicate its dominance across the Atlantic. Other brands jostling for position include Drty, Spark, Wild Basin and Bodega Bay. Global multinationals are also getting in on the act. Brewing giant AB InBev, whose brands include Becks and Corona, has already launched its Mike’s Hard Sparkling Water brand and will be adding Bud Light Seltzer to its British roster next year, possibly to appeal to those who find Bud Light beer too flavourful and complex. But the UK market could prove a tough nut to crack. Already, one academic has likened hard seltzers – flavoured with fruit and featuring branding akin to that of soft drinks – to “alcopops” such as Hooch, that were heavily criticised in the 1990s for appealing to children. Hard seltzers are “masquerading as sparkling water drinks with fruit flavours when they are as strong as a beer or lager,” Professor Sir Ian Gilmore, director of the Liverpool Centre for Alcohol Research at the University of Liverpool and chairman of Alcohol Health Alliance UK, told the Sunday Times earlier this year. Even if hard seltzers can shrug off comparisons to alcopops, they are entering a crowded and competitive market, according to Roth. So far, they are typically reaching consumers through supermarkets, where they are likely to sit on the shelves alongside increasingly popular ready-to-drink canned cocktails. Roth points out that hard seltzers in the US have taken market share away from the beers such as Bud Light and Miller Lite, a less popular sector in the UK. That said, he thinks hard seltzers could hit the spot for some UK drinkers. “Will it become a $2bn category in a few years in the UK? Probably not. But it could hit a zeitgeist like in the US.” H2Roads Craft Hard Seltzer 4.5%, 110 calories, 330ml, £2.99Although the grapefruit flavour is concentrate rather than juice, this was the most natural-tasting of the seltzers, just about worth its higher price point. 3/5 Wild Basin Boozy Sparkling Water Melon Basil, 5%, 100 calories, 355ml, £2.99Wild Basin is apparently a lush and unspoiled spot along the St Vrain river, according to the blurb from American brewery Oskar Blues. No fruit and the “natural” flavours tasted pretty confected to me. 1/5 Drty Raspberry Rose, 4%, 83 calories, 330ml. £2.20Uncanny resemblance to a Lush bath bomb. Very bubblegummy. You’d have to have an incredibly sweet tooth to enjoy this. 0/5 Balans Mandarin Aqua Spritz, 4%, 60 calories, 250ml, £1.50This “delicate infusion of natural fruit flavours” from Swedish cider giant Koppaberg tastes a lot like tinned mandarin oranges. The lowest in calories (though obviously water is a lot less). 2/5 Spark Mixed Berry, 4%, 65 calories, 250ml, £3At least the berry flavours are reasonably natural if a bit wimpy. Certainly better than the Drty Raspberry above. And at least it carries a clear statement of the alcohol content (1 unit) - and a health warning for pregnant women. 2/5 Mike’s Hard sparkling water, 5%, 99 calories, 330ml, £1.99The only can in the line-up with a more blokey appeal. And does what it says on the tin. It’s limey (like Rose’s lime cordial with a touch of kaffir lime). Backed by the giant ABInbev, it should do well. 3/5