Vicky Williamson is to switch from cycling to bobsleigh, having completed a successful training camp with the GB bobsleigh team. Williamson won a world championship bronze medal in the team sprint in 2013 alongside Becky James and has been a member of the Great Britain Cycling team since 2010. She won two junior world championship medals and an elite world championship medal, World Cup medals and a World Cup leaders jersey. The 26-year-old made her comeback at this year’s track cycling world championships following a horrific crash in January 2016 in which she broke her neck and back and dislocated her pelvis among other injuries. Williamson said: “Cycling has been a big part of my life since I was a teenager back. In a way I’m sad to be moving on but equally I’m excited about what could happen in my bobsleigh career. “My crash in 2016 changed my life and although I would say it has inhibited my ability to excel to the top of the sport again, my athletic capability has still allowed me to continue in elite sport. I couldn’t have got through it without the support I received from British Cycling who funded my rehab and supported my return – I will always be thankful.” The British Cycling performance director, Stephen Park, said: “Vicky’s cycling career has been nothing short of extraordinary. Her mental and physical strength, determination and resilience are admirable and set her out as a true professional sportswoman who has inspired other athletes who face their own challenging injuries. “But it’s not just her remarkable recovery that stands out from her time on the programme, she retires from cycling with a record filled with world, European and national level podium results. “The opportunity she has with the GB bobsleigh team is really exciting, we wish her well and I know the friends she has made among the riders and staff at British Cycling will be cheering her on in her new challenge.” Wiliamson’s move came 24 hours after the announcement that Team USA snowboarder Gus Kenworthy will switch allegiance to Great Britain. Kenworthy, who won silver in ski slopestyle at Sochi 2014 also represented the US at the 2018 Games. He holds a British passport and has a British-born mother. “I just wanted to do it for my mom,” he told NBC. “She’s held up the American flag for me for two Games now and I would love to be able to hold up the British flag for her for one.”