 The first election I paid attention to was in 1983. In the wake of the Brixton riots, Michael Foot’s commitment to tackling racial discrimination and disadvantage awakened my political consciousness. The manifesto was Labour’s most radical of the century, offering increased spending for the NHS, comprehensive care for under-fives and an emergency programme for investment in housing and transport. To a boy growing up poor in Tottenham, it seemed the exact tonic our sickly country needed. After learning the result – wipeout for Labour and a majority of 144 for Margaret Thatcher’s Conservatives – I was distraught. I could not believe that, offered a hopeful vision for a fairer UK, the public had opted for more economic conservatism. In the early hours of Friday 13 December, as the Tories secured their biggest win since the Thatcher era, I recognised the same disappointment and disbelief in many of those around me. The Jeremy Corbyn I have known for decades as the MP for my neighbouring constituency is kind, compassionate and thoroughly decent. I regard him as a friend, with a wonderful track record as a constituency MP. To put it politely, these were not the qualities that came up on doorsteps as I campaigned in London, Halifax, Bury, Bolton, Cardiff, Birmingham, Watford and elsewhere. The leadership’s failure to deal with the stain of antisemitism within the party stripped Labour of moral authority. Jeremy’s triangulation on Brexit left Leavers thinking he was a Remainer and convinced Remainers he supported Leave. His well-reported hostility to institutions such as Nato cemented the public’s distrust. It was not Jeremy’s righteous belief in economic justice that lost Labour this election; it was his perceived worldview, failure of competence, and mind-boggling decision to abdicate leadership on the biggest issue of the day. For Labour to win back what were once seen as our heartlands, we need to unite the country around a vision for the UK we can all take pride in. This does not mean imitating Boris Johnson’s populist, ethnic nationalism. Many people voted Tory because of a legitimate commitment to leaving the EU, or because they did not like Corbyn or what Labour was offering. But Johnson cynically scapegoated migrants during the campaign, warning that Europeans had treated the UK like “their own” country for too long. This is not the first time Johnson has attacked a minority in an attempt to win popularity. In 2018, he compared Muslim women to bankrobbers and letterboxes, which led to a surge in hate crimes. By lurching to the right, Johnson was able to make a Faustian pact and convince Nigel Farage to stand down. This helped him win, but set a very dangerous precedent. Johnson’s ethnic nationalism relies on the idea of the nation as the natural home of a people whose ancestors are all from one ethnic group. History suggests that once ethnic nationalism is introduced into a nation’s politics it is difficult to remove and even more difficult to control. Once one group is defined as “the people”, the next step is often to classify the excluded as second-class citizens. This is hardly a route back to national unity. A new tribalism has gripped the UK. However, recent surveys show that on the most fundamental issues – climate change, equal pay and the right of women to have careers, faith in science and scientists, the NHS – we are not divided. On these issues our collective views are converging, and even heading towards a consensus. We need a politics that reflects that. The alternative to Johnson’s ethnic nationalism that Labour should offer is a civic nationalism. Rather than basing national pride on biological heritage, skin colour or religion, civic nationalism says we can unite around shared values and institutions. To foster this, we need new spaces and places in which the UK’s diverse peoples can engage with each other and belong. Why don’t we start by creating a citizens’ assembly to begin deciding the basis for a new British bill of rights and a codified constitution? Next, who is up for scrapping our unfair voting system and replacing it with something proportional to encourage a new politics of compromise? Then, why not trial a form of universal basic income – call it the citizens’ fund – so that all people have the capacity and capital to come together in social clubs, sports teams and other parts of civic life? More controversially, could compulsory national civic service – compelling young people from all regions, ethnicities and social classes to mix – remind us what we have in common? Labour will win back the country only if we show the public that we love the UK, too, and are positive about what we have achieved together, and optimistic about the inclusive, multicultural, dynamic society we want to build. The difference is that our national pride manifests itself in hope, rather than fear. While Johnson pulls the country back towards a nostalgic version of Little England, Labour must own the future of a reinvigorated UK. As for which Labour figure I believe is best-placed to lead this hopeful vision, I will consider that over Christmas. David Lammy is the MP for Tottenham in London  “Can I ask why you’re voting Conservative this time?” I asked the woman – who voted Labour in 2017 – smiling at me from the doorway of her home, beautifully decorated for Christmas. “Not at all,” she beamed. “First, education…” “Cut by £69m, in real terms, in Wakefield since 2015,” I interjected. “Second, the NHS,” she continued. “Suffering the longest funding squeeze in its history,” I countered. “Third, Brexit – I voted Remain but I just want it done.” I was used to Brexit objections, given my own long-standing opposition to it. Paradoxically, I benefited from Lib Dem and Tory Remainers backing me, and the Greens’ generous decision not to stand, which kept the swing against me to 6.5%, lower than in neighbouring seats. But this voter was switching because she trusted the Tories on education and the NHS, even after the photo of a child with suspected pneumonia asleep on the floor of Leeds General Infirmary was in every newspaper. I knew then that we would lose. Labour, the party of the NHS, was no longer trusted with it. The causes of our worst defeat in 80 years are complex – and simple. A winter election that Jeremy Corbyn should never have agreed to, against the advice of his shadow cabinet and the parliamentary Labour party. In the middle of a Brexit crisis, his indecision on the biggest issue facing the country meant we lost Leave and Remain voters. His leadership ratings were abysmal. Voters didn’t trust him on defence, security and the economy. They hated the party’s infection by antisemitism and saw good MPs bullied out of their seats. They just didn’t like him. When our “all shall have prizes” manifesto was published, people asked where the money was coming from and scoffed at our nationalised broadband idea. Nostrums of the 1970s were presented as answers to the 21st-century challenges of new technology, climate change, an ageing population and the changing nature of work. The £58bn for the Waspi women knocked the “carefully costed” mantra on the head. People despaired at the invidious choice before them and picked what they saw as the lesser of two evils. Thousands of party members had resigned. More have resigned since the result. Those failures mean a hard Brexit looms in January. Boris Johnson’s promises on workers and environmental rights have gone, exposed as a ruse to win power. His anarchic Vote Leave government is cracking on. A £10 minimum wage will happen only “if economic conditions permit”. They won’t. The economy will shrink and people will be poorer. Brexit threatens the union and will harm our public services. The gap between north and south, rich and poor will grow. So when I saw Jeremy posing for a photo with young people in parliament, I seized the moment. In my accidental exit interview, I asked why he wasn’t apologising to them. Why he was still leader when his personal toxicity, organisational incompetence and political mishandling had led to the catastrophe? How did losing the election mean we won the argument? The answers were indifferent and infuriating. The pre-election trigger ballots to reselect Labour MPs were because he wanted more democracy in the party. The bullying? Mainstream media. Antisemitism? Did I think he wants racism in the Labour party? He was present, but not involved. The Labour party, formed to represent working people, cannot ignore their verdict. We have failed them for four elections in a row. The party does not have a God-given right to exist. Members must decide if we are to be the strong social democratic opposition our country needs, or an ideological vanity project. The next leader must speak not just to members but to voters in Wakefield and Wolverhampton. They must ignore the keyboard warriors and speak to the decent, silent majority who want a leader they can trust. The next leader must reaffirm Labour’s progressive internationalism, kick out the antisemites, rebuild organisational competence and enforce the rules. They’ll need the heart of a lion and a strong stomach for the fight. We need to detoxify and become again a principled opposition that people can trust. We need a courageous, credible, clever and competent person to reshape our movement. Observer readers should join us and help get it right this time. Mary Creagh was MP for Wakefield from 2005 to 2019  The Johnson government is clearly resolved to use the power of the state in order to drive through a rightwing shift. Our task is both to oppose Johnson but also to advocate the renewal of the country in a way which unites, rather than divides, and which offers a new economy, social justice and democratic reform. We must use the leadership election to debate our future. A blizzard of discrete tax and spend policies which lack any connective narrative or national story will not work. First, we need an analysis. Labour’s concern about impoverished public services, gross inequality and class stratification was surely correct. Our transformative approach should be sustained. It is also clear that many millions of people share the view that we need a big change. How else can we explain the fact that over 17 million people voted to leave the EU? A sense of dissatisfaction with the status quo has been incubating from as far back as the 2005 election. It is most deeply rooted in those areas which have suffered most from recent economic changes and which are geographically peripheral to the metropolitan growth nodes of the new economy. Too many people in too many communities experience a loss of agency; the power to control their own lives, to make a difference, and to have a voice which can make itself heard. Instead they sense they’re in a place where (bad) changes happen. Loss of control, no apparent economic purpose, and the collapse in social mobility means that your kids and grandkids can’t break out. The communities which I represent lost their coal mines 35 years ago. Their raison d’être was stripped away. Of the 533 English constituencies, mine is the 529th worst in terms of social mobility. Children born here can have little expectation of making progress in their lives. Loss of purpose leads to a sense of alienation and to emotional responses such as anger and a deep sense of existential angst. The right has understood this loss of agency. It explains the Brexit slogan of “take back control”. Of course, these working-class communities will not recover any control with a Tory government. Sadly the Remainer contingents failed to understand the emotional sense evoked by the offer of restored national sovereignty. Instead they sought to overturn the referendum in an apparent further twist of the knife by a social group which had never seemed to listen to or understood the “held back” regions. Given that the party was seen as tilting towards rejection of the votes of millions, it can hardly be surprising if those millions were suspicious of everything else we said, even though – taken singly – our policies were so popular that in some cases even Boris Johnson was using similar language. Where next, then? I would suggest three things. Each will require humility and a listening ear. First, there must be no going back to New Labour, where the alienation from so many communities began. Rather we must retain our central drive towards a transformation of our economic structures. But this must be rooted in a clearer understanding of working-class and left-behind areas. Never again should we present ourselves as knowing better than millions of our erstwhile supporters. Second, we need a connecting national story which explains who we are and where we are heading. This will require us to demonstrate how we will empower communities throughout the country and restore agency to those whose lives are subject to impersonal, often global economic forces. None of this new national story needs mean a return to a sense of an imperial Britain. The future is in internationalism on the one hand and localism on the other, bound together by a strong value-laden principle of solidarity. Third, we need to tackle the wholly dysfunctional, remote and incomprehensible political structures manipulated to their narrow interests by a golden elite group. We need a careful process of building power structures outside the metropolitan centre. It feels to me that progressive federalism with regional devolution in England alongside devomax for the nations is the only realistic way forward. Acting carefully, rooting ourselves in all Britain’s communities with resolve and radicalism but also with economic credibility, we can win again even in this dark hour. Jon Trickett is shadow minister for the Cabinet Office and MP for Hemsworth