It began as a Twitter account, which begat a book, which begat a Broadway show, in which God descended among us to update the Ten Commandments and excuse his “wrath-management issues”. In the US, its lead role was taken by camp sitcom stars Jim Parsons and Sean Hayes. Now standup Zoe Lyons plays the capricious Almighty who, when asked why there is no consistent justice in her world, barks: “I prefer mysterious ways!” Although described as a “one-God show”, Lyons – in silk pyjamas on Tim Shortall’s heavenly king-size bed set – is joined by buff Tom Bowen as archangel Gabriel, reciting verses from a Gutenberg Bible. In the auditorium, archangel Michael (Matt Tedford) solicits audience questions, before staging a minor rebellion and venturing niggling doubts of his own. Playwright David Javerbaum’s iconography – messianic woman, two camp angels – brings to mind Lucy McCormick’s hit show Triple Threat, next to which Act of God feels tame. It starts frothily, as louche Lyons reveals the same-sex truth about Ada and Eve, and tries to excuse the biblical flood: “It drowned me more than it drowned you.” There are divine one-liners: the show is more quotable than the good book itself. There are topical asides, too – on Brexit, on Prince Andrew – in a show Javerbaum has adjusted for UK audiences. There’s a final-act gear change, as God (and the play) gets a bit pious about Jesus, and volunteers belated penitence for her behaviour. (“Incompetence and omnipotence is a recipe for disaster.”) Javerbaum’s satiric point – that the Old Testament God is a psychopath, who we’d be better off without – might create a frisson in the States. To British audiences, it feels less of a Revelation. But it’s funny – as you’d expect from a writer whose 13 Emmys are mostly for comedy writing. Everyday and biblical idiom are spliced to droll effect; attention is amusingly drawn (if seldom for the first time) to God’s moral illogic and scriptural credibility gaps wider than the parting of the Red Sea. It trips along enjoyably in Benji Sperring’s production – but it’s more sweet breeze than thunderbolt. • At the Vaults, London, until 12 January.