Two leading figures of a frantic contest, Joe Denly and Vernon Philander, agreed about most things but not everything. Both acknowledge they are not playing on a batsman’s paradise but we may have guessed that after 15 wickets fell on the second day. “It was tough to begin with,” Denly said. “Philander and [Kagiso] Rabada are world‑class bowlers who complement each other very well. It’s disappointing to be 175 behind but they are four wickets down and we are still in the Test match. It’s a new-ball wicket for the bowlers and if we can get through that new ball relatively unscathed hopefully we might be able to chase something under 300.” Philander has also spent a fair amount of time batting at Centurion. “Once the bowler hits a good area it’s very tough to score out there.” Then he mentioned the same number as Denly. “A lead of 300 plus out there and you are in the safe zone.” Where these two seemed to differ was in their interpretation of Jofra Archer’s final two deliveries of the day: two attempted knuckleballs to the nightwatchman Anrich Nortje, both of which ended up as beamers with the batsman falling to the ground to avoid being hit. Philander gave the impression that both Archer deliveries should have been called for no‑ball, which would have meant he was unable to bowl again in the match. This also seemed to be the impression of the South Africa management at the close of play. “There was a little bit of a conversation going on after the game,” Philander said. “For me it’s plain and simple, we’re playing a game and we’re setting an example for the rest of the people coming into this game. You’ve got to make the right call. Are we going to tolerate it at another game or are we going to put a stop to it right here – it’s in the hands of the umpires.” Denly’s interpretation was different. “I was at leg slip and I wasn’t expecting two beamers. The first one fair enough. The second one ... well, it just missed the stumps. I saw him [the square leg umpire, Paul Reiffel] put his arm out and I think he tucked it in quite quickly. They [the umpires] withdrew that second no-ball.” This version of events was confirmed afterwards though Archer must now be careful for the rest of the innings. Another transgression and he will be removed from the attack. “More prosaically – except for those residing in the West Country – Philander confirmed that he would be joining Somerset next summer “on a year-by-year basis”.