Born in Kent, Anton du Beke, 53, started dancing at 14. In 1997, he began competing with his partner Erin Boag and, in 2004, the pair joined the first series of Strictly Come Dancing. He continues to tour the UK with Boag , and their 2020 show is Dance Those Magical Movies. Du Beke is Strictly’s longest-serving pro dancer; this year’s final is on 14 December. He is married with twins and lives in Buckinghamshire. What is your greatest fear? Death and spiders. Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought? I don’t know, because I spend like a man with three arms. I am always spending on clothes; I like to have things made. What do you most dislike about your appearance?My enormous head. Who would play you in the film of your life? Rob Brydon – he’d have to dance a bit better, though. What is your favourite smell? My babies. What is your favourite word? Darling. What did you want to be when you were growing up? Fred Astaire. What do you owe your parents? I owe my mum everything, especially my work ethic. What is the worst job you’ve done? I was a door-to-door carpet-cleaning salesman. I thought my life was going to end, so I binned that after a day. How often do you have sex? I can only manage it once a day – I hope that’s not too disappointing. What or who is the greatest love of your life? My wife and children. I met Hannah at Wentworth golf club. She refused to dance with me initially, which I found hilarious, because I don’t dance with anybody at these things ever. Which words or phrases do you most overuse?My love. What has been your biggest disappointment? Not doing as well as I’d hoped in dancing competitions. I was massively competitive and massively disappointed most of the time. It’s the same now. When did you last cry, and why? When the babies were born, in March 2017. What do you consider your greatest achievement? Convincing my wife to marry me and have children with me. What has been your closest brush with the law? I used to get stopped a lot for not having car tax because I couldn’t afford it. How would you like to be remembered? As a wonderful husband and a great father, and somebody who inspired others to pursue their own dreams, like Fred Astaire inspired me. What is the most important lesson life has taught you? One of my old dance teachers used to say, “Get better – don’t complain, don’t blame other people, just get better at what you’re doing.” And my mum always says to me, “Keep going, keep working.” Where would you most like to be right now? Somewhere fabulous with my wife and children; or on stage.