When I look at Kyle Sinckler and how he is performing I see someone who typifies this current England team. Abrasive, dynamic and full of energy and enthusiasm. He may have what I would call his “odd moments” every now and again but I can live with that if you get the rest of the package and that is what we are now seeing. If you’re Wales you will probably look at Kyle and maybe Ellis Genge and think you can rough them up. But I also think Kyle and Ellis both know that. If you know you’re going to be targeted you should be able to deal with it. Wales will be targeting all of England’s key players or leaders for different reasons all across the park. Warren Gatland has come out and called Kyle a “timebomb” but Warren is someone who knows Kyle pretty well from the Lions tour and he is someone who has never let him down. I remember speaking to the England coaches a few years ago and their concern about Kyle was his scrummaging. It was almost a case of hopefully he can survive in the scrum and then bring everything else that he brings around the pitch. He’s not just surviving in the scrums any more, he’s causing huge problems for opponents there and really importantly it is not sapping his legs, it is not detracting from all the other stuff he loves doing. I saw him the other day and told him I’ve never seen him looking so big. His response was: “Well, I’m not going to get any taller …” That appetite for improvement sums him up. I’m thrilled with how he’s developed physically, mentally and tactically as a player. He has nailed down that tighthead position, even though he would never feel like that; he’s forever wanting to stay hungry and improve. He comes across as vocal on the pitch, but that’s just him wherever he is. His energy is so infectious. He’s one of those guys where when he’s in the room, whether or not you can see him, you know he’s in the room. He’s like that in the gym. Sometimes he does it for effect because he knows it’s infectious and it gives energy to people around him. You see that with a few of the guys in the England team. You see it with Maro Itoje the way that he almost over-celebrates those little moments. That’s not because he needs to do that for himself, he knows that animation and those big gestures are infectious and it has that waterfall effect on everyone else. Kyle does that really well. If he’s making a big hit he celebrates just as much as everyone else. If Mark Wilson is making a turnover he’ll be the first to congratulate him with a pat on the back. He’s exactly the same in training, he’s exactly the same in the gym. To an extent he’ll probably be like that in meeting rooms – he’s just that kind of character who people like spending time with and being around. Kyle talks a lot about the work he has done with Adam Jones at Harlequins and it is a great dynamic. Adam would look at Kyle and think he can do all the things that Adam couldn’t. But then Kyle would have been looking at Adam thinking: I want to have your reputation, your mindset and consistency at the scrum. He is really coachable in terms of always wanting to learn. He has found his maturity and his mindset, his understanding that it all starts up front – yes, England have scored 10 tries and 70% have come from kicking but we’re talking about an England team who have been on the front foot for two matches. Kyle has to take some credit for that, as well as the rest of the forward pack. If you look back to the 2016 England tour of Australia, Kyle – and Ellis for that matter – was perhaps a surprise inclusion in the squad, Kyle wasn’t expecting to go out and play. Eddie just wanted him to go out and be part of the environment. Just sit back, understand and have a look – these are the levels that we train at, this is how we prepare, this is what Test match rugby is about. To cut your teeth in Australia, to be part of that environment as an active spectator, because he would have done all the training and helped the team prepare – I think that was a masterstroke. Just look at Kyle’s development year on year. In 2016 he was a spectator in Australia, in 2017 he became a Test Lion, in 2018 he made the No 3 jersey his own and this year he has completely established himself as a Test player. It has been an incredible journey. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels There is a bit of the unknown going into this game because we haven’t seen this English side massively tested. That’s a huge compliment to this England defence in terms of stopping the opposition playing but Ireland just weren’t as sharp as expected and we all know what happened with France at Twickenham. Wales cannot rely on the crowd and the passion – they’ll get it in spades but it’s like a team relying on the wind in the second half to get them out of trouble – it will aid you but don’t ever rely it. England, meanwhile, have to turn the negativity that will come their way into something positive. When you’re in the middle of the pitch and you’re in your circle it’s just us, no one else is going to do it for you.Everyone they need to win this match is right there in that circle. That’s so empowering, looking around at the quality, eyeballing one another and where Wales may look to the crowd and rely on it a little bit, England will be insular and look within the circle. It’s interesting, Eddie has said this is the greatest Welsh side but Warren disagrees. Having said that, Warren has described this as the strongest Wales squad he has ever had and Eddie did the same about England at the start of the Six Nations. Emotion is going to be a massive factor. We will see the best side of Wales but if we also see the best side of England then they will win. Ugo Monye played for England, the British & Irish Lions and Harlequins and is now a pundit