The family of a teenager who travelled to Syria to join Islamic State has been told the Home Office intends to revoke her British citizenship, according to their lawyer. Shamima Begum, who left her home in Bethnal Green, east London, at the age of 15, is in a refugee camp in Syria, where she gave birth to a boy at the weekend. Begum, now 19, had called on the British people to have sympathy for her and asked to be allowed to return to the UK. The home secretary, Sajid Javid, responded by insisting that he would do all in his power to prevent her coming back. Javid told the Commons on Monday: “The powers available to me include banning non-British people from this country and stripping dangerous dual nationals of their British citizenship. Over 100 people have already been deprived in this way.” Although Begum is not a dual citizen, the home secretary has been advised that, because her mother holds a Bangladeshi passport, he may be able to deprive her of her British citizenship. The Home Office has not commented. On Tuesday, Tasnime Akunjee, the family’s lawyer, said Begum’s relatives were “very disappointed with the Home Office’s intention to have an order made depriving Shamima of her citizenship”. He said they were “considering all legal avenues to challenge this decision”. According to ITV News, Begum’s mother received a letter notifying her of the Home Office’s intention to strip her citizenship on Tuesday. “Please find enclosed papers that relate to a decision taken by the home secretary, to deprive your daughter, Shamima Begum, of her British citizenship,” the letter read, according to the programme. “In light of the circumstances of your daughter, the notice of the home secretary’s decision has been served of file today (19 February), and the order removing her British citizenship has subsequently been made.” ITV News said the letter urged Begum’s family to make her aware of the decision, adding that she had a right to appeal. Begum left the UK along with two schoolfriends in 2015 and her case was thrust back into the spotlight last week, when she declared her wish to return for the sake of her newly born child. She made the plea in an interview with the Times, conducted in a Syrian refugee camp. “I’m not the same silly little 15-year-old schoolgirl who ran away from Bethnal Green four years ago. And I don’t regret coming here,” the heavily pregnant Begum told the paper last Wednesday. Sitting with her newborn baby during an interview the following Sunday, she said: “I feel a lot of people should have sympathy for me, for everything I’ve been through. You know, I didn’t know what I was getting into when I left. She told Sky News: “I was hoping that maybe for the sake of me and my child they let me come back. Because I can’t live in this camp forever. It’s not really possible.” Javid has made clear his fierce opposition to her return, writing in the Sunday Times that “there will be consequences” for those who travelled to Syria to support groups such as Isis. On Monday, he added: “Certainly, anyone that went to support terrorism in any way whatsoever, we are not going to risk the lives of any British officials – soldiers or anyone – to help them or rescue them.” Responding to an urgent question in the Commons, Javid told MPs more than 900 people had travelled from the UK to Syria or Iraq. “Whatever role they took in the so-called caliphate, they all supported a terrorist organisation and in doing so they have shown they hate our country and the values we stand for.” He added: “Now this so-called caliphate is crumbling, some of them want to return and I have been very clear: where I can, and where any threat remains, I will not hesitate to prevent this.” Javid can use temporary exclusion orders to bar the return of jihadists for up to two years. He acknowledged it was not within his power to render a person stateless, and said the UK “must, of course, observe international law”. Therefore, he said that Britons who do return to the UK “will be questioned, investigated and potentially prosecuted”. However, it now appears Javid has been advised he can use the Bangladeshi citizenship of Begum’s mother to prevent her return. In the view of the family’s lawyer, however, that advice is incorrect. “Our view is that this would be illegal because they would make her a stateless person, in breach of international law. We are surprised the home secretary does not understand international law, or care about international law,” Akunjee said. “If he were to attempt to put such orders on, we would explore all legal options to block his unlawful actions or appeal. If we can get an injunction, we will.” Begum’s relatives have called for her to be looked upon as a “girl who was groomed at the age of 15”. They said that comments she has made to journalists, characterised by some as betraying a lack of remorse, should be viewed with skepticism. “We are also mindful that Shamima is currently in a camp surrounded by Isis sympathisers, and any comments by her could lead directly to danger to her and her child,” they told ITV News. They said they welcomed an investigation into her time in Syria and called for her to be dealt with by the British justice system. On Tuesday, that call was echoed by the Liberal Democrats, whose home affairs spokesman, Ed Davey, said: “Membership of a terrorist group is a serious crime, as is encouraging or supporting terrorism. But Shamima Begum should face justice for those crimes in the UK. “It is not only hard to see Ms Begum and her baby as constituting a serious threat to national security, but it also seems a huge wasted opportunity. We can learn lessons as to why a young girl went to Syria in the first place; lessons which could improve Britain’s security by helping us prevent this happening again.” The Labour MP, Stella Creasy, said: “However horrific her defence of Isis, if the home secretary can start with stripping this woman and her week-old child of their citizenship for his leadership bid, where does it end?” Creasy added that she too would prefer to see Begum dealt with by the domestic justice system. 