After years of military rule in Thailand and multiple postponed elections, politicians seem to have turned themselves into stars – or former prime ministers – in order to attract votes. With new strict campaigning laws restricting what kind of messaging candidates can send out , one political party has published somewhat unusual posters. Presenting themselves as “heroes”, the leaders of the Thai Local Power party pose in blockbuster-like settings. Under the Hashtag #WeAreHero and #SmartLocalsSmartThailand, party leader Chuenchob Kongudom, drag actor and board director member Assadayut Khunviseadpong (known as drag persona Natalia Pliacam), and actor and deputy president Rattapoom Toekongsa alias Film Rattapoom, tried to get voters’ attention, using cinematic effects ahead of elections set for 24 March. Paul Chambers, a lecturer at the College of Asean community studies at Thailand’s Naresuan University, said the move was born out of “desperation” when competing with 108 parties registered. This, he said, intended to appeal to young people “who may be apathetic to the issues of the day”. Online, some lauded what they called a “creative” approach, while others remained critical. In an online forum, user JayBird1138 appeared to take a swipe at US and Thai politics at once. “Reality TV helped one person become president,” they said. “So, this is doing it Thai style?” For Facebook user Pichet Krongkampol, politics “isn’t supposed to be some entertainment”, though he did accept it was entertaining. Kitti Ruangphunglhuang echoed similar feelings. “This is idiotic. Get the hell away!” But most have taken it with a light heart, joking that they thought it an advertisement for a new movie premiering on 24 March. Facebook user Chakree Jackie Choi wrote: “I finally have a party that I will vote [for].” This prompted Facebook user Tanawat Boonpradit to ask whether he would “cast his vote at Major or SF”, two popular cinema companies in Thailand. Another political party, the Pheu Thai party, on Monday sent their candidate to a registration centre on horseback, dressed up as a Thai warrior.