Late-night hosts cover damaging sex scandals, the president’s need for attention, and Spike Lee’s Oscars speech. On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah dove into a fraught topic: the disheartening number of sex scandals finally moving from the rumor mill to the courthouse. First, there’s R Kelly. The R&B star, whose alleged sexual predation was recently examined in the Lifetime docu-series Surviving R Kelly, was arrested last week on 10 counts of aggravated sexual abuse against four victims, including three minors. “R Kelly’s best bet right now is to pray,” Noah said. “Although I don’t know if God has time for his prayers, because he’s got his hands full right now,” he added in reference to Pope Francis’s summit on sexual abuse within the Catholic church. During the summit, Pope Francis warned that abusers within the church would face the full “wrath of God”, also known as “the ultimate ‘Just wait until Dad gets home’”, according to Noah. That sentence is serious … or not. “Many people are pointing out that the wrath of God isn’t a thing,” Noah observed. “Yeah, I bet R Kelly heard this and he was like, ‘Can I also take the wrath of God as my punishment?’” In still other sex scandal news, one of Trump’s cabinet members, Alexander Acosta, is drawing closer scrutiny for his extremely light plea deal with the Florida billionaire Jeffrey Epstein, who stood accused a decade ago of sex crimes with girls as young as 14. “Yes, you heard that right,” Noah paused. “Eleven years ago, the man who is now Trump’s labor secretary basically let a billionaire off the hook for abusing underage girls.” President Trump’s response? “That seems like a long time ago.” “Think about how crazy this is – there’s a member of Trump’s cabinet who helped a billionaire sex offender sweep a scandal under the rug,” Noah said, incredulous. Yet there’s another billionaire sex scandal stealing the headlines this week: Patriots owner Robert Kraft has been charged with soliciting prostitution as part of a sex trafficking sting in Florida. Jokes of happy endings aside, Noah noted that the Kraft scandal wasn’t merely a rich man paying for sex; investigators claim that the women involved weren’t willing sex workers, and were forced to serve more than a thousand clients a year. “So this wasn’t Pretty Woman. It’s more like pretty horrific, which is why these are very serious charges – unless you’re a Patriots fan,” said Noah before clips of several diehard Patriots fans standing by their owner. The unwavering support for Kraft only demonstrated “what’s incredible about sports in America – if you’re winning, there’s no limit to what your fans will let you get away with,” Noah said. That being said, “you can call it insensitive for these people to just brush aside serious sex crimes like this, but you could also call it ‘presidential’.” On Late Night, Seth Meyers took a closer look at Trump’s constant need for attention. Trump seemed particularly inflamed that the Oscars, held on Sunday night in Los Angeles, didn’t even mention him; the closest anyone strayed to a presidential reference was Spike Lee’s exhortation that Americans “do the right thing” in the 2020 election. After the show, Trump tweeted disparagingly at Lee, who won his first Oscar for co-writing the screenplay for BlacKkKlansman. “I love that he didn’t mention Trump by name but Trump heard ‘hate’ and assumed it was about him,” Meyers said. In other news, CNN reported over the weekend that Trump is looking forward to sowing chaos and division among Democrats in the primaries, though those are still a year away. “It’s like the tagline for a new sitcom – ‘he’s bad at government but great at causing chaos. Tune in this fall for ‘the President is a Cat’,” Meyers mused. Trump’s nomination over the weekend of Kelly Craft as ambassador to the United Nations probably falls into the “causing chaos” category. Craft, a prominent GOP donor and climate change skeptic, said in a 2017 interview that she believed “there are sciences on both sides that are accurate … I appreciate and I respect both sides of the science [on climate change].” “She sounds like a sixth-grader who forgot to do a project for the science fair,” Meyers joked. “Also, there are not both sides. There’s one side with all the world’s scientists on it and then there’s the other side, which is just Donald Trump.” Over in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel recapped the hostless Oscars. “The theme for the Oscars this year was the Grammys,” he said in reference to the show’s numerous musical performances, including Adam Lambert and Queen, Bette Midler and a sensual reprise of A Star Is Born’s breakout song, Shallow. “Lady Gaga and Bradley Cooper had so much sexual chemistry that about a minute into the song my wife started ovulating,” Kimmel joked. Sunday’s Oscars were also “a historic night for diversity” – Black Panther won three Oscars, while Roma won three Oscars, including for best director Alfonso Cuarón. Spike Lee won his first Oscar, and then got a shout-out from the president, who tweeted that it would “be nice if Spike Lee could read his notes” and praised himself for doing more for African Americans than “almost any other Pres!” “I like that ‘almost any other Pres’,” Kimmel laughed before sarcastically adding, “If it weren’t for that damn Lincoln, I’d be number one!”