Juan Carrau Petit Manseng Gran Reserva, Melilla, Uruguay 2016 (£17.99, Fine Wines Direct) Whether it’s Argentina’s malbec, or Chile’s cabernet and carmenère, South America’s wine reputation is based on its reds. Increasingly, however, I’m finding some of the most creative winemaking is focused on whites. Uruguay, which is best known for the wines it makes from tannat, the French heavyweight grape, has some good, Atlantic breeze-cooled spots for making whites, and a refreshingly different portfolio of varieties planted in them. Albariño, still not all that common outside Iberia, has found a happy new home in the Maldonado region with briskly fresh and peachily aromatic wines, such as Bodega Garzon Albariño 2017 (£14.95, Slurp). And I was impressed by the tang and precision of Juan Carrau’s take on petit manseng, another variety from France. Viña Leyda Single Vineyard Riesling Neblina, Leyda Valley, Chile 2015 (£14.75, Great Western Wine) Chile’s winemakers have long had a knack for good-value sauvignon blanc, such as the peapoddy zippiness of Waitrose Chilean Sauvignon Blanc, Aconcagua 2017 (£7.49). But the quality has improved dramatically since they found more suitable sites near the Pacific in which to grow the variety. There is a luminous succulence to Viña Leyda Sauvignon Blanc Single Vineyard Garuma 2018 (£14.18, Great Wines Direct), a house signature also apparent in the same producer’s Neblina Riesling. I’m hoping the complex Bodegas RE Velado 2012, a sherry or Jura Vin Jaune-alike white made from pinot noir, will find a UK importer soon. But in the meantime, see how Chile is mastering chardonnay with wines such as Maycas del Limari Quebadra Seca Chardonnay, Limari 2014 (£22, The Wine Society). Terrazas de los Andes Torrontés, Mendoza, Argentina 2018 (£16.49, Ocado) Like Chile, Argentina has been making great strides with its chardonnay, the high-altitude vineyards bringing a real clarity of fruit to its wines. One of the best producers of malbec, Catena Zapata, is behind some of its best chardonnays: the shimmering Adrianna Vineyard White Stones Chardonnay (£65, Jeroboams) is one of the continent’s smartest wines, with a price to match, but there is stylish elegance, too, in the more affordable Catena Chardonnay, Mendoza 2017 (£12, Vinvm). Semillon is another Argentine strength, not least in the shape of the wonderfully savoury Mendel Semillon, Mendoza 2016 (£18.99, Latin Wines Online). While the gewürztraminer-like floral exuberance of torrontés is restrained and made into a wine of charm in the vineyards of Terrazas de los Andes. Follow David on Twitter @Daveydaibach This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.