A major trophy within three years was not quite on the list of essentials when Fosun took over Wolves in 2016, but the team are now serious contenders for an FA Cup win that would crown the club’s reconfiguration beyond all imagining. They will compete in the quarter-finals for the first time since 2003 and nobody will feel sure of dismissing a team that, against opponents who had been in scintillating form, mastered both sides of the game to secure safe passage. Ivan Cavaleiro’s 28th-minute goal was enough to take them through and at that point it was hard to envisage the chaotic injury-time scenes that saw John Ruddy, the Wolves goalkeeper, forced to block a volley from his opposite number, Frank Fielding, with the tie’s last action. Wolves had controlled the opening period and might have gone in at half-time with the game safe; Bristol City re-emerged looking far more like a team who had won their previous nine games and, by the end, Nuno Espírito Santo could take satisfaction from the different facets his side had been obliged to show. “The game was two different halves,” Espírito Santo said. “In the first half we played very well, building, creating chances, scoring. In the second half we had to hold on to what we have. We had to be brave.” Their winning goal was a distillation of everything they do so well, and so idiosyncratically. Laser-like diagonal passes to the flanks are their hallmark and, in Conor Coady and Matt Doherty, they have two players who have perfected the discipline. Both signed new contracts last week and illustrated why they had been offered when Coady, launching the ball 60 yards, found his teammate in an advanced right-sided position. Doherty controlled before beating the weak challenge of Jay Dasilva, Bristol City’s on-loan left-back. He had time to size up his options and chose well, Cavaleiro crisply converting his cutback with a first-time shot from 12 yards. The Bristol City manager, Lee Johnson, thought Doherty had handled the ball in the buildup and his side also felt aggrieved the Wolves player appeared to get away with a similar offence inside his own box early in the second half. “I’m not sure whether we were playing Wolves or the Harlem Globetrotters at one point,” Johnson said. VAR would have cleared up either incident and, whatever your feelings about the technology’s creep into the game, it is a nonsense that only a select number of FA Cup ties have been equipped with it. Espírito Santo, clearly less inclined to make a mockery of the tournament than its organisers, had made only three changes from last Monday’s draw against Newcastle and was rewarded for his deference. Doherty rapped a post straight after Cavaleiro had struck and Raúl Jiménez drew a smart save from Fielding before half-time, Willy Boly also heading a presentable chance wide. Wolves oozed self-assurance but City, sent out early by Johnson for the second half, are not a team that goes quietly and would leave the visitors stretched to the limit. Dasilva and the substitute Marlon Pack both squandered openings from 18 yards and Ruddy had to awkwardly save a deflected pass by Josh Brownhill. Fielding was kept honest with saves from João Moutinho and Morgan Gibbs-White but the best of the drama was reserved for the final 10 minutes, when Wolves took a battering in their penalty area. Ruddy tipped over from another replacement, Matty Taylor, and looked on as the resulting corner looped off Pack and just over. Adam Webster saw a header blocked near the line and City were only finished when, at the death, that confrontation between the keepers ended in Wolves’ favour. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels It was, at least, a face-off to remember the game by. When the two teams met here in last season’s Championship, Espírito Santo was sent from the touchline and won few friends locally when, up in the stands, he celebrated Wolves’ late winner with gusto. This time there was a frisson upon the half-time whistle when Johnson – who took his Uefa A licence in Scotland alongside Espírito Santo – confronted his former classmate and set in train a skirmish among the staff that ended with Jamie McAllister, his assistant head coach, being booked. “They’re a fiery bench and we’re a fiery bench as well; it was a bit of handbags,” said Johnson, who will now focus minds back on City’s push for promotion from the Championship. “I wasn’t part of it. This time I was not in trouble,” smiled Espírito Santo, whose team are in the thick of something far more exciting than a touchline scuffle.