Even a decade ago, Jeremy Hardy used to worry about the vulnerability of his supposedly aged Radio 4 fanbase: “I hope we don’t have a harsh winter – I could lose half my audience.” This was characteristically modest, since he was loved and admired by comedy fans of all ages, from the spit’n’sawdust clubs where he started out in the early 80s to the Hay festival and the BBC Radio theatre. So many of the tributes pouring in after the announcement of his death from cancer on Friday, at only 57, have come from younger comics with stories to tell of his unstinting generosity, support and kindness towards those coming up in the business. Hardy was a comedian’s comedian, which is to say that he was steeped in a love of standup and was regarded in turn as a master of the craft by his contemporaries and those who aspired to follow him. “If you loved standup, you loved him,” says the comic and writer Shappi Khorsandi, to whom he became a mentor and friend early in her career. “There was no ego, it was never about fame, it was always about the craft. He would always speak his mind, but his fierce intelligence meant that his self-expression was absolutely watertight.” It was in part that consummate clarity of expression – the ability to sound, even off the cuff, as if each sentence had been polished and carefully edited before leaving his lips – that made him such a unique voice in British comedy. But his instinctive feel for the perfect turn of phrase and comic timing was underpinned by a formidable knowledge of current affairs, politics and history. His longtime friend and colleague Mark Steel tweeted on Friday that a journalist from a national paper had called him to ask if Jeremy was political at all (yes, seriously). “I shall forever regret not saying, ‘He was chair of East Surrey Conservative Association but didn’t like to mention it,’” Steel added. Hardy won audiences over because he was never hectoring Hardy was, of course, a political comedian to his bones, though the label bothered him. “I’ve always been uncomfortable with that epithet, ‘leftwing comedian’,” he told his friend Jack Dee, who interviewed him for BBC Radio 4’s Chain Reaction in 2007. “It’s like you’re not a proper comedian, but people approve of you.” Not everyone approved; when he joked on Radio 4 that the world would be a better place if all members of the BNP were shot in the back of the head, there were complaints to the BBC and a gig in Burnley was cancelled. But for the most part, Hardy won audiences over because he was never hectoring – he delivered lines like the above with a cheery reasonableness that usually allowed him to slip potentially divisive points under the radar, but mainly because, above all, he was so funny. Hardy used to joke that he wasn’t all that leftwing, it was just that everyone else kept moving to the right. “I’ve always been an old-fashioned leftist-liberal,” he told Dee, “but the country had moved so far to the right that I’ve ended up the most leftwing person in the country.” But beyond the jokes, Hardy was respected by colleagues and audiences from middle England to Stop the War rallies, because he walked the walk. Plenty of comics have tackled topical material, especially on the alternative scene in the 80s where he learned the trade, but Hardy’s politics were indivisible from who he was. Much of his time was spent campaigning, not for big showy benefit gigs but quietly, behind the scenes, for the issues he cared about, from the Guildford Four to Palestine to the plight of child refugees. Hardy was serious about his politics, but never dour or earnest, and always took the trouble to put people at ease. The first time I met him, some years ago in Hay, he chatted easily, as if to an old friend, despite the fact that I was so obviously awestruck at meeting someone who had been a comedy hero since my teens. He was as loved by fans for his glorious silliness, including his celebrated tuneless singing on I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue. He once referred to his colleague Graeme Garden as “a quiet genius”, a phrase that could be applied equally well to Hardy himself. His death leaves a gap in the comedy landscape that won’t easily be filled and we will miss his wisdom in the years to come.