The Univision anchor Jorge Ramos has been detained in the Miraflores presidential palace in Caracas, Venezuela, the network announced on Monday evening. The Mexican-born journalist was interviewing Venezuela’s embattled president Nicolás Maduro when he and his crew were detained after asking a question the combative Maduro did not approve of, according to a tweet by the network’s US president, Daniel Coronell. The team’s equipment had also been confiscated, Coronell said. Coronell later said Ramos and his team had been released and he had spoken to the journalist. The equipment as well as the material that upset Maduro were confiscated. Reuters reported that Venezuela was going to deport the group. Ramos told Univision that the offending line of questioning came when he showed Maduro images taken on Ramos’ phone of Venezuelans eating out of the trash to prove people were living a humanitarian crisis. Ramos is arguably the best-known journalist in the Spanish-speaking world. He has gained particular notoriety for regularly locking horns with Donald Trump, who had him ejected from a press conference while on the campaign trail in 2015. The have since sparred over the US president’s proposed border wall among other contentious issues. Maduro, who is fending off mounting international pressure to cede power to opposition leader and self-declared interim president Juan Guaidó, has been accused of regularly detaining journalists. Last month, two French journalists were held after filming outside Miraflores. Numerous local journalists have been harassed or detained in recent years. The US state department received word of the arrest of Ramos and his team and insist on their immediate release, Kimberly Breier, assistant secretary for western hemisphere affairs, tweeted. The move against Ramos drew swift condemnation from Human Rights Watch, with the advocacy group’s Americas director, José Miguel Vivanco, calling for the immediate release of Ramos and his crew. “The international community must be alert,” he tweeted on Monday evening, later adding that “Jorge Ramos and his team are surrounded by Maduro’s intelligence services (responsible for atrocities).” Guaidó also attacked Maduro, tweeting that “the desperation of the usurper is each day more evident, he could even respond to [Ramos’] questions.” López Obrador has drawn criticism from some international observers for refusing to back Guaidó. The Mexican foreign ministry condemned the crew’s detention after their release on Monday night. “Our country calls for respect for freedom of expression and reiterates its obligation in defense of the security of Mexican citizens abroad,” a tweet read. Univision is the largest Spanish-language network in the US. Ramos anchors its flagship nightly news program, Noticiero Univision.