It was a definitive moment of the counterculture movement, an explosion of music and mud-spattered revelry set against a backdrop of political divisions, geopolitical turmoil and social unrest. Fifty years on, plans are under way for an anniversary edition of the Woodstock festival – but this time the squabbling isn’t confined to the political arena (though, in Donald Trump’s America, those divisions are as acute as ever). Two rival concerts have been planned to mark five decades since the extraordinary party that brought 400,000 people to a farm in Bethel, New York, with both events claiming to invoke the spirit of the original and promising three days of peace, love and music. “There’s going to be a lot of celebrations this year, but only one will be held on the site of the 1969 original,” said Scott Cullather, executive producer of the Bethel Woods music and culture festival. The organisers have struck a deal with the concert promoter Live Nation to hold an event on Yasgur’s farm, where Jimi Hendrix performed a rendition of The Star Spangled Banner. “If anything, the country is as divided now as it was during the Johnson-Nixon era, and this is going to give everybody the opportunity to come to the place where an amazing event that stood for something took place – and for many of the same reasons.” Making the case for his competing festival, also taking place in August but 150 miles to the north-west of Bethel, in Watkins Glen, New York state, is Michael Lang, the original Woodstock promoter. He says that while the Bethel site remains close to his heart, it no longer has the capacity to hold a real Woodstock. He hopes his show will be as suffused with politics as the original was by the anti-Vietnam war movement, and that the focus, other than the music, will be on sustainability, activism and social justice. Lang, who is aiming to sell 100,000 tickets, told the Poughkeepsie Journal that the themes would “hopefully encourage people to get involved with our lives on the planet” – goals, he said, that were in harmony with the “history and essence of what Woodstock was”. He hopes to attract an eclectic bill to appeal to a multigenerational audience. “It’ll be hip-hop and rock and some pop and some of the legacy bands from the original festival,” he told Rolling Stone. The Bethel festival, meanwhile, has already confirmed Santana, one of the original performers and a stalwart of 60s idealism, as a headline act, but has a venue with a capacity of only 35,000. Among its “pan-generational musical offerings”, it plans to put on TED-style talks “from leading futurists and retro-tech experts”. In what could be interpreted as a shot across Lang’s bow, Darlene Fedun, chief executive of the Bethel Woods Center for the Arts, which occupies the festival site, has vowed it won’t be a “put your logo here” event. In truth, the Woodstock brand is already highly leveraged, from its bird-and-guitar logo, tie-dye dog and children’s products to Woodstock cannabis. So can either Woodstock hope to be culturally significant? Lang – who is backed by the Japanese advertising group Dentsu – has conceded that an edition of the festival in 1999, marked by violence and looting during sets by Limp Bizkit and Red Hot Chili Peppers, was “just a musical experience with no social significance”. Lang has said: “We’re going back to our roots and our original intent.” He anticipates its relevance will be self-evident because “so many of the things we’re dealing with again harken back to the things we had thought we had dealt with in the 60s and beyond”. But if that doesn’t do it for people, he hopes to lure them by significantly higher sanitation standards. Mud and discomfort were prominent features in 1969, when hundreds of thousands chanted “Fuck the rain!” While keen to stress that “we’re going back to our roots and our original intent”, Lang promises that the 2019 version will have glamping and “types of experiences in various forms where there’s a real bed, and there’s a chair to sit in and a light bulb. There will also be easier access to portable toilets.” The rock writer Greil Marcus has said that the original Woodstock, which came in a summer blighted by the horror of a string of murders carried out under the direction of the cult leader Charles Manson, “was proof that America was still big enough to contradict itself on the grandest scale – to stage its best possible spectacle as if to cancel its worst”. In an essay published in Interview magazine 25 years ago, he pointed out that Woodstock came at a moment of relentless bad news, meaning that an entire era of good feeling was compressed into a single place and time. “That compression produced a corresponding intensity of wonder and delight. Again and again, as Woodstock stumbled on, through rain and mud and heat and cold, people turned to one another and said the same thing: “Can you believe this?” Contacted last week for his thoughts on Woodstock at 50, Marcus said he’d said what he had to say. But he added: “I also find the pop version of civil war re-enactment societies really creepy.” “I’d met Janis Joplin in a bar downtown and she suggested I came up to Woodstock. We’d never heard of festivals before. I wasn’t really a hippy, more like a flower child. It was a way to get high and get laid. My employer, an older photographer, said I couldn’t go, so I quit my job and we drove up. We tried staying in a field but it was sopping wet and full of leeches. Then we found a cottage about half a mile from the stage. The farmer’s wife said we could have it, $5 for the weekend. “There was a white horse I gave sugar cubes. But he wouldn’t let me climb on. By the end, there was like 50 people crashing there. We ended up giving her $50. I remember meeting a beautiful girl and she came back to the house with me. And I remember walking to the top of the hill. People were passing joints. You’d light one up and pass it on. But it never came back. Somehow another would come from different direction. “By the end of the day, I had somehow slid down the hill to the front of the stage. I saw Canned Heat, the Who, Sly and the Family Stone, Jimi Hendrix doing Star Spangled Banner. Truth is, everybody played great. It was one of those moments. I got stoned, I got laid by some stranger, I had a place to stay. We heard them announcing, ‘Don’t take the acid’, but there were no negative vibes. I swear to you, there was something telling you this was special. Nothing was wrong. They asked people climbing on the scaffolding to come down and they did. It was peaceful and content. Never disgruntled once. It was happy-happy. “The next week was kind of a comedown. But when I got back, my employer said, ‘Hey, I wish I could’ve been you.’ And he gave my job back.”