Saturday Night Live returns from a one-week hiatus and opens with Meet the Press. Chuck Todd (Kyle Mooney) kicks things off by asking his panel of experts the question on everyone’s mind: “What do you think Jeff Bezos’s penis looks like?” The answers range from Amazon echo to Dot. Moving on to the State of the Union address, Todd welcomes secretary of commerce Wilbur Ross (Kate McKinnon), but he too only wants to discuss the world’s richest penis. The same goes for acting attorney general Matt Whittaker (a bald-capped Aidy Bryant), who has no sympathy for Bezos since every time he posts a photo of himself on Instagram it “gets flagged as a dick pic”. That’s the long and short of the briefer-than-usual, light but focused cold open. Singer Halsey pulls double duty as host and musical guest. She busts out her East Coast chops by doing her best Jersey accent and gives some love to the women of SNL that she grew up watching. First sketch up is Them Trumps, a show from the producers of Empire that “asks the question: what if Trump was black?” Like the previous Them Trumps sketch from earlier in the season, the answer comes hard and fast: he would be immediately arrested. It’s a clever conceit, but one that offers diminishing returns . Next, Thompson plays the chairman of the Virginia State Ethics Committee, who finds himself forced to ask his colleagues (all of them white) a previously unthinkable question: “HAS ANYONE ELSE WORN BLACKFACE IN COLLEGE?” One by one, they all cop to it, although they’re still confused about what they did wrong. One asks, “What if the blackface was just part of your costume of a black person?”, while another wonders if “it counts if you did it all the way back in the ‘80s?” Ultimately, the comedy is neither vicious nor absurd enough to adequately represent the disgraceful subject it’s meant to parody. Valentine’s Song is a catchy R&B ballad from Halsey, Bryant, and McKinnon, in which their trio of lascivious songstresses find their amorous holiday expectations (“sex, romance, and sexy romance!”) thwarted by the interruption of their family members and co-workers. The song gives Halsey a chance to shine, but it’s Thompson, guesting on the hook as a honey-voiced crooner in the ‘90’s mold, who walks away with it. Women of Congress is a Charlie’s Angels-style action show starring Nancy “Madame Clapback” Pelosi, Alexandria “I Say What I Meme” Ocasio-Cortez, Maxine “Don’t Go Chasing” Waters, Kyrsten “Kooky Arizona Lady” Sinema, Ilhan “Get the Hi-Job Done” Omar, Annie “Raise the Roof” Kuster, Abigail “Say My Name, Say My Name” Spanberger, and Rashida “Impeach the Motherf***er” Tlaib. Alec Baldwin makes a brief – and entirely vocal – cameo as Trump. There’s no real point to it! . Halsey performs her ballad, Without Me. Weekend Update opens with Michael Che holding court on the myriad racial controversies that erupted over the past week – the Virginia Democrats blackface scandal, Liam Neeson’s past attempt at racist vigilantism, the deportation of British rapper 21 Savage ( “21 actually had to leave the UK as a kid, probably because crazy-ass Liam Neeson was looking for black dudes with a baseball bat.”), and the Gucci “Sambo” sweater. Melissa Villasenor, dressed like Lady Gaga, joins the Updated desk, ostensibly to discuss her picks for the upcoming Grammy Awards. Instead, she uses her time to belt out Gaga’s hit song Shallow (she’s briefly joined by Mooney, in costume as Bradley Cooper’s character from A Star is Born), which she knocks out of the park (per Che: “That was amazing … I’m supposed to tell a joke after that?”). In honor of Valentine’s Day, the anchors welcome a trio of dating experts who turn out to be narcissistic monsters. First, they’re joined by Nicos Slobkin (Day) and Brie Bacardi (Heidi Gardner), a toxically codependent “Instagram couple” who find themselves constantly on the verge of violent breakup, and later by Guy Who Just Bought a Boat, a yuppie d-bag “here to teach you how to score some ‘ginney whilst keeping your tiny hinny on this side of the line-y”. Another musical sketch, Sorority Scavenger Hunt stars Halsey, Villasenor, and Cecily Strong as members of a sorority who assault the patrons of a karaoke bar in-between their rendition of 4 Non-Blondes What’s Up. The premise promises ratcheting insanity, but it peters out quickly. Black History Presentation is a sincere tribute from the black members of the current cast to those that came before them, until they are hilariously interrupted by a clueless Kyle Mooney. In a unique (and instantly memorable) performance, Halsey sings the song Eastside while simultaneously painting a self-portrait on giant canvas below her – upside down no less! “Maurice” features Thompson as a buttoned-up husband and father who nonchalantly reveals to his family that he’s become a successful model on a gay cam site. Thompson and Halsey (playing his son’s curious and non-judgmental girlfriend) show off an especially easy rapport – the episode should have teamed them up a few more times. The final sketch of the night, Riverdale, finds the production of the popular teen series interrupted by a would-be method actor (Pete Davidson) tasked with playing a corpse. Davidson manages to actually lose himself in the character for a change (his over-the-top British accent isn’t too shabby either). Overall, a solid episode, with Halsey a natural performer.