Pep Guardiola has urged Manchester City to score as many goals as possible in the knowledge that it could decide the title race. City will regain top spot from Liverpool on Wednesday night on goal difference if they win at Everton, albeit having played a game more, and Guardiola knows the margin could be slim in the final analysis. His team’s goal difference is five better than Liverpool’s and superior to Tottenham’s by 14. Roberto Mancini’s City side won the title on goal difference from Manchester United in 2012. “The first message is to win the game and the second one is if you can score, score, and if you can avoid conceding, do it,” Guardiola said. “The Premier League could go to goal difference, I agree, though we are not going to say to the guys: ‘Today we have to win 25-zero.’ I have never said that. First you have to win the game and then second try [to score more], because it can happen.” Liverpool’s last two results have been draws, Jürgen Klopp’s team spurning the chance to pull seven points ahead of City. Guardiola, asked whether he felt reassured that his players have experience of winning the title, said: “I think [your] question is whether Liverpool can handle the pressure or not – really I don’t know. “What I would say is that I trust my players because, and I use this example always, we were 3-0 down in the Champions League at Anfield [last season] and the reaction when we played them in the second leg … when we scored a legal goal [Leroy Sané’s effort was incorrectly ruled out for offside] and an incredible penalty in the second half via Andy Robertson on Raheem Sterling [which was not given]. “The way we reacted and the way we [proceeded] to play despite all of this – that’s good. The only moment in the last two seasons when we lost back-to-back league games was this season against Crystal Palace and Leicester [in December]. I have the feeling that when I put them under pressure they react well. They accept the challenge when I say: ‘OK, show me again how good you are, come on.’ And they do it, they try it.” But Guardiola believes Klopp’s men have the advantage. He said: “I would prefer to be in the position of Liverpool. Yesterday after the result [the 1-1 draw at West Ham] we were surprised, but it can happen. “They drop two points and it is better for us than the position before. OK, the [other] teams will have a rest and Everton and ourselves have to play on Wednesday. But we have to win. Are we going to be the team that lost against Newcastle or the team that won against Arsenal? That is the challenge. “Three or four days ago we were already done, the champions were Liverpool and now we can be leading. We try to be calm. There will be surprises and it will be tough for teams to win every game.” Liverpool 9 Feb Bournemouth (h) 24 Feb Man Utd (a)  27 Feb Watford (h)  3 Mar Everton (a)  10 Mar Burnley (h)  17 Mar Fulham (a)  31 Mar Tottenham (h)  6 Apr Southampton (a) 13 Apr Chelsea (h) 20 Apr Cardiff (a)  27 Apr Huddersfield (h) 4 May Newcastle (a)  12 May Wolves (h) Manchester City 6 Feb Everton (a)10 Feb Chelsea (h) 27 Feb West Ham (h)2 Mar Bournemouth (a) 9 Mar Watford (h) 16 Mar Man Utd (a)30 Mar Fulham (a) 6 Apr Cardiff (h) 13 Apr Crystal Palace (a) 20 Apr Tottenham (h) 27 Apr Burnley (a) 4 May Leicester (h) 12 May Brighton (a) Tottenham 10 Feb Leicester (h)  23 Feb Burnley (a)  27 Feb Chelsea (a)  2 Mar Arsenal (h)  9 Mar Southampton (a)  17 Mar Crystal Palace (h)  31 Mar Liverpool (a)  6 Apr Brighton (h)  13 Apr Huddersfield (h)  20 Apr Man City (a)  27 Apr West Ham (h)  4 May Bournemouth (a)  12 May Everton (h)