A former staffer on Donald Trump’s presidential campaign has filed a federal lawsuit against the president, claiming he kissed her without consent. Alva Johnson, who was director of outreach and coalitions in Alabama in 2016, told the Washington Post Trump “grabbed her hand and leaned in to kiss her on the lips”, as the then candidate got out of a vehicle at a rally in Tampa on 24 August 2016. According to the Post, “Johnson said she turned her head and the unwanted kiss landed on the side of her mouth, which she called ‘super-creepy and inappropriate’”. The Post quoted her as saying: “I immediately felt violated because I wasn’t expecting it or wanting it. I can still see his lips coming straight for my face.” In a statement to the newspaper, White House press secretary Sarah Sanders dismissed Johnson’s allegation as “absurd on its face”. Sanders said: “This never happened and is directly contradicted by multiple highly credible eye witness accounts.” Johnson filed the lawsuit in Florida on Monday, seeking damages for emotional pain and suffering. The Post said the lawsuit “also alleges the campaign discriminated against Johnson, who is black, by paying her less than her white male counterparts”. A spokesman for the Trump campaign denied the claim. Trump has been accused of sexual misconduct by numerous women, claims which he denies. In October 2016, a month before election day, the Post reported on a video tape recorded behind the scenes of the Access Hollywood NBC TV show, in which Trump was heard to boast of how his fame allowed him to make aggressive approaches to women. “When you’re a star they let you do it,” Trump said in the recording, which was made in 2005. “You can do anything.” Unaware that a microphone was on, Trump said of one woman: “I did try and fuck her, she was married.” He also told show host Billy Bush that when he met beautiful women, he felt entitled to “grab them by the pussy”. At the time, Trump said: “Anyone who knows me knows these words don’t reflect who I am. I said it. I am wrong. I apologize.” Following Johnson’s sexual misconduct allegations, Trump’s defenders are likely to point to a recently sealed lawsuit involving the former campaign worker. The Post reported that in September 2018, three months after Johnson hired the Washington DC attorney Hassan Zavareei to handle the Trump case, Johnson “moved to seal a years-old court case in which two family members had briefly sought a temporary restraining order against her”. The restraining order was brought against Johnson in 2006. According to the Post, Johnson’s half-sister alleged that Johnson had been calling another sister’s school and falsely claiming that the teenager was using drugs. The family members withdrew the petition three weeks later. Zavareei said: “These false allegations came in the context of a family dispute that was resolved amicably years ago. “Ms Johnson’s family stands firmly behind her pursuit of justice against Donald Trump for the sexual assaults he has committed against Ms Johnson and so many other women over the course of decades.”