The number of new voters registered in Nigeria since January 2018 has increased by almost exactly the same percentage in each of its states, according to documents seen and analysed by the Guardian, raising fears that the results of Saturday’s presidential election could be open to mass rigging. Voters in Africa’s biggest country by population will choose between the incumbent Muhammadu Buhari, his main rival Atiku Abubakar, and more than 70 other candidates. Since the last presidential election in 2015, many more people have become eligible to vote, and many others have registered to take part in the polls for the first time. About 10 million new voters signed up between January 2018 and early 2019 – according to data released by the electoral commission (INEC) – twice the number that signed up in the first nine months of registration, between April 2017 and January 2018. But analysis of the data for each of the country’s 36 states and its capital shows that INEC has increased the number of new registered voters by almost exactly the same percentage across all states. The correlation is a “statistical impossibility” and does not reflect Nigeria’s demographic changes, according to data analysts working with the Guardian. Additional data seen by the Guardian also shows irregularities in registration for the 2015 election, until now considered to have been free and fair. On average, voter registration in each state increased by 2.2% between April 2017 and January 2018, and by 7.7% for the whole registration period ahead of Saturday’s election. Plotted on a scatter line graph, there is a 0.99 correlation across all the states, without a single outlier. According to three separate data analysts, the parity cannot be a coincidence. “Only God works that closely,” one analyst said. If some of the new voters registered are fake it would imply meddling at the electoral commission, though it is unclear whether it would be the ruling party or the opposition that would stand to benefit. On Sunday 16 February, 84m voters will choose who leads Africa’s largest democracy. Despite over 60 candidates, it is likely to be a choice between President Muhammadu Buhari, and former vice president Atiku Abubakar. Buhari's 2015 victory with his All Progressives Congress (APC) party was built on three promises: to rid Nigeria of endemic corruption, fix the economy and tackle security threats. The government says it is making progress in the fight against Boko Haram, but it is now in its tenth year, and the economy entered and climbed out of recession under Buhari. Opponents say his government is failing to tackle corruption, while Amnesty International say the army has been responsible for human rights abuses. After spending five months in Britain in 2017 receiving treatment for an undisclosed ailment, opposition groups said he was unfit for office, but Buhari, 76, says he is strong enough to serve. Main opposition People's Democratic Party (PDP) candidate Atiku, 72, has been caught up in corruption allegations since serving as vice president from 1999-2007. He has repeatedly denied any wrongdoing. He has promised business-friendly policies to double the economy to $900bn by 2025. He wants to privatise parts of the state oil company, and create a $25bn fund to support private sector investment. Atiku's opponents have claimed he would exploit those pro-business policies to enrich himself and those around him. Nigeria is deeply divided between the mainly Muslim north and largely Christian south. There are more than 200 distinct ethnic groups. This has led to an unofficial power-sharing agreement, with the presidency alternating between north and south every eight years. It isn't just religion or ethnicity causing fractures. Half of Nigeria’s registered voters are aged 18-35. Many say their ageing leaders are out of touch, and supported a "Not Too Young to Run" campaign to encourage younger people seeking office. 2015 was the only time Nigeria had a peaceful power handover since civilian government took over in 1999. Even then there was evidence of vote buying, voter intimidation, and other forms of corruption. International observers fear election interference and rigging this time around. Last month, Buhari triggered a constitutional row when he suspended the chief judge, who has a crucial say in resolving election result disputes. The candidate with the most votes is declared winner, as long as they have at least one-quarter of the vote in two-thirds of Nigeria's 36 states and the capital. Otherwise there is a run-off. Martin Belam and agencies Saturday’s election is seen as a referendum on Buhari’s first term, which has been marred by his prolonged absence due to illness, a weak economy, and the government’s failure to effectively tackle corruption and insecurity. A faction of Boko Haram attacked a state governor’s convoy on Tuesday, killing four people and stealing vehicles; on the same day, 15 people were crushed to death at a ruling party rally in eastern Port Harcourt. On Thursday, 14 sacks of ballot papers were intercepted in Kano state – though police said they were merely “specimen” papers to educate voters. There have also been reports that the privacy of citizens may have been compromised after INEC and the Nigerian communications commission allegedly allowed the ruling party to access personal data. The 2015 election in which Buhari came to power was widely held to be free and fair. However, an analysis of separate figures shows that manipulation may have happened in favour of Buhari’s party, which was running in opposition to Goodluck Jonathan’s People’s Democratic party. A clue may have been dropped last July when the INEC, perhaps inadvertently, publicly referenced a different set of results to the one on which Buhari’s victory was based. Both documents showed 29.4 million votes were cast. But according to the original results, 31.7 million accredited voters participated in the election, whereas in the second set of results that figure dropped to 23.6 million. The discrepancy suggests an additional 6 million accredited voters, far more than the APC’s winning margin - as per the original result set - of 2.6 million votes. Smart-card readers were used for the first time in 2015 and the second set of results was released in response to widespread criticism after the new technology malfunctioned, forcing millions of voters including Jonathan to use the manual process. The second result set appears to have disappeared from INEC’s website two months ago, along with all others relating to the 2015 poll. There is frequently rigging in Nigerian elections, and it is not usually limited to whichever side happens to be in power at the time. Powerful politicians move fluidly between the two main parties, taking support and rigging mechanisms with them. Buhari’s party chief may have revealed the truth with a slip of the tongue at a press conference in September. “For democracy to flourish, only people who can accept the pain of rigging – sorry, defeat – should participate in an election,” said Adams Oshiomhole.