Clad like a warrior woman, beckoning on her enemies with her war cry of “New party, who dis?” Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has made the leap from Congress to the pages of a comic book. Out in May from independent US press Devil’s Due Comics – which is quick to point out that Ocasio-Cortez has not endorsed the project – Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and the Freshman Force is, according to its publisher, a “satire that takes aim at Washington” and “spare[s] no one”. Its cover shows the new congresswoman, smartphone in hand, in defiant pose in front of the Capitol building; a variant cover replaces her white suit and phone with a superhero outfit and a sword. Ocasio-Cortez has previously revealed herself to be a comics fan, taking time out from launching her Green New Deal in January to quote Watchmen creator Alan Moore in a tweet to her detractors: “None of you understand. I’m not locked up in here with YOU. You’re locked up in here with ME.” “It’s no secret that AOC has become the unofficial leader of the new school, and has sparked life back into Washington and that’s reflected in the enthusiasm on display by the men and women contributing to this project,” Devil’s Due publisher Josh Blaylock told Comic Book Resources. “While we all don’t agree on everything, we share a common excitement for the breath of fresh air the new Congress brings. I hope this is as much a cathartic release for readers as it has been for us creators.” Contributors to the comic, an anthology of stories featuring Ocasio-Cortez, include Jill Thompson and Jose Garibaldi. A portion of the proceeds will be donated to military support non-profit United Service Organisation, and to immigrant legal services provider RaicesTexas.org. “Grab a hamberder and cup of covfefe and prepare to enjoy this read! “ said Devil’s Due, which previously published Barack the Barbarian: No F#¢*s Left!, a comic that transformed the former US president into a superhero battling “Boosh the Dim” and “Cha-nee the Grim”. • This article was amended on 25 February 2019 to clarify that Ocasio-Cortez is depicted in front of the Capitol building, not the White House.