Alisson Occasionally over-confident with ball at his feet, important early save to prevent Matip own goal. 6 Trent Alexander-Arnold Gave possession away on a few occasions, swapped wings with Robertson towards end of first half. 7 Joël Matip Solid but not the player Liverpool would have chosen to finish two of their best opportunities. 6 Fabinho Calm at centre-half, considering he had Lewandowski to look after. Broke forward and distributed well in early stages. 7 Andy Robertson Overhit a couple of crosses, usually found himself pressed back by Bayern’s wide players. 6 Georginio Wijnaldum Like the rest of Liverpool’s midfield, poise and promise tended to fizzle out higher up the pitch. 7 Jordan Henderson Some incisive passes from rear of midfield, one of which created early chance for Salah. 8 Naby Keïta Eager to take possession and used the ball intelligently, if not always imaginatively. Not decisive enough with second-half chance to free Robertson. 7 Mohamed Salah Wide with first-half header some great backheels, but ultimately not an unanswerable problem for the Bayern defence. 7 Roberto Firmino Masterful at creating space and danger from unpromising positions, few chances. Not his night. 7 Sadio Mané Glaring first-half miss with his back to goal, though he did have the time to turn and take a proper look. 7 Subs James Milner (for Keïta 76) 5, Divock Origi (for Firmino 76) 5. Not used Daniel Sturridge, Alberto Moreno, Adam Lallana, Simon Mignolet, Xherdan Shaqiri  Manuel Neuer Even more of a spectator than Alisson for the most part, did what he needed to do with usual reliability. 6 Joshua Kimmich Booked for foul on Mané in first half, so right-back will be suspended for the second leg. 6 Niklas Süle Looked susceptible to Liverpool’s pressing at first, perhaps not tested enough by the home front three. 6 Mats Hummels A little cumbersome at times in bringing the ball out, but grew into game and an impressively impassable barrier by the end. 8 David Alaba Strong and purposeful when going forward, not unduly troubled by Salah most of the evening. 6 Javi Martínez Midfield kingpin, authoritative and hard working in defence, powerful and committed when going forward. 9 Thiago Alcântara Neat and tidy in the middle, partnership with Martínez meant Bayern held their own in midfield. 7 Serge Gnabry Control let him down in Liverpool’s penalty area when Bayern could have taken a first-half lead. Decent shot in second half 7 James Rodríguez Not bad at taking corners, just a pity he was seldom noticed on the pitch for doing anything else. 6 Kingsley Coman Effective outlet on left, pace and control made for entertaining battle with Alexander-Arnold 7 Robert Lewandowski Surprisingly few touches, never mind chances, given his midfield saw as much of ball as Liverpool’s 6 Subs Franck Ribéry (for Coman 82) 5, Renato Sanches (for James 88) n/a, Rafinha (for Gnabry 90) n/a. Not used Alphonso Davies, Sven Ulreich, Lars Mai, Meritan Shabani