Diane Arbus was everywhere in New York between 1956 and 1962. On the streets and in Central Park, on the subway, in movie theatres and diners, on Coney Island and in New Jersey homes, in grim apartments, in revue dressing rooms, at the circus and in the morgue. With her 35mm camera and her eye, her ability to confront, cajole and to seduce, her talent was as much one of gaining trust – or at least something more than tacit refusal – from her subjects. Diane Arbus, In the Beginning focuses on these first eight years of her work as an independent photographer, following over a decade in the fashion photography business, where she and her husband Allan Arbus worked together, he as photographer, she as stylist and art director. The exhibition, which has travelled to the Hayward from the Metropolitan Museum in New York, is filled with strange encounters, not least with ordinary people. Just as German photographer August Sander never reduced his subjects to their roles (some of them appear to have managed that without any outside help), so life spills out of Arbus’s images. More than provoking mere curiosity, Arbus teases our imaginations. Looking at her images we invent backstories and narratives we can never be sure of. She makes us stop and look, just as she did. The Santa Claus on the street, his beard awry, stock-still and somehow tragic as a woman passes by. The woman pausing on the sidewalk, the old couple on the park bench. What went through Arbus’s mind about their lives? What went through theirs as they paused for her? We can’t know. Everyone has a story to tell but we don’t hear it, though she makes us know it is there. Arbus makes everyone exceptional, even if she only met them for as long as it took to take a picture. The stern, impatient woman in white fur with a cigarette, one hand on her hip, haloed by festive Christmas lights. Miss Makrina, a Russian midget, mopping her kitchen floor, looking up and smiling broadly. A young man with a greasy paper bag on Coney Island, kids stepping on and off the kerb. The boy under the low-slung lights in the pool hall, the woman on the street with her eyes closed, daylight examining her face. Even as they tumble, each image makes me stop, then makes me want to go both backwards and forwards, searching for something I’m not sure of. The upper galleries of the Hayward are a forest of pillars, with images hung on their broader faces, one on either side. Weaving between them, we also weave our stories of an imaginary mid-century New York. Each step is a surprise. Arbus seemed to arrive almost fully formed as a photographer, after a few private lessons with Lisette Model, an Austrian émigré photographer who had studied music under Arnold Schoenberg in Vienna and painting in Paris under the tutelage of André Lhote (who numbered Henri Cartier-Bresson among his other students). Although maintaining a friendship with Model for the rest of her life, Arbus quickly found her own way. As much as anything else, it was as if she had been waiting to give herself permission to begin. Arbus’s images, and her approach, have over the past half century insinuated themselves into our mental landscape. We know her best as the photographer of the stooping giant in the living room, the spooky, identical twin sisters in their matching outfits, drag queens (referred to, quaintly, as “female impersonators”), the grimacing kid with the rictus grin and the toy hand grenade; the boy in the straw boater with the pro-Vietnam war badges, but there was a great deal more to her, more subtlety, more strangeness than these. A movie usher in his cap, long coat and braid, hovering behind the rope in the cramped foyer. The raking seats of a 42nd Street movie theatre, with the smoke-filled cone of light gouging the darkness. Arbus shot the images on the screen too: a closeup of a couple kissing (from the movie Baby Doll), a still from a Mighty Mouse cartoon, with a moustachioed cowboy, his sombrero full of arrows. A woman screaming, blood all over her hands. Sometimes there is a macabre humour at play. A headstone at the absurdly named Bide-a-Wee cemetery in Wantagh, NY has the single word Killer on the stone. Maybe it is a pet cemetery. Knowing would spoil the fun. The title doesn’t say. Sometimes Arbus’s titles are as redolent as any Tom Waits song – The Madman from Massachusetts in an Empty Bar, NYC; Hezekiah Trambles, “The Jungle Creep”, on stage at Hubert’s Museum – or like something from Scott Fitzgerald – Miss Marian Seymour Dancing with Baron Theo Von Roth at the Grand Opera Ball. Sometimes a little more background would be useful. Arbus’s drag performers, backstage, putting on lipstick, sitting around, are mostly members of the Jewel Box Revue, a troupe of “25 Men and a Girl” that successfully toured the country, to mostly straight audiences, for three decades from 1939 onwards. The one girl was a black lesbian drag king. There is so much here. Fake rocks on wheeled pallets at Disneyland in California. A wax museum axe murderer at Coney Island, a girl on the street in New York, looking up. The quotidian and the extraordinary collide, again and again. The original exhibition is augmented at the Hayward by a number of later, mostly better-known square-format images, shot between 1962 and 1970 and first printed as an edition, A Box of Ten Photographs, in 1970. The following year Arbus, who suffered severe bouts of depression (she was probably bipolar) killed herself. The world goes on, teeming with stories and individuals, people stepping on and off the kerb. Diane Arbus: In the Beginning is at the Hayward Gallery, London, from 13 February to 6 May