Maurizio Sarri has yet to determine whether Kepa Arrizabalaga will start Wednesday’s Premier League game against Tottenham Hotspur, with the beleaguered Chelsea head coach to make his decision for the collective good of his group. Kepa apologised to Sarri, the technical staff, teammates and supporters on Monday for refusing to be substituted in the final minute of extra time in the Carabao Cup final defeat by Manchester City. The 24-year-old, who saved one penalty but might have denied Sergio Agüero in the shootout, was fined a week’s wages, around £190,000, for an act of petulance which had very publicly undermined Sarri’s authority. Chelsea had been keen to draw a line under the incident, issuing statements on Monday from the head coach and player while confirming the sanction. Yet Sarri, who goes into the Spurs fixture fighting to retain his position after recent damaging results, offered the world’s most expensive goalkeeper no guarantees that he would retain his place. Asked whether Kepa would start, Sarri said: “I don’t know. I have to decide. Maybe yes. Maybe no. I think he is fit. Yesterday he had only a recovery training session, so we have to assess him today, but I think so. It will be a decision for the [good of the] group. For the other players, all the players. I have to decide for my group. Not with my group. But I want to send a message to my group: the message could be Kepa is on the pitch, or Kepa is out [of] the pitch. I have to decide what is better for my group. “He has to [be ready to feature if required]. He made a mistake. A big mistake. There are some consequences. If the consequence is to play, he has to be ready to play. If the consequence is the bench, he has to be ready to go to the bench.” The Italian, who tends to reveal his selections to his team relatively close to kick-off, rejected the notion that Kepa’s dissent had exposed a lack of respect in which the head coach is held by the senior squad, and insisted he remained in control. “As you know very well, it was only a big misunderstanding,” he said. “It was really a very unusual situation, so I think the [other] players were really very shocked. “It was impossible for them to react immediately, I think. Like for us on the bench. So I have to value the performance [against City]. And they played with a very great level of application, with a great level of determination and aggression. This is really very important. “I spoke with the goalkeeper, with Kepa, of course. Then we spoke all together because he said sorry to the technical staff, but that was not enough. Then he said sorry to his teammates, to the club. So I think he made a big mistake, but we need to be tolerant. We don’t want to kill him. So that is the position of the club. The fine was the board’s decision. In this club there are some rules, so he has to accept the club’s decision.”