Theresa May has put a new motion before MPs that effectively asks parliament to allow her to continue negotiating to seek changes to the Irish backstop. MPs are permitted to amend the motion, which will be voted on on Thursday. This is the second time May has submitted an amendable parliamentary motion after the defeat of her Brexit deal. In January, MPs successfully amended the motion twice. The first amendment, supported by the government, was spearheaded by the Conservative MP Graham Brady and called for the government to seek “alternative arrangements” to replace the backstop. The second came from Caroline Spelman and was a defeat for the government backed by rebel Tory MPs. It said the House of Commons rejected the possibility of a no-deal Brexit. But several high-profile amendments were lost, including one by Yvette Cooper and Nick Boles that would have paved the way for legislation to extend article 50. Both Cooper and Boles have said they do not intend to bring their amendment back until 27 February, when May has promised the next update will be tabled. Here is a look at the prime minister’s main motion and the amendments that have been selected by the Speaker. Although bland at first glance, the motion could set the prime minister on a collision course with the hard Eurosceptics in her party. It says negotiations to come to a compromise on the backstop are continuing and “reiterates its support for the approach to leaving the EU expressed by this house on 29 January 2019”. That means MPs are voting to accept both the Brady and Spelman amendments – and members of the pro-Brexit European Research Group do not want to vote to accept the latter. That would effectively mean they had accepted parliament was against leaving with no deal, when many of their faction believe it is a viable option. The Labour frontbench, including Jeremy Corbyn and Keir Starmer, have tabled an amendment that would force the prime minister to bring her deal back to the Commons or table another amendable motion by 27 February, just over a month before the UK is due to leave the EU. The motion may have little material effect: May has already committed to bringing another motion before this date if no new deal has been reached. The amendment by the Scottish National party calls on the government simply to stop Brexit by withdrawing notification of departure. Unusually, the amendment has also been signed by the Labour backbencher Janet Daby, from the strongly pro-remain Lewisham East seat. The amendment tabled by the Conservative MP Anna Soubry and Labour’s Chuka Umunna, both leading remainers, demands the government publish “the most recent official briefing document”, which has been given to cabinet ministers on the implications of a no-deal Brexit on business and trade. If the amendment were passed, the document would have to be published within seven days.