Four cabinet ministers have demanded the prime minister stop using the threat of no deal as a negotiating tactic, telling Theresa May that businesses and manufacturers now needed to be given certainty. The demand was made in a meeting with the prime minister on Monday by the justice secretary, David Gauke, the work and pensions secretary, Amber Rudd, the business secretary, Greg Clark, and the Scottish secretary, David Mundell. Cabinet sources suggested it would be a key intervention before May’s expected visit to Brussels on Wednesday and described all four as loyalists who were keen to deliver a Brexit deal. The ministers who requested the meeting with May believe that while no deal had once been a sensible negotiating tactic, a number of alarming announcements by businesses and manufacturers over recent weeks meant it was time for the option to be categorically ruled out. Downing Street described it as a “private meeting” and gave no further details, but the discussions are likely to inform the weekly cabinet meeting on Tuesday. The intervention is likely to set the ministers firmly at odds with rebel Eurosceptics, determined to keep the option of no deal as a viable alternative. May was defeated in parliament last week at the hands of the European Research Group, led by Jacob Rees-Mogg, who abstained on a government motion because it appeared to rule out a no-deal Brexit. The prime minister is expected to meet the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, on Wednesday, departing for Brussels after prime minister’s questions. Speaking earlier on Monday, May’s de facto deputy, David Lidington, said a no-deal Brexit would cause “serious damage to our economy and, I think, put strain on the union of the United Kingdom”. The attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, is expected to set out in a speech later this week what changes would be required to eliminate the legal risk of being indefinitely trapped in the Irish backstop, the key sticking point for many of the pro-Brexit rebels. Downing Street hopes any changes that Brussels can offer will be enough to materially change Cox’s previous legal advice – which they believe would be enough to win over significant numbers of Tory MPs. Cox would explain “how the legal tests that he has set about ensuring the so-called backstop cannot be used to trap the UK indefinitely could be met and overcome”, said Lidington. Over the weekend, May spoke to seven more European leaders including Italy’s Giuseppe Conte, following talks last week with 13 others including Germany’s Angela Merkel and France’s Emmanuel Macron. No 10 says the prime minister hopes to speak to all of the other remaining EU leaders in the coming days.