Eddie Jones says England’s stunning bonus-point victory in Dublin is merely a start in a year that culminates with the World Cup in Japan. England became the first team to win here in the Six Nations since 2013 in ending Ireland’s 12-match winning run at home and their 32 points was the fourth highest they have ever accumulated in the tournament in Dublin. “We will be better in the next game because we are still growing,” said the England coach. “We are nowhere near our best. This match has nothing to do with the World Cup: it was a standalone between a very good Ireland side and an improving England team. “It is always physical when you play here and we knew we had to win that battle to win the game. We shaded a top side in that area and the players deserve all the credit. We executed our gameplan well. The front row was outstanding, as was Jonny May with his selfless work, Manu Tuilagi darted well at 12 and Henry Slade [who scored two tries] is getting better with every game. “Maybe at first he did not think he was good enough to play for England and now it is a question of how good he can be. We kicked today to create space and the chase was very good.” The one negative for England was the knee injury that forced Maro Itoje to leave the field in the second-half. “It is his medial ligament and you never know until you have it scanned,” said Jones. England’s next match is next Sunday against France, who have not won at Twickenham in the Six Nations in 2005. “They would have won on Friday if they had not gifted Wales 14 points,” said Jones. “They will be kicking themselves. They will be difficult and we will have to be better.” Joe Schmidt was left counting the cost of the encounter with three players, Keith Earls, CJ Stander and Devin Toner, doubtful for Saturday’s clash with Scotland at Murrayfield. Earls retired at half-time after taking a buffeting as he contested in the air. “It got quite physical with him,” said Ireland’s coach . “I am not saying it was a plan [by England] but it put him out of the game.” Tom Curry was sent to the sin-bin for a late challenge on Earls in the first half and Itoje was then warned for clattering into the wing. “I will go through channels and ask for clarification on some of the incidents I saw and what officials are doing for player safety,” said Schmidt. “Our ball was slow and it gave them an opportunity to take potshots. England are a big team and they bettered us physically. I do not think I have seen a game when our opponents have had so many dominant tackles and carried so physically.” Ireland will remain second in the world rankings, but Wales and England have closed the gap on them. “It was not a wake-up call because we were under no illusions about how good England would be,” said their captain, Rory Best. “How we respond in Scotland will show whether this is a bump in the road or something more.”