It was the biggest decision in the party’s young life, a turning point that will define its reputation for years to come. But when Italy’s Five Star Movement (M5S) had to resolve whether or not to join the far-right Lega, or League, in a coalition government last May, it didn’t retreat into a conclave of party leaders. It asked members to vote online. An overwhelming 94% supported the move. The process was perhaps the most striking example of an emerging trend at the heart of 21st-century politics – the use of digital technology to bring people into the hearts of movements from Italy and Spain to France, Scandinavia to the UK. The digital world has taken a great deal of criticism for subverting open societies, but could it also be a motor for a democratic revival? Could these digital innovations – mostly confined to new, populist parties – help revitalise our liberal democracies? The pioneers of digital democracies were the pirate parties of northern Europe who first broke through in Sweden, Germany and Iceland about a decade ago, using an online decision-making platform called LiquidFeedback. One of its founders, Andreas Nitsche, said the idea was that “empowering the ordinary members would make these parties more responsive to the demands of society”. More recently, the fiercely anti-establishment M5S and the Spanish leftwing populist party Podemos have led the way. “Ordinary citizens will become protagonists, abandoning the current system of delegate democracy in the hands of politicians,” said the late Gianroberto Casaleggio, who masterminded the M5S digital strategy. Given the discredited status of Italy’s political class, this narrative appealed to many citizens. M5S made digital democracy its core creed, with its anthem proclaiming: “We are not a party, we are not a caste, one man, one vote, one man, one vote.” A variety of new parties have followed suit, to the point where digital democracy has now become a must for all new political movements that want to be seen as in sync with the times. The central innovation is the “participatory platform”. This is an online portal, often part of the official party website, that hosts a number of interactive features. These might include donations, training sessions, discussions on policy and online ballots for primaries, elections of party officers, or strategic decisions, for instance whether to enter an alliance or the position to take on a specific policy. The M5S platform is named Rousseau, after the Genevan political philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Casaleggio liked to describe it as the “collective intelligence of the movement”. Podemos has a participation portal named Participa (“participate”). It comprises a voting area and a discussion system named Plaza Podemos (Podemos Square) that is similar to Reddit, with threaded discussions and upvote/downvote functionalities, which earned it the moniker of “Reddit party”. These sites closely mimic the logic of social media platforms, with discussions, votes, likes and other metrics to assess users’ views. For Miguel Ardanuy, a former participation coordinator of Podemos, the ultimate aim of this “platformisation of the party” is to “construct a different model of party, a party more open and responsive to society, where you do not need a membership card in order to participate”. News doesn't always have to be miserable – indeed, the relentless focus on confrontation, disaster, antagonism and blame risks convincing the public that the world is hopeless and there is nothing we can do. This series is an antidote, an attempt to show that there is plenty of hope, as our journalists scour the planet looking for pioneers, trailblazers, best practice, unsung heroes, ideas that work, ideas that might and innovations whose time might have come. Readers can recommend other projects, people and progress that we should report on by contacting us at theupside@theguardian.com “We live in an era of disintermediation, where we are bypassing the old middlemen, such as travel agencies,” said Roberto Fico, a M5S politician and the current president of the Italian parliament’s lower chamber, the Chamber of Deputies. “Digital democracy embodies the same tendency applied to politics, allowing people to have a say directly on important decisions without depending on their representatives.” The strategy has proven highly successful, enabling parties short of economic resources to achieve huge reach and scale. M5S is in government in Italy. Podemos rapidly surged to become Spain’s third largest political force, and underpins the present administration. There are few historical precedents of new political parties achieving comparable results in such a short time. This electoral prowess largely derives from an ability to recruit a large base of members. Podemos and the leftist French group La France Insoumise (France Defiant) boasted more than 500,000 members each at the start of 2019, putting them in Europe’s political major league. (M5S has fewer – about 150,000; some blame a cumbersome registration process for this.) Opting for a free membership system, similar to the free sign-up model of digital companies such as Facebook, Google or Twitter, has radically lowered the barrier to entry compared with traditional parties. “We built an open and flexible structure eliding the traditional separation between members and sympathisers,” said Guillaume Royer, who led the development of La France Insoumise’s own platform. The platforms enable parties to solicit ideas from members which can be evaluated by experts before being submitted to a wider online vote. M5S, Podemos and La France Insoumise have all crowdsourced ideas this way for their election manifestos. Yet in practice, most of the online voting tends to relate to the election of officials, or yes/no internal referendums. E-ballots have often been used more as a means of propaganda, to demonstrate the cohesion of party members, rather than as an opportunity for a genuine and pluralist internal debate. Online consultations have often returned highly anticipated super-majority results, with in some cases more than 80% of voters supporting the winning option that was almost invariably the option favoured by the party leadership. Out of more than 40 referendums carried out by M5S, there have been just two instances in which members have gone against the leadership’s will. Of the dozen online referendums held by Podemos since 2014, there has been not a single case of rank-and-file rebellion. For instance, when Podemos’s leader, Pablo Iglesias, was nominated as party candidate for prime minister in the next elections, he secured 90% of the votes. There was no competition. But barely one in 10 members took part in the ballot. According to M5S activist Davide Bono, this tendency towards unanimity stems from the fact that “activists share a strong collective identity and agree on many common points”. However, landslide results also hint at the strong control exercised by the party leadership over internal decision-making. There are a number of ways in which the leadership can influence internal consultations. The staff responsible for the management of digital platforms are often directly dependent on the party leadership, and therefore liable to pressure. Furthermore, apparently trivial things, such as the formulation of questions, the timing of votes or even the order of options on the ballot, can steer voters towards the preferred option. Finally, the leadership can create a mood conducive to its own will. David Puente, a former employee of Casaleggio, recounts how, in anticipation of important decisions, the employees and the all-important blog of party co-founder Beppe Grillo would adopt a certain line with the aim of influencing the decision. “It was enough for Grillo to say A, and the members would vote A.” Far from being the protagonists, party members are more akin to non-player characters, or NPCs, to use a term often used in digital subcultures. They are agents who can only respond to the stimuli coming from above, with little room for proactive intervention. “It’s a wasted opportunity,” said Yago Bermejo Abati, the project coordinator of Media Lab Prado in Madrid, who was originally involved in designing Podemos’s participation portal. “Given all the initial hope, this is a great disappointment.” Party members themselves seem to have become wary of digital democracy’s limits, as seen in the falling number of participants in the online consultations of Podemos and M5S. These failings may merely be teething problems of a new tendency that seems here to stay. A number of mainstream political parties have already integrated digital democracy functions. In the UK, the Labour party allowed members to vote online in the 2016 leadership election, and the leftwing, pro-Jeremy Corbyn campaign group Momentum has created its own participatory platform called MyMomentum. In Spain, the ruling socialist party, PSOE, used online voting in 2016, allowing members to express their opinion on a coalition government proposal. Local mayoralties in cities such as Barcelona, Madrid and Reykjavik are carrying out online consultations and, since entering government, M5S has created a “ministry of direct democracy”. We may be only just starting to understand how digital democracy can help address the crisis of legitimacy that is affecting different levels of the political process. Follow the Guardian’s series on the rise of populism at www.gu.com/new-populism • Paolo Gerbaudo is a political sociologist and the director of the Centre for Digital Culture at King’s College London