Two years ago England used their bench in the final quarter to come from behind to defeat France and Wales, but the half-backs Dan Robson and George Ford never left it on Saturday. Dan Biggar was the replacement who turned into a game finisher and it raised a question about Eddie Jones’s scrum-half policy. He has preferred to have two in a squad rather than three to maximise their time on the training field, but having dropped Danny Care, the finisher supreme, after three years, and replaced him with the internationally inexperienced Dan Robson, England’s head coach has become reliant on a starter. • Robert Kitson: Wales’s comeback is one of Gatland’s finest hours Wales said before the match that while they felt Kyle Sinckler struggled to contain his emotions in the heat of the battle, they had no intention of lighting his fuse. Not until the first scrum when there were more views exchanged than in a Question Time Brexit debate. Wales kept pushing but as long as England were in control, which they largely were in the first half, the prop responded through his tackling, carrying and scrummaging. As Wales took the initiative after the break so his stitching started to unravel and he was replaced after conceding two penalties. He will know better next time in Cardiff and remains a significant asset for England. • Wales 21-13 England: Six Nations player ratings from Cardiff Eddie Jones pointed out afterwards that Wales were the ones smiling for now. The grand slam may have gone but the championship remained open with England having the smoother run-in, Italy and Scotland at home, while Wales have to go to Murrayfield before welcoming the champions, Ireland. It is the fourth time Wales have won their opening three games in the Six Nations and on each of the other occasions they have gone on to secure the grand slam. Lacking try bonus points, it looks their route to the top again in Warren Gatland’s 12th and final year. • Wales 21-13 England: match report Wales were confident of winning, determinedly rather than arrogantly so. Like England, they had won their opening two games, but the plaudits had all gone to the men in white. Wales forensically examined the tactics of a side that not long ago was on a losing run and concluded that if their power and kicking games were dealt with, their narrowness in defence could be exploited as time wore on. It meant staying in the battle and as they showed in Paris, they are comfortable playing catch-up, trusting in their fitness; while they struggled in the lineout, they finished the physically stronger and in Liam Williams had a full-back who dominated the air. Wales turned England’s tactics back on them, powering their way to their first try and taking to the air for the second. • Jones will not rule out title as Gatland chases grand slam Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels A turning point was the final minute on the first half when England turned an attacking lineout into a driving maul. Wales held firm and then defended the cross-kick to the right-hand corner. England had seized those moments against Ireland and France and had they scored on Saturday, they would have been 15-3 up with a conversion to come, meaning Wales would have to do more than chip away at their lead after the break. There was no response from England when what had worked no longer did, tactically rigid as Ireland were against them. They missed Mako Vunipola and Maro Itoje, but their absence did not explain the inability to tweak the gameplan. In their last two matches against England, Wales have conceded a mere five penalties, and their opponents’ loss of control under pressure in the second half was telling. • Andy Bull: Jones’s words about Wales prove to be a warning