You must have once sat in a bar listening to an apparently informed companion. At first, they beguile you. Then the drink flows, tongues loosen, fingers wag and the evening degenerates. I have been on both sides of the table. I have wagged and been wagged at so often I know the danger signs. Nowhere are they more evident than in today’s lectures on how liberals “just don’t get it”. Yael Tamir offers an upmarket version of contemporary cliches. She is more wine bar than saloon bar, although, as the glasses are downed, the distinction between the two blurs. Tamir is from the subgenre of former or self-declared liberals and leftists. She was an anti-war activist in the Israeli Peace Now movement and like Blue Labour in Britain, the Prospect founder David Goodhart and a significant faction in the leftwing press, she speaks to liberals more in sorrow than anger. To begin with, at least. She believes nationalist movements can be exploited for social democratic aims and deliver economic patriotism and social responsibility rather than, say, attacks on foreigners and stagnation. Her case starts uncontroversially to anyone who has read the work of Ernest Gellner, Benedict Anderson or, indeed, thought about nations and nationality without reference to academic work. I did not need to be told that all nations must define their boundaries or that national identity ties strangers together. It was not news that there is only so much diversity any society can take. And when Tamir tells us that from the 19th century the state created nationality as it “built schools, taught the national language and spread national culture”, my first thought was: “Really, have you only just noticed?” The first sign that we may need to call her a cab comes when she slips uncritically into the language of Steve Bannon. Before the election of Donald Trump and the Brexit vote, “globalists” dominated politics. By “globalist”, she does not mean the handful of bankers and executives who can move from excessively well-remunerated job to job but hundreds of millions of voters in the west who live in cities and have broadly liberal instincts. The casual misuse of language matters because it allows her to dismiss vast numbers as corporate elitists when in truth they are no more likely to fly to Davos than to the moon. They voted for parties that “emptied the public sphere of ideological and motivational forces that could promote social solidarity and encourage the erection of mechanisms necessary to combat social alienation”, she proclaims as she reflects a nostalgia for the lost communities of the rural and industrial west she never knew. Is this a fair description of Labour Britain from 1997 to 2010, which I recall spent billions on combating social alienation by building everything from Sure Start centres to a generous system of pensioner benefits? Tamir does not say. Although she is a professor at the University of Oxford’s Blavatnik School of Government, she seems to feel no pressing obligation to provide anything resembling evidence. The professor does not know that the British Labour party in 2016 was led by Jeremy Corbyn, a lifelong anti-European The vulnerable rightly feel “those who exploit cheap labour and natural resources overseas portray themselves as moral universalists”, she continues, “while those defending their jobs are portrayed as narrow-minded bigots”. There is undoubted resentment that opposition to immigration is portrayed as racism when every country in the world has immigration controls, but who believes in a free for all apart from a handful of powerless commentators? Alas, there’s no stopping her. “Nationalism waters our memories, interprets our dreams and does not allow us to shrink into solitude,” she says as she sinks into a maudlin reverie. Do you want to hear Churchill’s Battle of Britain speeches or Henry V on the eve on Agincourt? Yet again? She repeats them anyway. Do you want to know why Remain lost the Brexit referendum? Because the “British Labour party, like many other progressive leaders around the world, was closer to the elites than to the people”. The professor does not seem to know that the British Labour party in 2016 was led by Jeremy Corbyn, a lifelong anti-European, who has opposed his members’ demands for a second referendum ever since. There is a wider intellectual fault that goes beyond the work of one author. Too many regard today’s crisis as an end rather than a beginning. Rather than fight, they accept. The majority of MPs in the British Labour and Tory parties know that Brexit is a national mistake. The patriotic course for all who love their country is to stop it. Instead of fighting, however, they stay silent and play along. The people have spoken, they say. We dare not argue back. Dissent and opposition become impossible in these circumstances. As does a clear understanding of the world. At one point, Tamir declares that “liberalism is loneliness” and leaves us “bawling” into a void. If this were the case, then in Brexit Britain, Trump’s America and Orbán’s Hungary we ought by now to see evidence that nationalism is rebuilding solidarity and ending isolation. Couples should be staying together. Communities should be flourishing. No such evidence exists. Of course it doesn’t, but if you talk as if it does you will fail to hold reactionaries to account. A first step in imposing accountability is to insist on the honesty that the right of the Tory and left of the Labour party cannot manage. Leaving the EU, slashing immigration, allowing nationalism to “water our memories” will hurt. Before throwing your punches, you must ask the public’s permission to inflict the pain and specify who will suffer, whose services will be cut and whose futures blighted. I think it is fair to say that the losers will not include visiting professors at Oxford. They will be left free to lose themselves in their well-watered memories and leave others to cope with the hangover. • Why Nationalism by Yael Tamir is published by Princeton University Press (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.