It was always going to be a race to see which party split first. And when push came to shove it was Labour that beat the Tories to it. Monday morning during half-term week in the etc. venue of London’s County Hall might not be everyone’s idea of a good time to launch a new party. The Etc Declaration doesn’t have quite the same ring as the SDP’s Limehouse Declaration of 1981. Despite this, the airless, corporate fourth-floor meeting room was rammed half an hour before the new Labour breakaway supergroup appeared. On stage were seven empty orange-brown, leatherette chairs, a high stool and a lectern with a blank sheet of paper covering the new logo. We now had an idea of how many were in the band, but just who they were and who was going to be Val Doonican and get the stool no one knew. There could not have been more excitement if Steps or S Club 7 had said they were making a comeback tour. With 10 minutes to go, the new party’s name was revealed to be the “Independent Group”. Catchy. As the clock ticked well past the 10am starting time, there were rumours of splits in the split before they had split, but then a voice called out: “They’re coming down the corridor.” Elvis was in the building. Moments later, several bouncers cleared the aisle and the expected figures of Luciana Berger, Chris Leslie, Angela Smith, Gavin Shuker, Mike Gapes, Ann Coffey and Chuka Umunna made their way to the stage and headed for the seven seats. Berger took the first solo and rather fluffed her lines by introducing herself as a Labour MP. She appeared close to tears as she hastily corrected herself. Enough was enough. She was embarrassed and ashamed by the institutional antisemitism that the leadership had wilfully failed to address. She had had enough of bullying, bigotry and intimidation and had now resigned to stand as an independent MP. For the next key-change, Leslie was on lead vocals. Breaking up was hard to do, he confessed. But it had been Labour that had changed, not him. He was still committed to the same values on which he had first been elected. The party had betrayed its supporters over Brexit and he could no longer remain while Corbyn was in charge. He was also sure there were many other MPs who secretly felt the same way and he hoped the Independent Group might be able to collaborate in the studio and do gigs together at a later date. The other five solo slots pretty much reprised the first two. A bit of country and western personal backstory, a reiteration that it was others, not them, who were to blame for their artistic fallout with the Labour party and a shout out to others to join them. The main differences were in tone. Coffey and Smith adopted the minor key of regret; Gapes went for full-on anger while Umunna opted for the sensible, pragmatic approach. Shuker was rather hampered by the fact he was largely unknown, so had to explain who he was and why he had been invited along as a backing singer. Things began to unravel slightly when the new band were asked to explain what they were for rather than what they were against. It had been so traumatic for all of them to leave the Labour party after so many years of trying to get their voices heard from within, that they had forgotten they were supposed to have a new album and tour to promote. This was the launch that failed to declare what it was exactly that was being launched. No, they definitely weren’t a new party. They were a movement. Though they might become a party at some point in the future. Just don’t hassle us, man. They didn’t even have a leader. Though it was possible that Gary Barlow might take over at some point if his recording schedule allowed. No, they weren’t standing down to trigger byelections as that wasn’t what their fans would want. No, they weren’t going to form an alliance with the Lib Dems as the Lib Dem brand was toxic, but if any Lib Dems wanted to join them that would be OK. And they would quite like some left-of-centre Tories to join them, too, though so far those MPs were still in a contract dispute with their record labels. And that was that. Seven Labour MPs who had been openly at odds with their party had now decided to go it alone. It felt less a major political realignment than a cry of regret and irreconcilable despair. No one could quite work out what they had done or what they had achieved. If anything. Not even them. And we never did get to find out who the stool was for.