Christian Horner, Red Bull’s team principal, believes Formula One’s owner, Liberty Media, has seriously underestimated the challenge it faces in running the sport. Horner also questioned the company’s attempt to use a US-based approach to F1 and said he does not expect rule changes imposed for the new season to be effective. Liberty, a US-based media group, took over F1 in 2017 and has been clear in its intent to adapt the sport to increase its popularity. However, it inherited the current formula and commercial deals from the former CEO Bernie Ecclestone and real change has been slow in forthcoming. It is still facing the serious task of reaching a settlement with the teams for new regulations for 2021 alongside a new concorde agreement – the commercial contract with the teams and the FIA – for the same year, the complexities of all of which Horner believes it may have misjudged. “I think they absolutely under-estimated what they were taking on,” he said. “They probably thought there was some very low-hanging fruit and it has proved an awful lot harder than they thought. They remain determined and convinced that the potential of the sport to take it to the next level is there.” Liberty’s management of F1 was recently criticised by the Formula One Promoters’ Association and although Liberty and the FIA imposed new front-wing design rules for this season to try and improve overtaking, after a winter spent developing the new Red Bull Horner is not optimistic they will make a difference. “They will accept it was a mistake to rush through the front-wing change for this year,” he said. “They have cherry-picked something in isolation from a future concept and rushed it through on to the current car, but there is no silver bullet, so taking a front wing and saying it will make racing better is quite a naive and ultimately expensive approach.” Formula One’s chief executive officer, Chase Carey, formerly president of Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation and current vice-chairman of 21st Century Fox, has expressed his desire to increase the exposure of F1 in the US, with more grands prix and to make race meetings like Super Bowl weekends. Horner, who alongside other team principals met with Liberty recently, is not convinced it was the right approach. “There is that constant comparison of American sport and franchises versus Formula One,” he said. “American sport works in America and it doesn’t work globally. Formula One has a different appeal. It is one of the biggest sports in the world and you can’t just apply a US-sports approach to something that has been established for 60 or 70 years as a global world championship.” Difficult negotiations with teams and promoters lie ahead, with proposals such as a budget cap and a fairer distribution of prize money still far from settled. Horner has been outspoken in the past that F1 needs to focus on presenting a better show and remains convinced that goal should be driving Liberty. “You can window-dress and promote a movie as much as you like, but if the film doesn’t have the substance or isn’t exciting, people won’t watch it,” he said. “Am I convinced they are the right people? Only time will tell. They will be judged on what Formula One becomes from 2021 onwards.” Looking to the new season, which begins in Australia on 17 March, Horner was bullish that his driver Max Verstappen will be able to challenge Lewis Hamilton and Sebastian Vettel for the title. “Max has evolved so much,” he said. “He is a much-more rounded individual, through experience, and he has got all the tools and skill to take the fight to Lewis or Sebastian. I don’t think he lacks anything that they have if we provide him with the tools to do the job and he is probably is the driver that they fear the most.”