Last year, Mario died. The real Mario – the man after whom the character was named. Mario Segale was a real estate developer who rented space to Nintendo of America, headquartered in Seattle. The story goes that one day, a team at Nintendo was trying to figure out names for characters in Donkey Kong – including a certain small man wearing a red hat. As fate would have it, Segale walked into the room and into video game history. The mustachioed carpenter (he was only later employed as a plumber) got his name, and he has been stomping Goombas and racing go-karts ever since. While the character has acquired countless extra lives, Segale died last year at 84. And it seems he may have been the last thing standing in the way of dark times at Nintendo. Mere months after Mario’s death, an ominous figure has come to power in Seattle. Yesterday, Nintendo of America’s beloved boss, Reggie Fils-Aime, stepped down, to be replaced by a man named Bowser. As in Bowser, AKA King Koopa, Mario’s nemesis: the fire-breathing dragon lizard thing constantly kidnapping Princess Peach (nee Toadstool; her English name has fluctuated over the years). He joins a slew of aptly named executives in the corporate world, including Zoe Hamburger, a marketing director at McDonald’s, and the energy and sustainability manager at Tata Steel, Barry Rust. Laugh all you want, but to Nintendo fans, this is no joke. They quickly pointed out a disturbing photo on Twitter. The new president, Doug Bowser, had introduced himself to the world with a photo apparently taken in his office – in front of stuffed Mario and Luigi dolls who had been tied up like hostages. This is the first photo of Doug Bowser when he joined Nintendo We never getting a new Mario game ever again pic.twitter.com/thv6o9opvf It’s like if someone named Dave Vader took over Lucasfilm while waving Luke Skywalker’s severed hand, or if Disney’s next CEO were named Ursula “the Scar” Jafar and tweeted a picture of Simba being trampled by wildebeests. But is it coincidence, or conspiracy? Before Bowser joined Nintendo, he was at the rival Electronic Arts, so he has every reason to want to take Nintendo down. Indeed, in the press release announcing his hiring, methinks he doth protest too much about not being evil. It specifically states that he is “no relation to the King Koopa and Mario’s longtime nemesis” and tries to comfort gamers by saying he “brings decades of experience, not fire breath, to new role”. It also claims he will play “a key role in driving national sales strategies to generate demand and achieve revenue objectives across all of Nintendo’s product lines”, which sounds exactly like something King Koopa would do. With Mario’s passing last year, what can be done to save Nintendo? After decades of playing Super Mario games, I have a few suggestions: first, threatened staffers should try either jumping over or running under the new president. Behind him there should be a button that causes the bridge to disappear and he’ll fall into lava and re-emerge as a comical skeleton. Alternatively, they can try grabbing his tail and spinning him around and around until he goes flying into a spiky bomb. If none of these options work, it’s time to find the real Luigi.