The steel band tinkled away all day here but Jos Buttler and Chris Gayle were dancing to the beat of their own drums on Wednesday. On a heart-breaking pitch for bowlers Buttler served up a career-best 150 from 77 balls that powered England to 418 for six – their highest total overseas. Gayle’s 162 from 97 in reply meant the fourth one-day international somehow, incredibly, finished a mere 29-run win for the tourists, who take a 2-1 lead into Saturday’s finale in St Lucia. When Jason Holder asked England to bat first, few could have predicted they would go on to clear the boundary rope 24 times, breaking the record of 23 sixes set by the hosts a week ago. West Indies looked gone at the halfway stage, their bowlers having been utterly pummelled. Mount Gayle was always liable to erupt on this volcanic island, however, the 39-year-old cracking a 25th century in the format in 55 balls. His blitz of 11 fours and 14 sixes took West Indies to 124 required from the final 15.5 overs before Ben Stokes, smashed up to this point, finally got the ball past the middle of his blade for a clean bowled. How this breakthrough was needed for a wilting England attack – all bar Mark Wood, that is, whose career-best four for 60 included Darren Bravo and the dangerous Shimron Hetmyer in the space of three balls. The former had made 61 from No 4 in a stand of 177 with Gayle, the latter caught trying to repeat a remarkable first-ball six. Carlos Brathwaite was determined to take this game deep, putting on 88 with Ashley Nurse to get to 29 needed from 16 balls. With Wood and Chris Woakes bowled out, – the latter for figures of none for 91 – Eoin Morgan boldly tossed the ball to Adil Rashid, who followed an earlier stumping of Jason Holder with the scalps of both batsmen in a four-wicket 48th over that finally ended this mind-bending match. “That’s as tough a day as we’ve ever had,” Morgan said. “It was 100-odd overs of pure, intense, crazy cricket. It’s something we’ve never come up against before. I was reasonably calm at the end but we needed something special to turn the tide. “Rashid was definitely going to bowl a late over. He was calm and produced under pressure. I’d have taken two wickets but to finish off ... incredible. “And to have Jos in our side is to have one of the world’s best. He’s destructive and a match-winner.” Such was the earlier violence from Buttler – he had needed 15 balls after a 45-ball half-century to reach three figures and 16 more to make his maiden 150 – that a sizzling 103 from 88 by the in-form Morgan and the opener Alex Hales striking 82 from 73 on his return to international action were somehow eclipsed when England batted first. He cleared the rope 12 times, breaking his own English record of eight during a 46-ball hundred against Pakistan in 2015, and once again those supreme wrists were at play. He took particular delight in slotting the bowlers back over their heads and a cheeky salute to Sheldon Cottrell after one such missile – copying the Jamaican left-armer’s military celebration from last Friday’s thriller in Barbados – was just about fair enough. In passing the 399 for nine made in Bloemfontein three years ago – their previous best on the road – England put on 154 in the last 10 overs, 19 more than during the latter stages of last summer’s world record 481 for six against Australia. Truly this team knows no limits with bat in hand. The platform for the late power-hitting, a score of 264 for three after 40 overs, owed much to Morgan’s insistence on keeping the pedal to the metal in the middle overs after yet another breakneck start from his openers. On this occasion, after Jason Roy reported tightness in his left hamstring, it was Hales who walked out with Jonny Bairstow, before watching on from the other end as the Yorkshire man creamed a half-century from 31 balls. An early experiment with the slow bowlers during the powerplay led to West Indies leaking 48 from four overs, with Bairstow clubbing Devendra Bishoo for three successive sixes. Bairstow eventually chopped on to his stumps for 56, the first of two quick wickets for the brawny Oshane Thomas, who soon had Joe Root flashing behind on five. Hales, now well into his work and combining late dabs with some meaty slogs over midwicket, was then joined by a bristling Morgan. When Hales fell in search of a third six, caught by a running Hetmyer off Nurse, and Buttler strode out as a promoted No 5, Morgan was 20 not out. Though the senior man was striking them cleanly, passing 50 for the seventh time in 10 innings and becoming the first England batsman past 6,000 ODI runs, Buttler reached his century first. There was one reprieve for him, on 93, dropped in the deep by John Campbell. But when a batsman has hit his previous 10 balls to or over the rope, such luck is sometimes earned. After reaching his century from 60 balls – four of his seven ODI tons have come in under 70 – it was over to Morgan, his sixth six bringing up three figures from 86 before eventually holing out attempting a seventh. Buttler did not look back, launching the 24th six of the innings for his 150 before being bowled next ball by Brathwaite. Wood struck with the new ball – Campbell picking out Root in the deep and Shai Hope caught behind – but Gayle, fresh from scores of 135 and 50 in Barbados, was already up and running for what proved a remarkable, if doomed chase by West Indies.