Harriet Lane – once a journalist at the Observer – wrote Alys, Always, her thrilling debut novel, in 2012. It’s about Frances, a lowly sub-editor, who witnesses the death of Alys, married to a high-flying novelist, in a car crash. Alys’s death marks the beginning of a new existence for complicated, ambitious, underhand Frances. A stage version of the novel by playwright Lucinda Coxon (Happy Now?, The Little Stranger, The Danish Girl), directed by Nicholas Hytner, and starring Joanne Froggatt and Robert Glenister, previews from tomorrow at the Bridge theatre, London, and runs until 30 March. How did Alys, Always make the leap from page to stage?There was a tug on the line even before the Bridge theatre’s opening had been announced. Nicholas Hytner was looking to develop new stuff (one of the things that makes this theatre unusual). I met him for lunch, and when he said: “I’m pretty sure the play will start with Frances alone on stage telling you her story”, I got goosebumps because I could see he had a vision and was confident about that. With Nick, if he wants something to happen, it will happen. Have you and Lucinda Coxon collaborated on the script?I met Lucinda with Nick and thought she was fantastic. I’ve seen and commented on her drafts. But when you write a book, you let it go. Thank God the adaptation is not my problem. I have all the fun, none of the responsibility. I gather the fun has included sitting in on rehearsals. What’s Hytner like as a director?Nick has a serenity about him. The rehearsal atmosphere is quiet, warm, supportive. The level of detail – about everything – is extraordinary. So Nick’s notes recently included: “For the opening scene – Frances’s foil blanket – could you find a blanket that is quieter?” Did you base the inside-track journalistic detail on your experience of the Observer?Ish… although Mary, the novel’s grand literary editor, is more Condé Nast (where I spent a few years). Moving from Tatler to the Observer was like dying and going to heaven… You send up journalists. Do you have a low opinion of them?Some of my best friends are journalists. I loved being one. And Coxon has turned up the volume on the journalistic detail in a fantastic way. Frances lists three questions a self-respecting interviewer must not ask: a) where do you get your ideas? b) what would you have done if you were not a writer? c) do you have a routine when you work? Please answer them at speed…A) Conversations on the bus; b) a jockey (when I was tiny); c) I wish I did; I’m questing for the perfect coffee shop where you can sit uninterrupted for five hours. Because my sight is bad, the type on my laptop is really big and people can look over my shoulder. Alys, Always was written after you discovered you had a rare condition affecting the optic nerve?When I started to lose my sight, I had to pack up the journalism. I’d said to my commissioning editors: “I’ll get back in touch when things are back to normal.” That point never arrived. I did not miss the office stuff, the swotting up and sometimes scary interviewing, but missed the writing. We were living in a small flat that summer because building work was going on at home. The idea came to me one Saturday afternoon, and I couldn’t argue with it. The following Monday I started writing. I found the slow reveal of Frances’s character attractive. You have huge descriptive flair yet, intriguingly, you never describe Frances’s appearance. Will Joanne Froggatt need to de-prettify herself for the role (as she did as Anna Bates in Downton Abbey)?I hate being told what characters look like. Joanne might have to make a transition because Frances’s appearance improves… Frances is a good listener – are you?Not as good as I should be. But as I’ve lost my sight I’ve become less beady. Something awful happened to me, but everyone has their shit to deal with… As you get older, you realise that. • Alys, Always is at the Bridge theatre, London until 30 March