The issue of antisemitism has taken centre stage in France in the last few days, following a spate of violent attacks – President Emmanuel Macron even said that it was at its worst level since the second world war. The gilets jaunes (yellow vests) movement has also been infiltrated by this bigotry. Last weekend, gilets jaunes protesters hurled antisemitic slurs at Alain Finkielkraut – a prominent philosopher and ardent supporter of the movement – as he was walking by a rally. While the movement as a whole is not antisemitic, extremist groups, both far right and far left, have effectively co-opted it, turning it into a platform for a range of hateful narratives. As support continues to decline, the movement is becoming increasingly dominated by a radical, and sometimes extremist, minority. Yet reading the attack against Finkielkraut as an isolated episode or as a symptom of a movement spinning out of control misses an important truth: that, early on, the very nature of the movement has allowed hateful voices to weave their way into its ranks. The gilets jaunes protests, with their combination of economic frustrations and distrust of mainstream media and political elites, have provided a convenient platform for antisemitic groups and individuals to spread their conspiratorial narratives. The “democratic”, non-hierarchical nature of the movement (as well as its use of social media to coordinate and communicate its actions) has made it vulnerable to infiltration by radical and extremist individuals. Its rejection of mainstream media and ill-defined “elites” has fuelled conspiracy theories, some of them specifically targeting the Jewish community. If the attack on Finkielkraut has acted as a wake-up call, evidence of antisemitic elements in the gilets jaunes movement is nothing new; from hateful slogans on banners and antisemitic graffiti sprayed on walls, to groups of gilets jaunes shouting abuse and making the quenelle gesture (an inverted Nazi salute popularised by now disgraced comedian Dieudonné, and recognised as an expression of antisemitism). Meanwhile, notorious Holocaust deniers have made regular appearances at the weekly rallies. Yet this is only one manifestation of a broader social malaise in France. Recent data released by the French ministry of the interior revealed that antisemitic attacks increased by 74% in 2018, shocking figures that were grimly reinforced by a wave of attacks against Jewish symbols. In three separate incidents, swastikas were drawn on artwork representing late politician and Holocaust survivor Simone Veil; a Jewish cemetery was desecrated in the eastern region of Alsace, and a bagel bakery in Paris was sprayed with the word “Juden”. These attacks have shocked the nation. On Tuesday, thousands took to the streets to demonstrate against antisemitic hate in one of the largest rallies against antisemitism since the death of Ilan Halimi, a young Jewish man who was brutally murdered in 2006. These attacks may be horrifying, but they are not surprising to observers of French society. Over the last few years, antisemitic groups and individuals have thrived during a period of social polarisation, economic grievances and concerns around French identity. They have spread their narratives through every channel available, including social media and online platforms. Antisemitism pervades large sections of the French fachosphère – a nebulous group of websites, blogs and influencers affiliated with the far right. French far-right ideologue Alain Soral, who has multiple convictions for antisemitic incitement, is running one of the most visited political websites in France (Egalité et Réconciliation). Every video released by Dieudonné has hundreds of thousands of views on YouTube. The roots of French antisemitism run deep and there is no quick fix. The French government has shown signs it is serious about cracking down on antisemitism. The country is set to adopt a new law against hate speech online in the next few months, which will put pressure on tech companies to tackle hate speech. And on Wednesday, Macron announced that France would adopt the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance’s (IHRA) definition of antisemitism. But these tackle the symptoms, not the cause of racism. More soul-searching and longer-term solutions are needed. • Cécile Guerin is a French journalist based in London