It’s tempting to argue that Free Solo should win the Oscar for best documentary simply on the strength of its subject. Alex Honnold’s solo and ropeless climb of the 3,000ft vertical wall of El Capitan in Yosemite has been called a great athletic achievement but this is absurd. An absurd understatement, I mean, since it’s one of the great individual human achievements of all time. The sheer number of chances Honnold has to die in the course of his ascent is so huge that even though we know he survives, certain sequences remain almost unwatchably scary. This is an indirect tribute to the skills of film-makers Elizabeth Chai Vasarhelyi and Jimmy Chin (the dudeliest couple in the world, surely) but it’s not just a matter of vertiginous swoops and dizzying vistas. The problem, as Chin and Vasarhelyi have explained, is that Honnold’s grace and speed make the inconceivable look relatively easy. To counter such a delusion they focus in on the chess-like footwork involved in a few manoeuvres, though this, in turn, raises another issue. While Free Solo is a film that cauterises cynicism, it would be a shoo-in for most gripping footwear commercial as well as best cinematography. Advances in camera technology mean that there has never been a better time to make climbing films, but since the crew had to be elite climbers and experts in this technology the choice of potential collaborators was narrowed down, in Chin’s words, to a handful, almost all of whom are, at some point, in shot. This is crucial. Filming the climb influenced it in ways ranging from the aesthetic (was it Honnold’s decision to wear the red T-shirt that makes him blossom against the life-denying wall like a flower of tenacious and fragile beauty?) to the existential: might the distracting pressure of cameras increase the risk of his slipping? We see the crew preparing shots to maximise visual impact – at one particularly perilous moment we even see a cameraman avert his eyes – but a potential outcome of all this, as Chin admits, is that they could be left with a perfectly composed shot of his friend falling through the frame. That’s something else to emphasise: this most solo of ventures is dependent on – and filmed by – a bunch of friends. As Honnold researches and rehearses the route he is assisted by Tommy Caldwell who, in 2015, together with Kevin Jorgeson, achieved the first free ascent – roped – of Yosemite’s Dawn Wall. Further context for this world of highly individualised communality is provided by Valley Uprising (2014) which documents how the climbing culture of Yosemite grew out of the Beat movement and moved through a highly precarious phase of acid-enhanced gravity denial before entering the current era of vertiginous gymnastics – in laid-back Californian mode – exemplified by Honnold. The philosopher EM Cioran said that he was drawn to write about “the great mystics” because they “lived a more intense life than others. And too, because of their extraordinary pride, me and God, God and me.” For Honnold it’s me and the wall; and whereas, for the mystics, it was the inner life that counted, at one point in the film Honnold undergoes a scan to test if he might be weirdly deficient in inner life. There’s also a wonderful sequence of him cooking in his van, scoffing food out of the frying pan with a spatula – a mode of solo consumption that persists after he gets a girlfriend. With or without prompting, that girlfriend, Sanni McCandless, conforms to a well-documented filmic female role whereby love comes between the gunslinger/warrior/hero and his rendezvous with a high and potentially fatal destiny. At a certain point news of the death of one of Honnold’s free soloist buddies makes her think, tearfully, of the grieving widow. “Well, what did she expect?” asks Honnold. On the wall it is High Noon every moment of the day – and it lasts a lifetime. • Geoff Dyer’s latest book, Broadsword Calling Danny Boy, is published by Penguin.