Jeremy Corbyn has set out  the terms under which Labour would back Theresa May’s Brexit deal. But what would his five key demands entail for the EU negotiation and for her attempt to get a deal through the Commons? Ever since his speech in Coventry a year ago, Corbyn has been clear that a customs union would be the price of Labour support for any Brexit deal, believing it would help to protect manufacturing supply chains. That’s something centrist Tory MPs such as Nick Boles and Oliver Letwin have been pushing for. But a customs union is anathema to many MPs on the other side of the Tory party, because it prevents Britain from doing its own trade deals. Labour has kept its plan ambiguous, saying it wants a “say” in future trade deals. While the EU would refuse giving British negotiators a seat at the table in any trade talks, it could be open to some form of consultation. The EU’s single market is more than a free-trade area. It aims to remove not just the fiscal barriers to trade (tariffs) but the physical and technical barriers (borders and divergent product standards) too by allowing as free movement as possible of goods, capital, services and people. In essence, it is about treating the EU as a single trading territory. See our full Brexit phrasebook. This part of the proposal sounds strikingly similar to May’s Chequers plan, but the EU rejected that as “cherry-picking” parts of the indivisible four freedoms. If Labour decides it wishes to be fully in the single market, the EU will insist it signs up to EU state-aid rules. “Corbyn will have to come out of the closet and say we accept single market rules,” says one senior EU official. If Labour wants to be in the single market, it will also have to accept continued freedom of movement, though senior Labour figures have sounded more warm towards that prospect in recent weeks. This has been a key demand of both trade unions and Labour MPs who have considered backing May’s Brexit deal. May is expected to propose a draft bill guaranteeing that UK workers’ rights will keep pace with those in Europe, likely to be announced before the next meaningful vote. It would include a “regression lock” that would ensure workers’ protections never slip below European standards. Corbyn’s terms could potentially go even further and could extend to the UK matching EU safety or air quality standards. Joining some programmes is feasible – if the UK pays. Israel, for example, is part of the EU’s research programme. The political declaration – the non-binding part of the Brexit deal that May has proposed – already states that the EU and the UK will “explore the possibility of cooperation” involving agencies such as the European Medicines Agency, the European Chemicals Agency and the European Aviation Safety Agency. Countries in the European Economic Area such as Norway, as well as Switzerland, take part in various EU agencies, though without voting rights. But EU officials are uncertain whether this could be agreed in the political declaration. Security cooperation should have been one of the easiest parts of Brexit to agree and one of the strongest cards the UK held. But progress on the bespoke security deal May had wanted has stalled. The ambition has been to largely preserve the status quo, including hopes of staying in Europol and a host of pan-European crime-fighting databases including the Schengen information system. Brussels has said it is difficult for the UK to have the same access to EU police organisations and databases without being a member state, including taking on EU data-protection rules and accepting the remit of the European court of justice. It is unclear if Labour would be prepared to accept this.