Toto Wolff has issued a strong warning of the dangers facing Formula One and the sport’s place in the UK because of Brexit, describing it as the “mother of all messes”. The Mercedes team principal was speaking as teams gave their cars their full track debut at the first test here. Ferrari were quickest but Williams suffered a severe blow, admitting they were not ready to run for the opening two days of testing. Seven of the 10 F1 teams are based in Britain and there are nine European races this season. They employ a large number of people with a wide range of nationalities and are reliant on parts, equipment and materials coming in and out of the EU. Wolff warned Brexit would have a major impact. “Any major disruption with borders or taxes would damage the F1 industry in the UK,” he said. “Our team is an international team, including many EU citizens, and there is uncertainty at whether the industry will be impacted by a no-deal Brexit or a Brexit. That is damaging to what is to me one of the outstanding industries in the UK. It is the mother of all messes.” He was also concerned about the ability of F1 teams to attend races and perform at the highest level, reflecting a similar view to those the McLaren chief executive Jonathan Neale expressed in November. “If a no-deal Brexit happens like it is being discussed, it would have a major impact in terms of our operation going to the races and getting our car developed and ready,” said Wolff. “That is a nightmare scenario that I don’t want to envisage.” Mercedes have won the past five drivers’ and constructors’ championships and Lewis Hamilton has taken four of his five titles with the team, who employ what is understood to be approximately 1,100 people from 26 nationalities. They, as well as McLaren, Williams, Force India, Renault and Red Bull are based in the UK, while Haas have their headquarters in the USA but with a base in Banbury. Wolff also warned the potential upheaval caused by Brexit could affect Mercedes’ ability to compete. “Everybody at Ferrari, Toro Rosso [both based in Italy] and also Alfa Romeo in Switzerland will have a massive advantage over every UK-based team,” he said. Last week, Williams cancelled their pre-test shakedown of their car and announced at the weekend it would not be ready to take part on day one of the test. The car arrived at the track on Monday morning. “It is looking more likely than not that we will now not be in a position to run on track until Wednesday at the earliest,” said the deputy team principal, Claire Williams. “This is extremely disappointing.” There are eight days of pre-season testing and Williams, who had a terrible season in 2018, finishing last in the constructors’ championship, will badly miss losing two full days. The other nine teams all managed to run successfully, with Ferrari looking particularly strong. Sebastian Vettel was quickest in both sessions and completed 169 laps. McLaren also enjoyed a solid start, with Carlos Sainz second to Vettel, four-tenths back. Red Bull, using their Honda power unit for the first time, were also well served with Max Verstappen fourth-fastest over 128 laps. Lewis Hamilton took the Mercedes for the afternoon session and he and team-mate, Valterri Bottas, put in 150 laps between them.