Sarah Taylor will make a limited return to the England squad for their upcoming tour to the subcontinent, as she continues to manage her anxiety issues. Wicketkeeper Taylor, who missed the recent World Twenty20 tournament in the West Indies, will play in the three one-day internationals against India in Mumbai at the end of February, but will return home while the rest of the squad heads to Guwahati for three T20 internationals in March. The rest of the squad will then travel to Sri Lanka for another three ODIs and three T20s, but Taylor will miss that leg of the tour entirely. Amy Jones, who deputised behind the stumps in the West Indies, is expected take the gloves for the games Taylor does not play. Also making a return will be bowler Katherine Brunt, who missed the World T20 with a back injury. She will be available for all six games in India, but will also not play in Sri Lanka. Jenny Gunn has been rested for the tours, but retains her central contract, while Dani Hazell announced her retirement after the World T20. Left-arm spinners Katie George and Kirstie Gordon are both unavailable through injury. “We’ve looked to use as many players as we can to give everyone an opportunity to learn and grow as we head into a busy year,” said England’s coach Mark Robinson. “We’ve included 18 players across the squads and they’ll come in and out as the tours progress as we look to improve our strength in depth. “We’ve got a huge Ashes series in the summer, as well as hosting the West Indies, and obviously there are ICC Women’s Championship points up for grabs across both of these tours so there’s hard work ahead of us but we’re excited.” England reached the final of the World T20 but were comprehensively beaten by Australia, only Danni Wyatt making a significant contribution in that game. They will have chance for revenge in the summer when England host Australia in the Ashes, decided once again by a points system over three ODIs, three T20s and one Test. ODI squad v India H Knight (captain, above), T Beaumont, K Brunt, K Cross, S Dunkley, S Ecclestone, G Elwiss, A Hartley, A Jones, L Marsh, N Sciver, A Shrubsole, S Taylor, L Winfield, D Wyatt. I T20 squad v India H Knight (captain), T Beaumont, K Brunt, K Cross, F Davies, S Dunkley, S Ecclestone, G Elwiss, A Jones, L Marsh, N Sciver, A Shrubsole, L Smith, L Winfield, D Wyatt. ODI and IT20 squads v Sri Lanka H Knight (captain), T Beaumont, K Cross, F Davies, S Dunkley, S Ecclestone, G Elwiss, A Jones, L Marsh, N Sciver, A Shrubsole, L Smith, F Wilson, L Winfield, D Wyatt.