Jürgen Klopp has told Liverpool fans to “fasten the seatbelts” and enjoy a title race he believes will go to the final day as he denied nerves are afflicting the team’s performances. The Liverpool manager admits he expected better against West Ham and Leicester, and internal criticism was severe following the two draws that helped Manchester City move top of the table. But Klopp flatly rejected suggestions the pressure of pursuing Liverpool’s first league title in 29 years has got to him and his players. “I do not see what they all say they can see in our faces,” the Liverpool manager said. “When I talked to the referee after the West Ham game they say: ‘Now he is nervous.’ I am not. I knew this would be a really tough race and here we are. Make yourself ready. Fasten the seatbelts and let’s go.” Liverpool will return to the Premier League summit on Saturday with a draw or victory against Bournemouth, who have lost their past eight away fixtures in all competitions. Klopp believes a lack of defensive organisation at set pieces, rather than nerves, has been at the root of his side’s difficulties in recent weeks. “In the last three games we conceded three goals from set pieces, Crystal Palace at 2-1, Leicester and West Ham, but I am sure we still have the best record for [defending] set pieces. Crazy numbers. In the early stages of the season, 1-0 up, set pieces for the opponent were nothing. We were there, focused, physically strong. Now this happens three times.” However, Klopp denied changes in defence, because of injuries to Trent Alexander-Arnold, Joe Gomez and Dejan Lovren, were a factor. “It is never cool if you have to change but the goals we conceded were not because of the changes to the last line. “We are not blind to our problems but it’s not as serious as people make it. That’s the truth. There was never a guarantee this season. People always wanted the biggest gap in the world pretty much, 25 points or whatever, but that’s not the reality. The reality is that, if you want to be champions, you have to fight until the last match day. If we want to be part of that tight race, we cannot change that, or offer something else. What is on offer is a tight race until the end of the season.”