A constant of Welsh rugby through the years has been a raging debate about who should play at fly-half. Even Cliff Morgan, Barry John and Phil Bennett had their detractors, but lost in the verbal jousting between Warren Gatland and Eddie Jones this week was the former’s decision to play Gareth Anscombe at 10 against England ahead of the more experienced and battle-hardened Dan Biggar. It will be only the third start in the position for Anscombe, a New Zealander who qualified for Wales through his mother, confirmation that Wales’s strategy has become more inclusive. When ‘Warrenball’ was at its peak, the combative Biggar and his powerful inside-centre Jamie Roberts were at its heart, prompting their side on the front foot through kicking or charging. Wales are still physical and direct, but with Anscombe at 10 and Hadleigh Parkes outside him, they have proficient passers. ‘Warrenball’ has been remodelled rather than abandoned, variations on a theme. Anscombe does not have the range of kicking of Biggar, who is on the bench, and he is not as effective in defence, but he stands flatter and widens the point of attack. “There is always a lot of noise about the outside-half in Wales,” said the 27-year old Anscombe, the top points scorer in the 2011 Junior World Championship who played for the Blues in Auckland then and made the switch to the Blues in south Wales three years later. “It is a topical debate for the Welsh public and media. There are four of us in camp, me, Dan, Rhys Patchell and Jarrod Evans. We have all got different strengths and weaknesses and get on really well. I have been given the chance to represent us as a whole and it is my job to lead the team around. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels “I feel fairly settled within the camp, although I have been in and out more than I would have liked. The selectors are spoiled for choice at 10 and it is down to one of us to dominate the role. Victory against England would go a long way to cementing myself and we know it is going to be our biggest test of the season.” Anscombe was at full-back at Twickenham a year ago against an England team that has one survivor in the same position on Saturday, the wing Jonny May, who scored a try after two minutes following a kick by Owen Farrell, who was in the centre then while Courtney Lawes was in the back row. The Cardiff Blue had a try ruled out in the first half, wrongly World Rugby later decreed, and it may have made the difference in a six-point defeat. “It was frustrating in the sense that it would have definitely changed the game, but you cannot say it would have given us victory. It was disappointing because I have still not scored a try for Wales; if I get one this week it would more than make up for it. We have made a slow start to the tournament in terms of performance, but like England we are two from two. They are probably playing their best rugby under Eddie and deserve a lot of the accolades they have been receiving. We are fairly comfortable with where we are at and our preparation has been really good. There will be no excuses from us.” Anscombe moved to Wales to fulfil his ambition of becoming an international. In 2011, it seemed that destiny lay with the All Blacks. He was the man of the match in the Under-20 final against England, a day when probably the two leading 10s in world rugby today were on opposite sides: Beauden Barrett was at full-back for New Zealand while Owen Farrell was in their opponents’ midfield. “It was a special year and that game was freakish in terms of the players on both sides and what they have gone on to accomplish,” said Anscombe. “It was a nice day for me, but Saturday will be a lot different. Owen has really grown over the last few years and he has a huge influence on England, especially since he has moved back to 10. He is world class and we are going to have to put him under pressure.” Gatland spoke this week about Wales needing to reduce the time Farrell and his half-back partner Ben Youngs had to make decisions. England, apart from a period in Dublin when Tom Curry was in the sin-bin, have been in control in their two matches, never flustered or contemplating the prospect of defeat. “It is going to be a huge occasion, but we must treat it as just another match,” said Anscombe. “We know what’s coming. They are probably favourites, but we do not need to reinvent the wheel. We have to start well and apply pressure. I have been here a few years and know what we are trying to do with the ball. It is my job to push our game on against England.”