You would be forgiven for thinking pasta is struggling in these carb-concious, Instagram-centric times. After all, a big bowl of beige wheat hardly seems de rigueur. But pasta is popular again, thanks largely to the supposedly starch-averse twenty- and thirtysomethings. Take Padella. The pasta place outside Borough Market in London is notorious for the queues of young professionals that snake from its entrance as mealtimes approach. Tim Siadatan, the chef and co-owner, had no idea when he opened the restaurant in 2016 that punters would be willing to stand in line for a plate of pappardelle. “It genuinely hadn’t crossed my mind,” he says. “We thought during busy periods a queue might form in the way a queue might form at lunchtime in Pret, but none of us imagined it would become a thing we’d have to manage.” Nowadays, 500 diners turn up every day to try its wildly popular fresh pasta dishes, such as the interminably Instagrammed pici cacio e pepe. In the past few years, a clutch of pasta-peddling rivals have opened across the city, from Pastaio in Soho to Campania & Jones in Bethnal Green. But the passion for posh pici is not confined to the capital. The hype around Pasta Loco in Bristol is so frenzied that diners are advised to book 22 weeks ahead to secure a table; its sister restaurant, Pasta Ripiena, opened last year to similar fanfare. Cardiff’s I Giardini di Sorrento has been garlanded for its dishes inspired by the Amalfi coast. Elsewhere, the French restaurant group Big Mamma so skilfully tapped into millennials’ taste for Italian cuisine that it became the fastest-growing restaurant group in Paris. Last week, it opened Gloria, its first site in the UK, in Shoreditch, east London. Away from restaurants, a love of pasta has spawned cookbooks (Laura Goodman’s Carbs was published in October) and podcast episodes (millennial memoirist Dolly Alderton waxed lyrical about pasta with the actor and gourmand Stanley Tucci on a recent episode of her series Love Stories), while truffle-adorned tortellini was the dish of choice among influencers at this year’s Copenhagen fashion week. So, what is behind the renewed interest? One reason, evident from even a cursory scroll through Instagram, is pasta’s popularity on the photo-sharing site: it is awash with posts bearing hashtags such as #choosepasta or #girlswithgluten. “People love my pictures of pasta,” says the food writer Rosie Birkett, who has 75,000 followers on Instagram. “There’s a familiarity to pasta – people have childhood memories or holiday associations that make it nostalgic. Being able to taste something in our mind’s eye is at play here.” It is this tastebud-teasing effect that Siadatan credits for the excitement around his pici cacio e pepe, which was one of the most Instagrammed restaurant dishes in 2016. “It’s not the most beautiful dish, but people can look at it and go: that is going to be fucking delicious.” Victor Lugger, the 34-year-old co-owner of Big Mamma, thinks the rustic element of the dolce vita aesthetic attracts millennials, who have been force-fed the idea of authenticity. “The Italian way of partying appeals to a generation craving human contact and real moments,” he says. “In Italy, you can imagine yourself drinking negronis in a piazza while the sun goes down. There would be free food and by the end you realise it has only cost €15, but you’re completely drunk and you’ve been there four hours.” Pasta’s surge in popularity has extended to homes, too. Sales of the 13 bestselling lines of pasta produced by the grocery brand Napolina have risen 13% to £29.7m in the past year, according to the analyst Nielsen. Overall, the dry pasta market has increased in value (+0.1%) and volume (+2.6%) in the same period, according to Kantar, another analyst. The latter says “pre-families and young families” – in other words, millennials – are driving the growth. While the increase is not huge, any rise is significant – pasta is emerging from four years of decline. There is also the rise of vegetarianism to consider. “Lots of us are trying to eat less meat, and pasta is probably the simplest way I know of making sad vegetables wildly appealing,” says Goodman. Then there is the fact that pasta is a commendably democratic foodstuff. “I can serve the best-quality pasta, but it will only cost me 50p per kilo,” says Lugger. This affordability is entrenched in Italian culinary traditions, says the Guardian’s Feast columnist Rachel Roddy, who lives in Rome. “The Italians have names like ‘sawdust’ for pasta – there’s egg pasta with 20 egg yolks and there’s a sawdust pasta you’d have with boiled greens. It straddles everybody.” Could pasta’s popularity be part of the backlash against the restrictive world of clean eating? “Pasta brings joy to lots of us, unlike clean eating,” says Goodman. “But I don’t think we should see eating spaghetti as a rebellious act. Spaghetti isn’t the opposite of clean eating.” A recent World Health Organization report reiterated the importance of carbs to a healthy diet. It is a message worth promoting, says Goodman. “The word ‘carb’ is often used as a synonym for ‘unhealthy food’, which is so far from the truth.” Michela Chiappa of the Chiappas, three sisters in their 30s who write about Italian cooking, suggests that pasta and clean eating are, in fact, compatible. “My definition is: strip it back. You should be eating carbs, but eat ‘good’ carbs. Cook from scratch with fresh ingredients.” Focus on provenance, too. At the Big Mamma restaurants in Paris, authenticity informs the produce as much as it does the experience, says Lugger. “We cook everything ourselves; nothing is too salty. This is a generation of people who really care about what they’re putting in their bodies.” It is easy to draw a line between this back-to-basics kitchen mindset and the wider resurgence of crafting – knitting smugly in cafes, whittling wooden spoons, that sort of thing. Indeed, I have friends in their late 20s who flit from channelling their “inner nonnas” at pasta-making tutorials to salivating over the handiwork of real-life nonnas via the YouTube channel Pasta Grannies, which treats its 370,000 subscribers to videos of Italian grandmothers’ culinary techniques. Roddy says pasta’s versatility makes it a blank canvas. Perhaps this is a neat metaphor for the buzz around it – it is a repository for myriad conflicting cultural concerns. The revival hints at a rejection of carb-phobia, but others may deem it an Instagram-fuelled fad. And while there are whiffs of an elitist fetishisation of fresh produce, pasta also appeals because it is cheap and cheering. As Roddy concludes, though, pasta is just, well, food. As trends come and go, that is a mentality worth tucking into.