Joe Denly arrives in St Lucia determined to prove he is not simply a stopgap Test opener and instead book a place in this summer’s Ashes series. The third Test against West Indies at the Darren Sammy Stadium from Saturday is not just a chance for Joe Root’s side to salvage some pride and avoid a series whitewash; for individuals such as Denly there is more at stake. After a Test debut in Antigua that returned scores of six and 17 – a possible pair were it not for a tight lbw shout on day one and a dropped catch in the second innings – he may have only two more innings to impress after Root declined to guarantee the extended run offered to others recently. It was at least consistent with the captain’s pre-series diktat that players must forget about the carrot of facing Australia. But it would not be human if Denly – who will be 33 in March and offered a golden late opportunity in place of Keaton Jennings – was not looking ahead. “For me personally it has to be about this next game,” Denly said. “[But] playing in an Ashes series is an absolute dream and I’d be lying if I said I wasn’t thinking about it a little bit. It is important to try to not think about it as much as possible and have a real focus on trying to get a score in this next Test and prove to those guys who think I am a stopgap, makeshift opener that I have got a future as an opener in Test cricket. Hopefully I can.” Denly expects a response from England’s batsmen who, averaging 16 runs per wicket, need to perform a handbrake turn in St Lucia to prevent their worst collective series for 131 years. “I don’t think it is a case of trying to prove anything to anyone else but ourselves,” he said. For him this involves cracking a relentless West Indies attack who represent a significant step up from batting at No 3 for Kent last season in Division Two, where Denly admits the quality of bowling can drop off once the best bowlers are negotiated. Antigua was his first time opening in first-class cricket since 2015 and toe-ending a long hop from Alzarri Joseph in his first innings, before being bowled by the 22-year-old when shouldering arms in the second, made for an inauspicious return. Denly at least draws strength from a sense of comfort in the middle. “There were a flurry of emotions when Joe Root told me I was playing but I felt pretty relaxed in the buildup and the match,” he said. “That comes from having a taste of international cricket [in 2009], it not going to plan, going through rough patches, before coming out the other end. Sometimes you build things up to be something they are not.” This outlook also comes from 18 months of strong returns on the domestic Twenty20 circuit which earned him a contract at Kolkata Knightriders in the Indian Premier League. But for all the appeal of that career path, Test cricket tops the lot. “This is absolutely the ultimate. I’d take this all day long,” he said. “I think those gigs in the last few years played a part in me reaching this place now, playing pressure situations against top players. But I’d give it all up to be here, that’s for sure.”