The government has expressed willingness to discuss Labour’s terms for backing Theresa May’s EU withdrawal bill, but Jeremy Corbyn’s offer of support for a softer Brexit has prompted fury among some Labour backbenchers. David Lidington, the Cabinet Office minister and de facto deputy prime minister, said he had not had any direct “overtures” from Labour about talks but added: “We should be talking to the official opposition and understand their point of view.” In his letter to the prime minister, Corbyn calls for the government to rework the political declaration with the EU to offer five commitments including staying in a customs union, in part to avoid the need for a backstop over the Irish border. It also calls for a say on future EU trade deals and “dynamic alignment on rights and protections”. Labour MPs who back a second referendum have reacted with dismay to Corbyn’s letter. Pat McFadden said his leader was giving MPs in leave constituencies permission to back May’s deal. He wants it to happen, and even if he doesn’t vote for it himself, he’s sending a signal to Labour MPs that they can do so. Corbyn lays out Labour’s terms for backing May on Brexit | Politics | The Guardian https://t.co/QhpHkXhlwU David Lammy and Owen Smith said Corbyn was compromising too far in favour of Brexit. Weaker than our six tests. Ignores conference policy. Downgrades demand for change to the binding Withdrawal Agreement to non-binding Declaration. Trusts the Tories to legislate to protect workers. And rejected already by the Dep. PM as ‘wishful thinking’. Time for a #PeoplesVote https://t.co/zJJHBSB3nV And Chuka Umunna, Ben Bradshaw and Mike Gapes said their leader was trying to facilitate Brexit. This is not Opposition, it is the facilitation of a deal which will make this country poorer.A strong, coherent Labour alternative to this shabby, Tory Brexit is absent - it has been since this Parliament began.Totally demoralising. /1 https://t.co/cRVtopz5Qx Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Lidington questioned those demands but said he wanted to “understand exactly where the Labour frontbench is coming from”. He said: “It doesn’t mean we will necessarily come to an agreement, but we need to take this forward … let’s hope those conversations can take place.” He added: “I would be asking what on earth they mean when they want to be in a customs union with the EU but also for Britain to have a say in EU trade policy with other countries. That’s not something that is allowed under the European treaties. This seems to be wishful thinking. So let’s get down and have those talks with them.” Lidington was speaking before talks in Brussels between May and European leaders, including Donald Tusk, the president of the European council. On Wednesday Tusk prompted outrage among senior Conservatives when he talked of a “special place in hell” for those who had backed Brexit without a plan on how to achieve it. Asked if May should demand an apology from Tusk, as some cabinet colleagues have suggested, Lidington said: “He wasn’t criticising the prime minister at all. “It wasn’t the most brilliant diplomacy in the world. Mr Tusk was venting yesterday, but I don’t think that will detract from sensible and courteous discussions.” Earlier, Barry Gardiner, the shadow international trade secretary, suggested Labour had now abandoned its six tests on Brexit in favour of Corbyn’s five demands. He told Today: “It is not about tests now. What we are doing is saying: ‘We believe these are the options that are available that would actually secure a majority in the House of Commons.’ It is trying to set out, in a spirit of cooperation and compromise, a way forward that we feel not just the majority of Labour MPs, but actually the majority of parliament could say: ‘Yes I can support that, it may not be my dream Brexit or my dream remain but it is something that we can move on for and that would be good for the country.’” This soft Brexit compromise has been championed by the former Conservative minister Nick Boles as a plan B for leaving the European Union. It is based on Norway’s relationship with the EU, which is outside the bloc and the customs union but inside the single market. Under the plan the UK would have to join Norway, Liechtenstein and Iceland in the European Free Trade Association (Efta), which would then allow it to participate in the European Economic Area (EEA). The ‘plus’ in this option refers to a temporary customs union with the EU, which would need to be negotiated to avoid a hard border ion the island of Ireland. The temporary arrangement would remain in place until the EU and UK agreed a specific trade deal. The option has the advantage of being as close to the EU as possible without full membership, and it would do away with the need for a problematic backstop for Northern Ireland. Like Norway, the UK would be outside the common fisheries and agriculture policies, and would not be subject to the European court of justice. But it crosses a key red line for Brexiters by continuing freedom of movement, one of the preconditions of single market membership. It would also limit the UK ability to negotiate its own trade deals while a new customs arrangement is under discussion. And it would require continued financial contributions to the EU without an influence inside the bloc. MPs from both sides of the House who back a “Norway plus” option for a softer Brexit have backed Corbyn’s offer. They include the Conservative MP Nick Boles and some of Corbyn’s critics on the Labour benches, including Stephen Kinnock and Lucy Powell. Boles tweeted that Corbyn’s letter “takes us a big step closer to a cross party compromise”. This takes us a big step closer to a cross party compromise based on Common Market 2.0 as championed by @SKinnock @halfon4harlowMP @LucyMPowell @GeorgeFreemanMP @SeemaMalhotra1 @NSoames @JDjanogly @Sandbach and many others https://t.co/fSSEhJLTYH https://t.co/wn898NtadR Powell tweeted links to a Norway Plus Group pamphlet to show how Corbyn’s suggestions could work. The response in Brussels to Labour’s proposal was mixed, with officials welcoming the backing of a permanent customs union, and even indicating that the UK might have a chance of a consultative role in future trade negotiations. The member states have not had any discussions on the possibility of the UK taking such a role and France would be likely to take a tough stance but officials are loath to rule it out given the size of the British economy, and the benefit it would offer the EU when embarking in trade talks with the rest of the world.Concerns were expressed, however, that Corbyn was being unrealistic in seeking “shared institutions” with the EU, wording that appears to suggest an equal role for the UK and the 27 member states. Senior EU officials also doubt the sincerity of Labour’s offer to the prime minister, fearing it is an attempt to weaken May’s hopes of getting a deal through parliament. One official said: “It is a shame that we have this perfect storm: a lousy government and an even lousier official opposition”.