There are few things, in our age of convenience and 24-hour supply chains, that are truly seasonal. So it’s always a pleasure when that first electric-pink bunch of forced rhubarb arrives each year. I love it principally for its mellow flavour – fruitier than its later-season sibling – but it would be a shame to use it in a recipe that didn’t allow its eccentric colour to shine. This week I’m roasting it with a little sugar, before nestling it in a bed of golden frangipane. You can’t go wrong. Prep 25 minChill 25 minCook 55 minMakes 1 x 10 inch tart – enough for 12 slices For the pastry250g plain flour125g unsalted butter (cold), plus more for greasing75g icing sugar1 large egg, beaten For the rhubarb4 large sticks of rhubarb (about 400g)75g caster sugar For the frangipane150g light brown muscovado sugar150g unsalted butter, at room temperature160g ground almonds40g plain flour¼ tsp table salt2 large eggs60g golden syrup Start by making the pastry: tip the flour, butter and icing sugar into a food processor, and blitz until combined. Continue to mix, adding just enough of the beaten egg to bring the dough together (you’ll need to use most, if not all the egg). Pat the dough into a palm-sized disc, wrap it in clingfilm and pop it in the freezer for 10 minutes. Heat the oven to 170C/(160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Cut away the tops and tails of the rhubarb and chop into 12cm-long batons. Cover with the caster sugar, and bake for 12 minutes. Meanwhile, grease the sides and base of a 24cm round tart tin with butter. Scatter a little flour over a work surface and rolling pin, and roll out the pastry to 2-3mm thick. Starting at one end, roll the pastry around the rolling pin, then unroll over the tin. Press the pastry into the sides of the tin, trimming away the excess to leave 1-2cm overhang over the rim. Use a fork to prick all over the base, then pop it back in the freezer for 15 minutes. Once the rhubarb has baked, remove it from the oven and set aside. When you’re ready to blind bake the pastry, cover the base with a sheet of greaseproof paper and weigh it down with some dry rice or beans, or whatever you have around. Bake at the same temperature for 12 minutes. Make the frangipane filling: cream the butter and sugar, then stir in all the other ingredients. After the pastry case has had its 12 minutes in the oven, take it out, remove the beans and paper and pour in the frangipane filling, smoothing it down with a spoon. Arrange the roast rhubarb over the surface, then bake for 25-30 minutes, until the frangipane is looking toasty and golden.