The Australian-born journalist at the centre of the Jeff Bezos scandal is known for his relentless pursuit of stories. As a sports reporter at Channel Seven in Melbourne in 2004, Dylan Howard’s colleagues believed he had a big future ahead of him. The RMIT drop-out was dogged and didn’t let anything stand in his way. “He clearly wanted to succeed in the entertainment space,” a former Seven colleague told Guardian Australia. Despite his reputation as an ambitious journalist, former colleagues were surprised to read that Howard was the Australian-born journalist behind the emailed threats to the Amazon chief executive, Jeff Bezos. No one predicted Howard would rise to the top of the US entertainment media industry just a few years after quitting Seven in 2008 when his contract was not renewed. He headed straight for New York where he worked the red carpet as an entertainment reporter. After producing and editing for Reuters, RadarOnline and Celebuzz, he joined American Media Inc and by 2014 he had risen to chief content officer and vice-president. AMI is the largest publisher of celebrity and entertainment titles in the US, including the National Enquirer, Us Weekly, RadarOnline.com and OK! On LinkedIn the 37-year-old describes himself as a “metrics-driven digital, print and television media executive who has developed, re-invented and created entertainment and news brands”. Howard wrote to Bezos: “[I]n the interests of expediating [sic] this situation, and with The Washington Post poised to publish unsubstantiated rumors of The National Enquirer’s initial report, I wanted to describe to you the photos obtained during our newsgathering”. His email was published by the richest man in the world on Friday. The email, with redactions of personal information, went on to say that the National Enquirer had obtained a “below the belt selfie — otherwise colloquially known as a ‘d*ck pick’” as well as nine other images. Those included a selfie, a shirtless photo of him holding his phone “while wearing his wedding ring”, a “full-length body selfie” of him in his underwear, and photos and messages from Lauren Sánchez, a former TV anchor. “It would give no editor pleasure to send this email. I hope common sense can prevail — and quickly,” Howard allegedly wrote. Howard has been approached for comment. Seven’s news director when Howard was a sports reporter, Steve Carey, says the Howard he knew between 2004 and 2008 was a great reporter who broke dozens of stories for the network. “He was an extraordinarily talented and driven journalist,” Carey said. “When I had him in my news room he was always hard-edged; always determined to get the story. “He was an absolute gun as a sports reporter. A bloodhound in terms of finding stories and a crusader in trying to get to the truth of things.” One of Howard’s stories, which broadcast confidential details of an AFL player’s drug use, put Seven at war with the AFL and led to the couple who sold the documents to Howard pleading guilty to theft. The network stood by Howard, who was cleared by a police investigation. “A witness was present for all dealings between Dylan and the individuals in question,” the network said. “We support Dylan Howard and can vouch for the fact that Dylan’s conduct was entirely appropriate.’’ Carey says it was a myth that Howard was sacked by Seven as a result of the controversial story and that his contract was simply not renewed a year after the incident. He had not seen him since and he said he did not recognise the man he knew in 2008 in the news reports about Bezos. But other Seven sources said it was obvious Howard didn’t play by the rules. He ran his own race, they said. He didn’t respect confidences, he’d take the most sensational angle and never “looked after” his contacts. “He’d be nice to your face but you wouldn’t trust him not to stab you in the back,” a former staffer said. Another Australian journalist who met Howard later, in 2009 after he’d moved to the States, also described him as a go-getter, but added that he could be charming and likeable. Howard was working the red carpet for stories and paying B-grade celebrities to be in video stories for RadarOnline, the Australian journalist said. “He was just ruthless.”