Writers on the TV series Empire, known for its jaw-dropping twists and turns of fate, would have been hard pressed to craft a plotline as strange as the recent real-life drama of Jussie Smollett. It took just over three weeks for the TV star to be recast from victim to villain, as the tale of the alleged vicious homophobic and racist attack on him in the early morning hours of 29 January began to unravel. The turnaround appeared to reach its climax on Thursday morning when the actor was arrested in Chicago, and the city’s police superintendent, Eddie Johnson, accused the 36-year-old of taking advantage “of the pain and anger of racism to advance his career”. According to Chicago police, Smollett orchestrated a hoax hate-crime attack on himself in which he claimed that two attackers – at Smollett’s direction – punched him, called him racial and homophobic slurs, poured bleach on him and hung a noose around his neck. “I’m left hanging in my head and asking why,” said Johnson. “Why would anyone, especially an African American man, use the symbolism of a noose to make a false accusation?” Smollett had claimed the pair were supporters of Donald Trump, and that his anti-Trump stance had made him a target. Investigators have now said they believe the scratches and bruises on the actor’s face were probably self-inflicted. Johnson, the police chief, said Smollett paid two brothers, including one who was a former co-worker on Empire, $3,500 to orchestrate the attack as a “publicity stunt” because he was “dissatisfied with his salary”. Police also believe Smollett sent a racist and homophobic threatening letter to himself at the Fox studio lot where the show is filmed. The actor, who is black and openly gay, handed himself into police on Thursday morning after he was charged with felony disorderly conduct for making a false police report – a crime that could bring up to three years in prison. The studio behind Empire has said it is considering its options over Smollett’s future. Smollett’s lawyers have said they would fight the charge, according to the Associated Press, and he is expected to appear in court later on Thursday. Like a number of advocates and commenters, Johnson expressed concern that the victims of Smollett’s apparent fabrication would be future victims of hate crimes, who could face increased skepticism about their claims. “False police reports cause real harm,” Johnson said. “They do harm to every legitimate victim who is in need of support by police and investigators. “I’ll continue to pray for this troubled young man, who resorted to both drastic and illegal tactics to gain attention.” Trump, who is himself regularly accused of racism, and whose online supporters had been among the most vocal doubters of Smollett’s report from the moment it was made public, tweeted: “Jussie Smollett – what about MAGA and the tens of millions of people you insulted with your racist and dangerous comments!? #MAGA” The police press briefing, and Johnson’s public scolding, were a far cry from Smollett’s first public appearance after the attack, at a concert in Los Angeles on 2 February. The singer and actor performed for an enthusiastically supportive standing-room-only crowd, and offered emotional commentary in interludes between songs. “The most important thing I have to say is thank you so much and that I’m OK. I’m not fully healed yet, but I’m going to. And I’m gonna stand strong with y’all,” Smollett said. “l will always stand for love. I will never stand for anything other than that.” The outpouring of support for Smollett came in torrents, including from the California senator Kamala Harris and the TV host Ellen DeGeneres. Referring to a published account of the attack, Trump had told reporters at the White House: “It doesn’t get worse, as far as I’m concerned.” Smollett also gave graphic details of the apparently hoaxed assault during a Good Morning America interview last week, describing how his attacker yelled “This Maga country, nigger” before beating him. But doubts about Smollett’s claim started with reports that he had not fully cooperated with police. Then detectives, in a city bristling with 50,000 surveillance cameras, could not find video footage of the attack. Police said they were able to track down their primary leads thanks to footage from 35 public, and 20 private, cameras. That information led them to a ride-share trip taken by the two male suspects, which enabled police to identify them. The brothers, Abimbola “Abel” and Olabinjo “Ola” Osundairo, were taken into custody for questioning after returning from a trip to Nigeria, where police said they flew immediately after the attack. The pair were released after two days, with police saying they were no longer suspects. Police announced a “significant shift in the trajectory” of the investigation last week after the brothers were freed. Smollett was charged on Wednesday evening after the two brothers testified before a grand jury. Smollett’s attorneys met prosecutors and police, but it was unknown what they discussed or whether Smollett attended the meeting. Police said one of the Osundairo brothers had appeared on Empire, and Smollett’s attorneys said one of the men was the actor’s personal trainer, whom he hired to help get him in shape for a music video. Speaking outside the courthouse where the grand jury met, the brothers’ attorney said the two men testified for two and a half hours. “There was a point where this story needed to be told, and they manned up and they said: ‘We’re going to correct this,’” Gloria Schmidt, the brothers’ lawyer, said. She said her clients did not care about a plea deal or immunity. “You don’t need immunity when you have the truth,” she said.