Manny Machado, one of baseball’s biggest free agents, has signed a 10-year, $300m deal with the San Diego Padres, according to ESPN. The Padres executive chairman, Ron Fowler, said “we are continuing discussions” but it is believed the financial part of the deal has been confirmed with Machado still needing to pass a physical. This likely is semantics. Machado has not passed a physical and the two sides have not finalized language. But they are in agreement on financial terms. https://t.co/j4kcZZBRg1 The 26-year-old who, along with fellow free-agent All-Star Bryce Harper, had remained unsigned with spring training rapidly approaching last played for the Los Angeles Dodgers. Machado hit .297 last season with 37 home runs, 107 RBIs and 14 stolen bases, and can play short stop or third base. Before joining the Dodgers during their run to last season’s World Series, he had played his entire career with the Baltimore Orioles. The Padres, who have only reached the playoffs twice in the past 20 seasons, and had the second-worst record in the National League in 2018, may seem an unlikely destination for one of the best players in baseball. However, the Padres have spent $474m in free agency over the past two seasons, the most in MLB, and ESPN rates their farm system as the best in baseball. “[Machado is] a generational talent,” the Padres’ first baseman Eric Hosmer said earlier this week when asked about the possibility of getting Machado. “I think it just shows where this organization is at. Where we’re at, at the process right now. We’re trying to win baseball games. ... It’s exciting, it’s motivating.” Machado has hit more than 30 home runs in each of the last four seasons, although some have questioned his work ethic, particularly when he said last season that hustling to first base was “not my cup of tea”. If the Padres deal is confirmed it would be the second-highest in baseball history, and the third-highest sports contract of all time. The boxer Canelo Alvarez signed a $365m deal with broadcaster DAZN last year, while Giancarlo Stanton agreed a $325m contract with the Miami Marlins in 2014. Stanton now plays for the New York Yankees. Harper remains on the market for now, with the Philadelphia Phillies believed to be his most likely destination.