Thomas Young is in line to make his Six Nations debut for Wales against Italy in Rome on Saturday after impressing during training in Nice. The 26-year-old was picked for the first time by Warren Gatland last month. Young’s caps against Tonga and Samoa in 2017, after he had been in the training group for the Six Nations that year without making the match-day 23, came when Gatland was on sabbatical with the Lions. The flanker has become one of the leading players at the breakdown with Wasps in the Premiership but the feeling two years ago was that he struggled to adapt to the extra pace Wales adopt in training. “Thomas has been a consistent performer for Wasps,” said the Wales forwards coach, Robin McBryde. “He is playing in a league where he is up against big men every week and the intensity is there. He has won several man-of-the-match awards, making intelligent decisions when to compete for the ball in defence and linking with the backs in attack. “He is doing that here as well. Our training is different to club level, the metres covered and the intensity is up but he has dealt with it. Everyone has the opportunity to stake a claim and if they get it, they have to make the most of it.” Wales stayed in France after Friday’s Six Nations victory in Paris to prepare for their second match. Gatland took 31 players to Nice to replicate the number of players he will have at the World Cup in September and is likely to change a winning side before the third match against England. “It has been good to recuperate here after a tough match,” McBryde said. “You could not ask for better surroundings but we have some hard work to do before Italy and cannot slip into holiday mode. “Everybody realises the importance for the first two games and the momentum it can create by getting positive results. “Italy will be tough to crack and we have to improve from last Friday. They will be buoyed by the last 15 minutes at Murrayfield when they came back strongly. They showed how dangerous they can be in attack and it will be a big test for us. We have some tough decisions to make in selection.” The centre Garry Ringrose and the lock Devin Toner will miss Ireland’s match against Scotland at Murrayfield on Saturday. Ringrose has picked up a hamstring complaint, while Toner has aggravated an ankle injury. CJ Stander was already missing owing to facial fractures but the wing Keith Earls appears to have overcome a hip problem.