It has been a puzzling series which defied the bookmakers and the pundits. For West Indies it was an uplifting one as they regained the Wisden Trophy in the space of seven days’ play, yet there was still the feeling at the end of the final Test that their resurgence is as fragile as a spider’s web. Take away the captain, Jason Holder, as happened on their recent tour of Bangladesh and in St Lucia this week, and the bright new edifice can crumple. Yet West Indies overran England in Barbados and Antigua not thanks to freakish career-best contributions from two of their team, which was the case at Headingley in 2017 when Kraigg Brathwaite and Shai Hope held sway after Joe Root’s declaration. Instead, for two entire Test matches West Indies were more disciplined and more streetwise than their opponents, daring in their choice of playing surfaces yet canny in their play. They systematically overcame England because their bowlers were unrelenting as well as hostile and their batsmen unfashionably patient. In short until arriving in St Lucia they were more professional than Root’s side, who were tempted into playing fancy, over-theoretical cricket at the start of the series. After England’s success in Sri Lanka perhaps they thought they could skip the hard yards. Now, in advance of a momentous summer, it is time to try to make sense of it all from an English perspective and who better to turn to at such a difficult time than Donald Rumsfeld? There are some known unknowns but the known knowns should come first. They are not very encouraging since they focus mostly on players about to be discarded. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Trevor Bayliss offered encouraging words about Keaton Jennings. “He’s desperate to do well and we probably haven’t got a harder worker on the team. He does a lot of work away from the group in sessions with Mark Ramprakash and he’s a student of the game,” he said, but that does not reassure. Jennings does everything right off the field and still he struggles to deliver. Likewise Adil Rashid is unlikely to encounter a red ball in an England shirt for a while, if ever again. That may just be possible in Sri Lanka in 13 months but a lot can happen in that time. More unjustly Ben Foakes has been discarded as England revert to their old regime in the batting order. “Jonny [Bairstow] is happier down the list,” said Bayliss, “and his record down there is one of our better ones.” This raised two questions: is the experiment with Bairstow at No 3 over? Is that bad news for Foakes? Which prompted the answers “Yes” and “Yes, unfortunately”. The most encouraging known known has stemmed from the form of Ben Stokes. Since the incident in Bristol Stokes the batsman had been a less dangerous proposition. Eighteen months ago opponents were fearful of what he might do at the crease but since then he has batted so responsibly that he could always be controlled if not dismissed. As a breed, bowlers like that kind of comfort. Bayliss welcomes a change of emphasis. “We saw Stokes get back to his free-flowing approach, trying to dominate the attack.” The coach is clearly aware of the peculiar challenges that Stokes has endured over the past 18 months. “You don’t know how that affects people. He can be fairly hard to read sometimes. He keeps things pretty close to the chest. Deep down he is a good guy, a family man. “He is a very sensitive bloke as well but he is a tough character on the field and he will not back down from anything. He is a leader within the team whether he has vice-captain next to his name or not, and they follow him.” We can take it as a known known that Bayliss is desperate to have him on board in this summer’s Ashes campaign. Now for the known unknowns. Bayliss acknowledges that finding a functioning top three remains a problem and it is still no clearer who they should be. So it is possible to plonk Rory Burns and Joe Denly in the category of known unknowns. Glimpse them for half an hour in a Test they do not look out of place – and they are lumbered with batting when life is most difficult – but Burns in particular has an all too familiar return after six Tests (he averages 25). Some familiar alternatives were mentioned by Bayliss: Jason Roy and James Vince. “If those two guys come out and score runs, they’ll be in the mix,” he said. Then someone mentioned Ian Bell – apparently Michael Vaughan has yo-yoed him back into contention – and a slightly surprised Bayliss eventually responded, “You never say never at all.” More positively Mark Wood has graduated into a known unknown. He bowled fast in St Lucia and it was a captivating sight for punters and coaches alike. Bayliss recalled telling him he was out of the one-day team last year. “He was a little angry and went into the nets and tried to knock the batter’s head off. And I said to him afterwards: ‘Mate, that’s it. That is what we want to see from you every single time you bowl.’” Wood delivered in St Lucia and Bayliss was excited but it is by no means certain whether he can do it again and again.