Just as you were about to scream into the sky, asking the heavens just why the Fast and Furious franchise hasn’t turned into an extended cinematic universe, your prayers have been answered. Given the phenomenal success of the underdog motoring saga and The Rock’s continuing ascent, this was an inevitable step and for the first self-referential spin-off he’s joined by Jason Statham’s character for a Mission: Impossible-esque caper (even Fallout’s Vanessa Kirby is joining them). They’re pitted against Idris Elba’s superhuman bad guy as well as a ton of atrocious dialogue (“I’m what you’d call an ice cold can of whoop-ass”) but predictably, it all looks rather fun. Seen by some as another post-Atonement misstep for director Joe Wright (it did follow maudlin Oscar-bait drama The Soloist), Hanna was viewed by others as an audacious curio. A strange, unconventional thriller starring Saoirse Ronan as a child assassin and a deliciously campy Cate Blanchett as the woman hunting her down, it didn’t land commercially but Amazon has taken the concept and turned it into a series, one that looks solidly entertaining but not quite as odd as its source material. As a special bonus, there’s also a “surprise” drop of the first episode right after the game ends which will only be available for 24 hours. There’s inevitable trepidation surrounding the release of the impossible-to-Google Us, writer-director Jordan Peele’s follow-up to Get Out, a film that was a box office smash, a thinkpiece generator, an Oscar-winner and a cultural phenomenon. But last year, the first teaser helped to allay fears with arguably one of the most effectively assembled trailers we’ve seen for a long time and now, Peele has shared a second, tantalising look at his nightmarish new thriller film about a family haunted by doppelgangers, starring Lupita Nyong’o and Black Panther breakout Winston Duke. Its March release seems scarily far away. Hoping that its second amusement park movie within a year does a whole lot better than its last one (Johnny Knoxville’s misfiring Action Point), Paramount is giving a big push to this animated adventure. With age, these films often feel a bit like a fever dream and the trailer, involving some “chimpanzombies”, a British porcupine voiced by John Oliver and a fish carousel does give it a trippy feel. But a stacked voice cast, also including Kenan Thompson, Jennifer Garner, Mila Kunis and Matthew Broderick, and a script from the duo behind Mission: Impossible – Ghost Protocol suggests wondrous times ahead. Hoping to kick off some positive buzz for the third season of a show that really didn’t need a second season, Hulu has launched a splashy new teaser for The Handmaid’s Tale, returning all too soon. It starts out like a propaganda ad for a healthy new period for America before Offred enters, hinting at agency and revenge that she’s not been allowed for so long. “Wake up America, morning’s over,” she says and we hope that the second season lull will be following suit. One of the most anticipated ads of the night ended up being a cruelly brief one but regardless, will help sustain excitement until the fourth, and likely final, Toy Story film is released later this year. After seemingly endless online theorising post-Infinity War’s gobsmacker of an ending, Marvel released the first trailer for the follow-up last year to acclaim and yes, even more theorising. Tonight, more screengrabs will be studied with a second tease of thepotentially final Avengers film that’s a bit shorter than many would have hoped but does the job rather nicely. It’s a grief group-themed ad about refusing to move on and sees the survivors teaming up ready to find their missing friends. “Some people move on but not us,” Cap says, echoing a fanbase who will find it hard to say goodbye to these guys. While some studios have chosen to spend less cash teasing their new movies during the Super Bowl, here’s another sign that Marvel and Disney have little interest in doing the same. As well as sharing new footage from the final Avengers movie, there’s also a new look at Captain Marvel, the film that’s set to share a connection given Infinity War’s post-credits scene. It’s more of the same but further showcases that Brie Larson’s new hero will be the most powerful superhero of them all. A rather nifty tease here of the new rebooted take on The Twilight Zone, arriving on CBS All Access later this year. It makes sense, with the game showing on CBS, that the channel would use this chance to promote their own goods but less predictable is how they chose to unveil the show. Hosted by Jordan Peele, the man himself appears in a creepily empty stadium before that familiar theme tune kicks in … Furthering their plan for world domination, Netflix is now intent on taking over the genre of wildlife documentary. Tonight they dropped the first teaser for Our Planet, made in collaboration with David Attenborough. It’s often hard to tell these apart on first sight but we’ll find out more in March.