Sick of true-crime podcasts that tantalise you with a compelling story only to end with a maddening lack of resolution? You might want to subscribe to Case Closed, which provides a novel twist on the genre by focusing on crimes that have already been solved. It begins with the tale of a murder in Joshua Tree national park. After spending the past nine centuries seeing off sieges and hosting monarchs, Leeds Castle in Kent is moving with the times by launching its own podcast. Narrated by Cold Feet’s Robert Bathurst, the series of short episodes will recount the history of the castle, and promises to cover everything from beheadings to banquets. The first four are available now. Finally, well worth a read is this interview with Marvyn Harrison, host of new podcast Dope Black Dads, which celebrates black British fathers as well as considering the many challenges they face as parents. “We want to inform and help black fathers to make sure they can play an active part in their kids’ lives and be supportive to their partners,” he says. David Tennant Does a Podcast With …As Line of Duty star Craig Parkinson’s Two Shot Podcast proved, actors interviewing their colleagues is a successful format. Now David Tennant has launched a pod with “lots of lovely people dropping by, hanging out”, starting with Olivia Colman, who is predictably delightful. It’s giggly and covers a lot of ground, from the irritations of people who drive in the middle lane of the motorway to keeping secrets on Broadchurch. Michael Sheen, Whoopi Goldberg and Jodie Whittaker are coming up. HV ConvictionThis new seven-part true-crime podcast investigates police brutality with the case of Pedro Hernández, who was arrested as a teenager for a shooting in the Bronx. He spent more than a year in Rikers Island prison while his family tried to prove his innocence. Central to the story is charismatic PI Manny Gomez, a man who doesn’t give up when he gets his teeth into a case. “I see myself as a bringer of justice for the good. I protect the weak,” he says. He could be straight out of a movie, but sadly this is real life. HV Forget kangaroos and koalas, this new six-parter celebrates under-appreciated Australian animals, like the giant cuttlefish, to make sure it’s not just the cute and cuddly that get our attention and conservation efforts. Host Benjamin Law learns about their amazing lives and hears from people who have formed a special connection to these animals. Chosen by Ermela Hoxha (Partnership development manager) I love chick lit. There, I said it. And I am fed up with feeling apologetic for wanting an enjoyable read and needing to unpack my Sophie Kinsella and, instead pop Milkman in my suitcase for fear of poolside derision. Which is why I am recommending Caroline O’Donoghue’s podcast, Sentimental Garbage. An ode to so-called “chick lit”, it sees Caroline and her guests celebrate these brilliant stories and the truths they reveal about women’s lives. It is witty and, yes, sentimental, with each episode exploring the influence these books have had on other female writers. The Bridget Jones’s Diary episode with author Ayisha Malik is a particular highlight from the first series and, with the new season beginning on Valentine’s day, it’s sure to get me ready for feeling unashamedly emotional.