To cross the planet once to see a band is indulgent. Twice might be a bit mad. Last June I flew from Sydney to Dublin to see Microdisney play their first gig in 30 years. Now I’m going from Sydney to Cork to see their final ever gig. My love affair with Microdisney began as the band ended. On 1 July 1988 they supported David Bowie at the Dominion Theatre in London, then split up days later. I was not there. I was in the Pyrenean microstate of Andorra, having gone there on a day trip from a package holiday in Spain. Andorra is beautiful, but I was concerned with taking advantage of its duty-free status. I bought 200 cigarettes, a bottle of tequila and a bunch of albums. One of those was Crooked Mile by Microdisney, which I found in a bargain bin for the peseta equivalent of 80 pence. All I knew about Microdisney was they were Irish and lived in London – and 80 pence was a risk worth taking. The mass smoking of duty-free cigarettes hastened my quitting. The tequila gave me a two-day hangover. But I still play Crooked Mile, 31 years later. It starts with the should-have-been-massive single Town to Town. When, 40 seconds in, I heard Cathal Coughlan sing “She’s trying to pronounce my name”, I was ready to proclaim their genius. As a Pádraig, I felt his pain. Despite being playlisted by BBC Radio 1 and legendary songwriter Mickie Most saying it was “one of the greatest pop singles of the last 15 years”, it failed to chart. The next song, Angels, sounds like a Steely Dan classic. Then comes Our Children, which wouldn’t have been out of place on an early 1960s Ray Charles album. Three songs in and they’d gone from pop to classic rock to country-soul – I already had my 80 pence worth. And, as I soon discovered, it’s not even their best album. That would be 1985’s The Clock Comes Down the Stairs – a novel of Irish emigrant life and Catholic guilt distilled into a 43-minute record that reduces me to tears every time I play it. Coughlan’s acerbic lyrics mixed with the pop classicism of guitarist Sean O’Hagan led BBC’s John Peel to call Microdisney “an iron fist in velvet glove”. But even Peel’s imprimatur did not lead to record sales, and they were gone before I truly knew them. Over the following decades I bought the other Microdisney records, solo albums by Coughlan and O’Hagan and those they did with their respective groups the Fatima Mansions and the High Llamas. I saw Fatima Mansions live twice and the High Llamas once, and they were great shows. But I never thought I’d get to see Microdisney play. And then, in 2017 came the brilliant Iron Fist in Velvet Glove radio documentary about the band, followed soon after by the announcement they’d play shows in Dublin and London in June 2018. Coughlan and O’Hagan were going to be joined by Jon Fell on bass and Tom Fenner on drums from the last line-up of the band, plus another guitarist, a keyboard player and backing vocalist. The night before the Dublin show, they played a rehearsal gig in front of about 150 people. I managed to get a ticket. My expectations were sky high, but nothing could have prepared me for the power and majesty of seeing them metres in front of me. I had an ear-to-ear grin for the entire set. It really felt like something close to heaven. Afterwards, the band mixed with the audience in the venue bar. I said to O’Hagan that as I’d travelled from Sydney I reckoned I’d come the furthest. He then introduced me to his sisters, one of whom had travelled from Canberra and the other from Brisbane. Later, in a bar across the road, I walked into Coughlan posing for someone’s selfie and chatted briefly with him about how much Ireland had changed for the better. He was intense. I’d have been disappointed if he wasn’t. And now it’s about to end again, and Microdisney are bringing it all back home to Cork, where it began almost 40 years ago. If it’s a time to take stock for the band, it is for me too. I’ve rarely returned to Cork since I left there in December 1991. It’s a city full of great memories, but also ghosts and regrets. I’m both looking forward to and dreading introducing myself to people I recognise from nearly 30 years ago by saying “I used to have long hair. And a lower BMI.” Not only am I now old enough to see one of my favourite bands reform, I’m also old enough to see them break up again. But at least I’ll be there this time, not on a bus from Andorra to Salou.