Donald Trump has said he will declare a national emergency in an effort to secure resources to build a wall on the US-Mexico border. Here are key questions answered on what this means: The analysis flies in both directions on this question. Some legal analysts say the emergency declaration is deeply alarming because it is an aggressive power grab by the president on funding issues. The constitution allots the power of the purse uniquely to Congress. Here, Congress has refused to pay for Trump’s border wall, and now it appears that Trump is trying to usurp the appropriations power. Many legal analysts take a more sanguine attitude about the emergency declaration. They point out that any declaration built on shaky legal ground is likely to collapse in court. They point out that Democratic House speaker Nancy Pelosi has the power to force the Senate to vote on a resolution to rescind the declaration, which if it does not succeed could extract a potentially large political cost from Republicans. Finally, voices counseling calm in the face of the emergency declaration point to the 59 emergency declarations made by presidents since the 1976 National Emergencies Act. It emerges that presidents declare national emergencies with fair regularity. The most recent such declaration, in November of last year, is described as blocking the “property of certain persons contributing to the situation in Nicaragua”. In theory it could. Military officials are empowered under multiple statutes, following the declaration of a national emergency, to divert funding and resources “essential to the national defense” including the “use of the armed forces”. So Trump might declare a national emergency, then order the military to move money and troops around to address the emergency – in this case, Trump imagines, by building a wall. But many analysts believe that the emergency declaration will not produce a wall, owing to the aforementioned anticipated challenges in the courts and Congress. Or it will fail due to public outcryor perhaps to a breakdown in compliance somewhere in the chain of command, either on the part of military officials or Trump’s own legal team. A CNN poll conducted 30 January through 2 February found that a strong majority of the public was opposed to the idea of Trump declaring a national emergency to build his wall. In response to the question, “Should Trump Declare Emergency to Build Wall?”, 31% said “yes” while 66% said “no”. The national emergency declaration seems particularly to pose political hazards for Republicans. If they are forced to vote on a resolution to repeal the declaration, they risk being tied to a potentially unpopular policy. If they back the policy, they risk eroding their credentials as devotees to the US constitution, whose checks on the presidency were sermonized gospel among Republicans during the Barack Obama years. But as bad as that could get for Republicans, Mitch McConnell might have decided that the political risks of a national emergency were smaller than those of a second government shutdown in 2019, which Trump had also threatened but many saw as a likely political disaster.