Micro-homes” ran a recent BBC headline, “could solve London’s housing crisis.” A neoliberal thinktank, it went on, is calling for the Greater London Authority to scrap its rules on minimum floor space, saying homes in the capital with less than 37sq m of floor space could be an “affordable opportunity” for young people. I calculated that figure – the size of approximately 30 bath towels, overlapping slightly – while reading the story on my phone while drinking tea while watching Grand Designs on my laptop. It was an episode set in Amersham in 1999, when Kevin McCloud still wore a fleece but also hair. “To what extent is this project… mad?” Kevin asks, within a minute of meeting a couple planning to design an “invisible” house that will blend in with the earth banks of the surrounding reservoirs. This couple who, in that way that people do in ancient footage from 1990s Britain, look both extremely old and also extremely untouched by the grinding horror of post-millennial life. Upon seeing a picture of the site, a 100ft water tower built by German prisoners of war in 1916, the wife tells Kevin that she said no way. Said it was too tall, too close to the road, but that her husband had breezily replied: “Well, we’re going to live here.” He is an architect, of course, with an idea to build an open-plan extension to the water tower, which promises to be uncompromisingly modern. At the sound of the word “uncompromising” I growled gleefully to an empty room, “Oh yes?” and put down my tea. Grand Designs is 20 this year. The housing crisis is 11. Both are tender portrayals of British homemaking performed through the import of many tons of specific weatherproof glass, winters spent in a caravan and the cost-led dissection of what a home is for. In the offices of a neoliberal thinktank (in my head, an armoured vehicle wearing a beret) researchers lie on the carpet top-to-tail to decide how much space a human really needs in which to live. Well, a poor human anyway. Someone without a wealthy family that could offer the backing required for Lloyds’ new 100% “Lend a hand” mortgage, an offer last seen just before the crash, or someone so exhausted after years of being exploited as a renter (in London, mayor Sadiq Khan has proposed rent control, but whether he’s able to sway a government full of private landlords is yet to be seen) they are willing to live in a generous closet. Someone desperate, let’s say, and under 5ft 4in. Elsewhere, on a wintry day in November, a couple in complementary body warmers will gesture shyly at the sky as they prepare to build the home that will expose all their cracks. Rather than lying on a carpet, they will stand in a field with Kevin to consider the view of a mountain as dawn breaks, and the ethical implications of mud. They will design triple-height ceilings to honour the memory of a church that one half of the couple, let’s guess the husband, visited as a child. They will return often to a single word, “light” or “uncompromising” or “playful”, which will, four years later, realise itself as a children’s swing-set in the kitchen, or a sunken hole near the wood-burner for storing magazines – a nod, Kevin might explain, sensitively, to the wife’s previous career as a journalist. Grand Designs’ utter Britishness was clarified this week by the New Yorker explaining its appeal to Americans now watching on Netflix. “The show’s central theme,” the writer explained, “is man’s morbid need to erect a monument to himself” – which, wow, is not wrong. Elsewhere on Netflix a documentary about the fiasco of Fyre Festival had a similar theme. It reminded me of a fiasco unravelling closer to home – people having sold tickets to an island dream, with those who believed their promises of models and music or, say, blue passports, arriving on a completely different island to find disaster relief tents and a single slice of processed cheese. Anyway, as I scrolled through yet more news about how homes continue to define and defeat us (foreign investors took advantage of the Brexit-induced decline in the value of sterling to buy up three times as many £10m-plus luxury homes as before the referendum vote), the writer’s explanation of Grand Designs made me feel a little wobbly. Both Grand Designs, with its great British dream of building one’s own castle, and the shrinking of possibilities for people without the time or income to do so, coexist in our housing market. On one side, the psychedelic glamour of designing a different bathroom for every excretion and, on the other, living with black mould because if you tell your landlord he will put the rent up. The housing crisis, it’s emerging, as we move into its second decade, numbing ourselves at night with Kevin McCloud’s bitchy wisdom about dry-walling, is a mutable thing that expands in our hands like spray-foam insulation. One lesser discussed aspect is the distance it creates between those watching and those doing – those who are required to take what’s given to them, and those wild-eyed couples building barns out of glass. I saw Ronnie Spector perform last week, one of my absolute heroes. Her voice is unique - a cracked glass of milk - and it’s joyous to see her so strong now, after a life under Phil Spector, who kept her prisoner during their marriage. Once he surprised her with adopted twins. ‘The more kids I got, the further I was in that mansion.’ Viktor & Rolf debuted a collection of slogan gowns at Paris Couture Week. With messages like ‘I’m not shy, I just don’t like you’; ‘Sorry I’m late, I didn’t want to come’ and, my personal favourite, a voluminous blue tulle dress emblazoned with a huge red ‘NO’. They spoke to me on a deep, deep level. According to a Women’s Hour poll, 50% of women felt as if they had ‘let their baby down when they struggled to breastfeed’. God, it’s not just the exhaustion and hormones that get you as a new mother, it’s the societal shame and hangover from health messaging. How many times can a woman be screwed? Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter@EvaWiseman