Over the past decade, Gypsy documentaries have been doing something insidious. Armed with patronising, misleading voiceovers delivered in cut-glass English accents – “Tonight, we reveal what it’s really like to be a Traveller woman!” … “From as soon as she’s old enough to walk, every Traveller girl dreams of her wedding day!” – it’s a narrative that’s part Stars in Their Eyes, part nature show. These programmes conjure the feeling that you’re getting an intricate and balanced depiction of a hidden world. In fact, the reverse is true on all counts. Poorly researched and stripped of context, they can create the impression that social problems spring up out of nowhere; that Gypsies and Travellers are magically immune to common human concerns about work, money, health and their children’s education; that everyone from a certain background, or a certain gender, is the same. You’d be forgiven for not knowing much about Gypsy history. Not just because Romany Gypsies are a small minority in modern Britain, but because most books, films and TV shows that feature them make no mention of history. In fiction and in drama, Gypsies tend to be used as a simple plot device: a mysterious world for a protagonist to escape to, or a red herring in a murder mystery. In other words, a grab-bag of weirdness and weirdos. Ahistorical and disconnected, they camp on the fringes of storylines, with whatever clothes, accents or nonsensical talents the production feels like giving them. With the opener of A Very British History, we’ve tried to make a film that’s different in several significant ways. It harks back to the 1960s – a time of great change for Romany people, due to restrictive new laws on caravans, fewer halting sites and less work in their traditional agricultural trades – and uses footage from that time, much of which has never been seen before. We witness brutal evictions being resisted with ever more extreme tactics: one Bromley councillor, wide-eyed with alarm, warns that local people go about “in fear of molestation” when Gypsies are around. Though many hotels and inns at the time displayed signs saying “NO GYPSIES”, here we see that one Kent pub went further, actually painting the words right by its doors. Incredibly, that same pub later played host to the first ever meeting of the Gypsy Council. There are smiles as well as politics and tears. Film of the fast-paced horse trotting at Cumbria’s Appleby Fair, then and now, shows that much has remained the same at this rambunctious rural event. We see men with swept-back hair haggling over a scrap metal deal in the middle of an orchard. One of them, Jim Riley, spins out his life philosophy from the wheel of his Bedford truck: “I like to be free. I like to be my own boss. Do what I like, go where I like, come back when I like. You know, so long as I just get a bit of a living I’m quite happy. I ain’t a rich bloke and never will be.” Making this film was only possible because the 1960s was a “golden age” of broadcasting about Gypsies. Social documentarians such as Philip Donnellan, Ewan MacColl, Peggy Seeger and Charles Parker were hard at work. They interviewed with respect, crafting subtle and sympathetic narratives a world away from the oversimplifications of recent documentaries. They also let people’s actual voices be heard. It seems unbelievable now, but before this time, actors would be hired to re-record comments given by Gypsies and other people whose accents were deemed too coarse to broadcast. These programmes balanced the hard facts of Traveller life and community tensions with an appreciation of the history that led up to them. There was a tangible hinterland which had led Gypsy life to be both romanticised and demonised. They recorded tales of faerie folk, told by Scottish Traveller matriarchs in mediaeval “bender” tents in Highland glens; captured songs in the Romani language; and they recorded a Birmingham Labour councillor saying that Gypsies who refused to fit in should be “exterminated”. This episode of A Very British History points out historical ironies, like Romany tradesmen building houses on the very spot where their families used to stop in horse-drawn wagons. There are interviews with people too scared to live near Gypsies, and with Gypsies forced to live in a line of trailers that stretched for miles down one of the country’s busiest trunk roads. We even hear from the son of the prolific novelist Barbara Cartland, who recalls how his mother fought to set up a caravan site for Romany families near her glamorous home in the Hertfordshire countryside. And we meet a silver horse called Fifty Shades of Grey. • A Very British History starts on Monday at 9pm on BBC Four.