Aziz Ansari, the creator of Master of None, has for the first time spoken extensively about the allegations of sexual misconduct made against him, saying he believes the controversy has made him a “better person”. According to Vulture, at a standup comedy show in New York for a crowd of just 200, the comic said: “There were times I felt really upset and humiliated and embarrassed, and ultimately I just felt terrible this person felt this way. “It’s a terrifying thing to talk about,” he added. “But you know, after a year, how I feel about it is, I hope it was a step forward. It made me think about a lot, and I hope I’ve become a better person.” In 2018, a 23-year-old woman known only as Grace told Babe.net she “felt violated” and “pressured” by Ansari, and that he had “taken advantage” of her during a sexual encounter. Ansari responded to the claims at the time by saying he felt the encounter was “by all indications completely consensual”, but that he “took her words to heart”. Grace stated she felt compelled to go public after Ansari wore a badge supporting the Time’s Up movement against sexual harassment when collecting an award at the Golden Globes. “It was actually painful to watch him win and accept an award,” she told Babe. “And absolutely cringeworthy that he was wearing the Time’s Up pin.” During Monday’s standup set, Anzari recalled that a friend told him the accusation had made him rethink the world of dating. “If that has made not just me but other guys think about this, and just be more thoughtful and aware and willing to go that extra mile, and make sure someone else is comfortable in that moment, that’s a good thing,” Ansari said. He also said he worried he would never be able to return to standup comedy. “There was a moment where I was scared that I’d never be able to do this again.” Ansari was criticised last year for returning to the stage so soon after the allegations made against him. But he has remained popular with audiences, with 18,000 people trying to get tickets to the sold-out show in New York, ahead of a worldwide tour this spring.