Stuart Broad said he felt “lost” after England failed to bowl out West Indies on day two in Antigua, having being informed by the team’s analyst that they had beaten the bat some 103 times over the course of the 90 overs. Four catches went down as Jason Holder’s side tightened their grip on the second Test and indeed a series they lead 1-0 with Broad seeing two off his own bowling to move to 97 drops over the course of his 125-cap England career. But despite staring at an 85-run first innings deficit with four more wickets still to claim in the morning – not least the watchful Darren Bravo, unbeaten on 33 from 165 balls, Broad still fancies that a famous turnaround is possible. “I feel a bit lost as to how we got only six wickets to be brutally honest,” said Broad, who will resume in the morning with figures of three for 42 from 28 overs. “We’ve put everything into it. Heart and soul has gone into that day. 103 plays and misses in the day? I can’t think of any more in any Test that I’ve played in. “West Indies have shown a lot of grit and they’ve left the ball better than us. But is that the way we’ll get back into this Test? Probably not. We’re going to have to move the game on. “It will either be 2-0 or 1-1 – I can’t see this being a draw – but if we got 140 on the board I would fancy our chances. Scoreboard pressure counts for a lot.” On the missed chances, for which Jos Buttler was twice the guilty party at third slip including Bravo on 20, Broad said: “It’s somewhere we have got to improve. It’s been a running theme for a few years. “It’s not for lack of training but to become the best team in the world you have to take your chances.” Broad was frustrated to be left out of the first Test in Barbados, an error only highlighted by his threat here in Antigua. Asked if he felt he had a point to prove, the 32-year-old replied: “I don’t think so. Everyone in the set-up knows how nicely I’ve been bowling in the nets. “I got three wickets today but in all honesty I could have walked away with a hatful. I don’t mean that to sound arrogant but I felt that threatening as a bowler.”