If Cher is the gloriously unbothered reigning queen of Twitter, then Frank Ocean is Instagram’s new nonchalant king. After opening up his private account in November – a Pandora’s box of homoerotic art, shirtless selfies and Steve-O with a firework up his bum – he marked his coronation in a beaming selfie, crowned with a silk headscarf to rival the flamboyant headwear of Grey Gardens’ Little Edie. In just two months, 1.3 million of us have smashed Follow on @blonded. The intrigue is understandable. Information is scarce: when it comes to personal topics, Ocean weaves Easter eggs about his private life throughout his lyrics. “Image is so important,” he told the New York Times in 2013. “That’s why you’ve got to practise brevity when you do interviews like this.” That philosophy has been a guiding light for his elliptical chats with journalists. That is, when he speaks to them at all. Ocean’s 2017 i-D cover story, for instance, comprised a “personal letter”. @blonded A post shared by  Frank Ocean (@itsfrankocean) on Nov 15, 2018 at 6:27pm PST While Ocean settled in to being an enigma, his Tumblr, as well as housing Ocean’s poetic 2012 note about his sexuality, is often fertile ground for potentially personal details. Such as 2013’s “MY TV IS 160 INCHES. PORN IS AWKWARD,” perhaps offering some explanation as to why Ocean’s “TV ain’t HD, that’s too real,” as he noted on Sweet Life. You’re welcome, Genius. Flinging open his digital doors seems designed to further skewer the myth of Ocean as an introvert. He recently told US GQ that he made his Instagram public because “there was dissonance between how I was seen by the audience and where I was actually”. But with Ocean’s mask slipping, it is worth wondering how audience perceptions towards him might shift. From the off, Ocean felt like a pre-social-media artist, with a privacy that forced listeners to focus on the intricacies of his music rather than the life of the man behind it, adding to his enigma and giving rise to one of music’s most dedicated fanbases. But if the hope was to quash elaborate theories, he might need a rethink; while his playful posts stanning Zendaya, and ones posed with rollers in his hair, feel innocuous, they are still ripe for fan over-analysis. Could the whole thing be a tease for a new album? In 2016, a video of Ocean building a staircase heralded the one-two punch of his Endless and Blonde masterpieces. And while there are not many Instagram clues as to his new direction, his recent GQ interview did feature an ode to night moisturiser. “I need the night cream because when I wake up I feel very beautiful,” he mused. So that’s that confirmed: expect an album of dewy, early morning soothers alongside a free Goop voucher.