Shamima Begum has said she is “willing to change”, as she issued a plea to the UK government for “mercy” after the home secretary moved to strip her of her British nationality. The British-born 19-year-old, who travelled from east London to Syria to join Islamic State in 2015, wants to return from Syria because her newborn son is unwell, and she does not wish to allow him to return to the UK alone. However, her family are exploring legal and practical options to bring her baby to London while she undergoes what could be a long drawn-out appeal against the removal of her British citizenship. In response to whether she had anything to say to politicians in Westminster, Begum told Sky News: “I would like them to re-evaluate my case with a bit more mercy in their heart, you know.” Asked if she can change or be rehabilitated, she replied: “I am willing to change.” She added that she was “struggling to get my supplies in right now”, referring to an apparent lack of resources in the northern Syrian camp that has been her home since she fled the embattled enclave where Isis is making its final stand. “I don’t have a card because they lost my card, so I have to run around to take care of my son now, when I am sick. I am not getting my stuff.” Begum’s family has written directly to Sajid Javid, asking the home secretary to help bring her newborn son to Britain. The letter, written by Begum’s oldest sister, Renu, also said the family would help her to challenge the decision to strip Begum of her British citizenship. “Neither myself or any of my family have had any contact with Shamima,” it said. “We have discovered from media reports, along with the rest of the country, that she gave birth to a baby boy. “We were pleased to learn from your comments in the Commons that you recognise my nephew, Shamima’s son, as a British citizen. “As a family, we ask now how we can assist you in bringing my nephew home to us. In all of this debacle, he is the one true innocent and should not lose the privilege of being raised in the safety of this country.” The letter said her family were “shocked and appalled at the vile comments” Begum had made in recent days, which they noted were not representative of British values. The teenager has been in the “thrall” of a “murderous and misogynistic cult” for four years now, and “her exploitation at their hands has fundamentally damaged her”, the letter continued. “We hope you understand our position in this respect and why we must, therefore, assist Shamima in challenging your decision to take away the one thing that is her only hope at rehabilitation, her British citizenship.” On Friday, the Tory MP Phillip Lee, a former minister, criticised Javid’s “populist” decision to strip Begum of her citizenship, saying it deeply concerned him. Meanwhile, the Muslim Council of Britain has warned Javid’s move heightens fears of a two-tiered citizenship scheme, setting a dangerous precedent and demonstrating an “abdication of responsibility”, and the government’s chief adviser on countering extremism warned radical Islamists could exploit the unease caused by the decision.Asked about the situation on ITV’s Peston show, Javid said: “I’m not going to talk about an individual, but I can be clear on the point that I would not take a decision – and I believe none of my predecessors ever have taken a decision – that at the point the decision is taken would leave that individual stateless.” Begum is of Bangladeshi heritage, but the south Asian former British colony has insisted she will not be allowed to enter the country.