Now popular on Netflix: female victims. There is You, in which Gossip Girl heart-throb Penn Badgley plays a stalker and murderer; Dirty John, an adaptation of the popular true-crime podcast about an abusive relationship; The Innocent Man, based on John Grisham’s only non-fiction book, about a small-town rape and murder; the second season of Making a Murderer; and the Netflix-commissioned Conversations With a Killer: The Ted Bundy Tapes. Its quota of Bundy content apparently not yet met for the 30th anniversary of the serial killer’s execution (as 2019 has been morbidly described), the streaming giant has also acquired the rights to the crime drama Extremely Wicked, Shockingly Evil and Vile, starring Zac Efron, for a cool $9m (£7m). All are proving hugely popular, showing that when it comes to choosing from thousands of films and television shows, many will opt for one in which a woman is killed, raped, abused or manipulated (and, judging by some responses to Badgley and Efron on social media, even publicly thirst after the hot perpetrators). It speaks to the grim persistence of the so-called “dead girl trope”, established by Law & Order and other police procedural dramas and more recently given a highbrow makeover for the golden age of television in True Detective, Top of the Lake and any number of Scandi-noir series. As the US essayist Alice Bolin writes in her 2018 debut collection, Dead Girls: Essays on Surviving an American Obsession: “Crime stories are ubiquitous in our culture not only for their transgressive lure, but for their power to reinforce social order” – in this case, that women are most comprehensible as victims, in danger from men. Linda Ong, the chief culture officer at Civic Entertainment Group, which advises the TV industry on consumer sensibilities, attributed the popularity of crime programming in part  “to the shifting view of women in society”, holding Dirty John up as an example. “Viewers with more traditional tastes like to see men and women in traditional gender roles. They’re used to seeing women portrayed as victims.” And Netflix is fuelling it, choosing – of the limitless creative possibilities afforded by its enormous wealth – not only to create such shows, but to acquire them as well. You was picked up from the Lifetime entertainment channel; Dirty John – which was criticised in a Time review for failing “women whose lives have been affected by predatory men” – from Bravo. Similarly, the multimillion-dollar acquisition of Extremely Wicked, Shockingly Evil and Vile is likely to have been informed by controversy over the film’s depiction of Bundy as charming and attractive. “Smart money says audiences will take [a] chance on it to judge for themselves,” was the website Cinemablend’s analysis. Many positive noises are made about Netflix’s apparently progressive offerings – such as the almost gratingly sex-positive teen comedy Sex Education, and its casting of Asian-American and plus-size romantic leads in To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before and Dumplin’ – but its enthusiastic investment in films and series predicated on women’s suffering shows that there are limits to how much the acclaim is justified. Rather than a force for marginalised voices or diversity in entertainment, Netflix’s data-driven method is to invest in what gets watched – and although it seems there has never been greater appetite for women’s stories, the algorithm shows that there is still, grimly, plenty of interest in those in which they come off worst.