This is the saddest of days for the Labour party and everyone who needs us. For years we’ve been locked in an angry tug of war, and this is where it’s brought us. And at a time when poverty, homelessness, mental ill health and crumbling public services have pushed thousands to breaking point. People have never needed us more. For 126 years our strength has been in the diversity of a movement that inspires fierce debate across the grassroots and the highest levels. Our breadth gives us reach into very different communities and the ability to hear what they are telling us. At times we have fallen short, but, at our best, we inspire people to debate, argue and participate. Even through the Iraq war years we were home to politicians as diverse as Jeremy Corbyn and Tony Blair. Dissenting politicians have found ways to stand by Labour values even in such fraught times. The MPs who left today have different motives and beliefs. Some never accepted the current leader, others served in his shadow cabinet. But a response to this that seeks to attack and condemn speaks of an unwillingness to listen, learn or compromise. We are in danger of becoming incapable of accommodating alternative points of view. Growing intolerance has spread like a cancer across the political spectrum, but its existence in the Labour party is a genuine threat to our survival. Our members join the party to fight for a more compassionate, equal and tolerant country. How do we convince the public we can create that country if we don’t live, fight for and uphold those values ourselves? There is strength in humility, generosity and compassion. As the Brexit deadline looms and we face a looming national crisis, we will not be forgiven for spending more time looking inwards. The blame game that has erupted is a hopeless dead end for us and for the country. We have to do better. • Lisa Nandy is Labour MP for Wigan A rushed press conference, a lineup that surprised no one, and a name and branding exercise that promises not to bother so much as the third page of Google. Splits have been mooted since the very advent of Corbynism, especially since the second leadership election put paid to the idea that the route back to rule for Continuity Blairities was via the membership. The general election in 2017 returned a far greater turnout for Labour than MPs like Chris Leslie and Chuka Umunna had mooted, and seemed to temporarily quell attempts to restart a leadership contest. But as Monday’s press conference shows, the philosophical tussle remains at the heart of the party, but it is less concerned with what the future of Labour should be than how politics itself should function. Labour has always been a broad church: it held John McDonnell, Jeremy Corbyn and many other socialist members of the Labour Representation Committee within its ranks while voting for war in Iraq, and letting private finance initiatives overtake hospitals. Those tensions have always bubbled up: these seven MPs are now discovering how it feels to be sidelined and consigned to the backbench. Their decision to start their own splinter group is a refusal to accept that role. They won’t see any more decision-making ability – that’s not the aim – but they hope to grab as many headlines as possible. In breaking away, they accept the fact that doing so jeopardises a potential Labour government: numbers are tight, regardless, and pulling a handful of MPs away is designed to either block a Labour government, and lead to decades of Conservative rule, or secure a confidence-and-supply deal akin to that enjoyed by the Democratic Unionist party, and greater influence as a result. Real, transformative social change in the first-past-the-post system requires a majority government. The breakaway seven today have publicly made clear they are willing to see a continuation of deliberate poverty, benefit sanctions, the cruelty of universal credit, and economic mismanagement, rather than accept politics has changed and the terms in which they entered parliament have altered. If Coffey, Smith, Gapes et al had the courage of their convictions and were truly honest about their aims, they would stand for their seats in by-elections: winning would send a clear message to Corbyn and McDonnell that they have their constituents’ backing. But they will not: this is a vanity exercise, and the most high-profile example of political toys being thrown from the pram yet. Many MPs will be watching this spectacle and staunchly steering clear. • Dawn Foster is a Guardian columnist Politics is broken, we all know that. We are completely stuck. The two-party system strangles any innovation at birth. It has calcified in the last few years into total crisis. Representative democracy is not working in any meaningful way. We sit agog as deals are done, bungs offered and amendments made. Both main parties are in hock to their extremists and to unelected advisors, from Lynton Crosby to Seumas Milne. Those who can watch a heavily pregnant Jewish woman saying that she has been bullied out of the Labour party, that this party is institutionally racist, and think nothing of it – all while she is being abused right now on social media – need to take a long, hard look themselves. Don’t bleat on about the moral integrity of some future socialism when this is what’s happening now. Antisemitism and the leadership’s position on Russia and Venezuela are not uppermost on the doorstep. Not even Brexit is. It’s housing, jobs and hospitals – all of which are good reason to want a Labour government. But at what price? Sometimes you have to ask who your fellow travellers are, and what they are asking you to go along with. We can all spout on about ending neoliberalism. It’s harder to understand how Labour might end the barrage of abuse its women and Jewish MPs face. The viciousness of attacks on anyone who doesn’t worship Corbyn, this continued cry of “centrist” as a meaningless insult, the personal attacks on this gang of seven: all that is but babble to the average voter. The repeated comparison to the SDP seems meaningless. That was a long time ago and we are in a vastly different era. Blame will now be apportioned – whether the idea is to set up a new party, join with rogue Tories, or not. The point is to be true to oneself. Right now, many MPs cannot say they are. They are huddling together like penguins in the frozen Antarctic hoping for the weather to change. They are inert, powerless and unhappy. It may be old-fashioned to want our politicians to stick to their beliefs, but then I am old-fashioned. If people standing up for what they believe is now seen as sad and disloyal, as both a power grab and a damp squib, then Labour needs to look at itself. A broken system cannot be fixed by those who keep their heads down. I saw that some hard and necessary truth was spoken on Monday, and if that can’t be tolerated, or even listened to, that tells us all we need to know. • Suzanne Moore is a Guardian columnist I have been disenfranchised. My Labour MP, Chuka Umunna, who represents the Streatham constituency, and whom I and 38,000 others voted for less than two years ago, has quit the party and set up in centrist alliance with six others. That 38,000 figure is itself 12,000 greater than in 2015: and those extra voters can be attributed directly to the Corbyn effect – the impact of the Labour leader Umunna has always opposed, yet who galvanised support and won an extra 3.5m votes across the country within two years of taking office. Umunna talked of intolerance within the party, bringing up his own his Irish-Nigerian heritage. Yet it’s Corbyn who has brought minorities into his frontbench in unprecedented numbers – the New Labour years by contrast were conspicuous by their whiteness. (Ironically, though the party was far more institutionally racist in those days, Umunna, who’s so quick to attack Corbyn on this, barely raised a murmur against Blair, Brown or Miliband). And Corbyn, who has always embraced multicultural Britain, won massive support among black and Asian voters in 2017, including many in Streatham. Umunna is entitled to leave the party: it’s become clearer over time that his views are increasingly out of step with modern voters – his cosying up to the wealthy, and his non-opposition to austerity were not in line with the direction Labour’s leadership was taking. I’d rather Umunna stayed in the party; even better, I’d rather he realised how out of touch he’s become and start to represent his constituents and party members better. But if he leaves Labour he has a duty to stand down as MP and let constituents decide whether they want his kind of politics to represent us. It’s ironic that, when asked about whether the MPs should step down, rebel Chris Leslie said we don’t need more elections right now: this from the man who’s spent the last two years campaigning for a second referendum. If these seven really believe in what they’re saying, and all they say about democracy, they should let voters decide. Why won’t they? Because, despite all they claim about Corbyn’s unelectability, they know that he’s far more in touch with voters than they are: and that, in an election, there’d only be one winner. • Joseph Harker is the Guardian’s deputy opinion editor. No one could watch the seven MPs departing Labour on Monday morning, and doubt it was an agonising decision for any of them. Together, they launched a damning indictment of Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour party and the contemporary political system. While there was much criticism of the left ideology of the current leadership, that hasn’t in truth changed much in recent years. Two things will have pushed them over the edge. First, the Labour party’s failure to adequately deal with complaints of antisemitism within its own ranks. In a powerful and brave statement, a pregnant Luciana Berger, who has faced months of disgusting abuse and deselection threats from her own party, stated that the party is “institutionally antisemitic” and that she has become embarrassed and ashamed to be part of it. Second, Corbyn’s failure to take a more anti-Brexit stance, and back a second referendum, given the impact Brexit will have in widening gaps between the least and most prosperous parts of the country. While those loyal to Corbyn are already painting this as a cynical move by a small group of MPs facing deselection threats, it was clearly a matter of conscience. It’s a huge problem for Jeremy Corbyn that under his leadership, the Labour party is an insufficiently broad church to accommodate these MPs. And who would have thought 10 years ago a group of MPs would be departing a party rightly proud of its anti-racist history, accusing it of institutional racism? It should prompt much reflection from Corbyn and his allies. In today’s uncertain political climate, this small group of independents may well pick up a few MPs from the Tory ranks and have a greater impact on Brexit and British politics than one might expect from their numbers in the coming months. But the truth is that under our first-past-the-post electoral system, their medium-term electoral fortunes look less than bright. At least if they lose at the next election, they will depart British politics knowing that they had the courage to speak out for what they believe is right. • Sonia Sodha is deputy opinion editor at the Guardian It’s rare for the Tories to have a good news day in the current climate but Monday morning’s announcement appears to be just that. The news of seven resignations in protest against Jeremy Corbyn’s position on antisemitism and Labour’s Brexit position has been greeted in the Conservative party with cautious optimism. The hope is that the MPs’ new outfit – the Independent Group – could play a pivotal role in stopping Corbyn from coming to power. With these MPs expected to stand as independents at the next election, it could split the Labour vote and help the Tories in key marginal seats. One of the reasons Labour did so well in the 2017 snap election was that the party became a repository for anti-Tory votes. If even a small percentage of those votes now go to the Independent Group, it could give the Tories a crucial boost. It’s of particular cheer to Conservative brains that one of the splitters, Chris Leslie, used his speech at the press conference to strike a pro-EU tone and criticise Labour’s “betrayal of Europe”. This is because the Conservative party now relies so heavily on leave voters that a party that appeals to remain is seen as little threat to their vote share. But that’s not to say it’s without risk for May’s Tories. Senior government figures believe that, where the Labour moderates have gone, Tory remainers could now follow. MPs on the watchlist include Sarah Wollaston, Heidi Allen and Anna Soubry. The fact that a number of Conservative MPs are currently facing deselection threats of their own over their remain position could act as a trigger to other MPs choosing to leave. But so long as the Conservatives can keep any losses to a small handful of MPs then the creation of the Independent Group will be seen as a win for the Tories. • Katy Balls is the Spectator’s deputy political editor