Brendan Rodgers will be named the new Leicester City manager. The 46-year-old is expected to be appointed within the next 24 hours after Celtic reluctantly gave him permission to talk to Leicester. It is understood talks are at an advanced stage and that a deal in principle has been agreed between all parties, paving the way for Rodgers to take charge of his first game as Leicester manager at Watford on Sunday. Leicester had identified Rodgers as their number-one target to replace Claude Puel several months ago but there were doubts as to whether the Northern Irishman could be persuaded to leave Celtic in the middle of the season, especially given the Scottish champions are on course to win a third successive domestic treble.  Rodgers' first job as manager comes at then-Championship Watford, following coaching stints at Reading and Chelsea, where he worked as a youth coach for four years. Rodgers returns to Reading as manager, with the club paying Watford compensation to sign him – but his tenure lasts just six months and he departs with the club in relegation trouble. The Northern Irishman's next job proves his breakthrough, as Rodgers leads Swansea to the Premier League, winning the play-offs in his first season. Their success continues in the top flight as they finish 11th in the 2011-12 season. Rodgers replaces Kenny Dalglish at Liverpool, leading them to seventh in his first season before a dramatic title charge in 2013-14 with an attacking side led by Luis Suárez. Liverpool ultimately finish second behind Manchester City, but can only come sixth the following year after Suárez departs. After a slow start to the 2015-16 campaign, Rodgers is sacked with Jürgen Klopp replacing him. After seven months out of football, Rodgers returns at Celtic and achieves total dominance in Scotland. Celtic have won seven trophies in his short tenure, and are on the verge of a treble-treble with the 46-year-old set to join Leicester. However, Puel’s dismissal on Sunday, after a 4-1 home defeat against Crystal Palace the night before, has forced the issue. With the best part of three months of the season remaining, Leicester were eager to make a permanent appointment straight away and prepared to pay a compensation figure of £5m for Rodgers, who has previously managed in the Premier League with Liverpool and Swansea. Although there was still an expectation that Rodgers would complete the season with Celtic, Leicester refused to be discouraged and made it clear that they wanted to fill the vacancy immediately. Chris Davies, Rodgers’s assistant at Celtic, and Kolo Touré, another member of the club’s backroom staff, will also move to the King Power Stadium. Rodgers is viewed by Leicester as the perfect manager to develop a talented group of younger players and to implement a clear playing philosophy – something Puel failed to do. Although Leicester are 12th in the table, there is a feeling the squad is capable of far more and that Rodgers, with his ability to coach as well as manage, is the person to do this. From Celtic’s point of view, the timing is far from ideal and leaves them with sizable shoes to fill – Rodgers won seven domestic trophies in the space of 32 months with the club – at a critical juncture of the season. It appears likely Celtic will now turn to Neil Lennon, who left Hibernian at the end of January, as a short-term option.