Wolves had just secured the three points with their third goal when a black cat ambled on to the pitch at Goodison Park. A bad and fitting omen for someone from Portugal, although Marco Silva cannot blame misfortune for Everton’s latest miserable defeat. He and his team are listing dangerously. Everton, bereft of leadership, endeavour and a coherent gameplan yet again, were comfortably beaten for the sixth time in nine Premier League games as the malaise around them deepened. The spotlight will inevitably fall on a manager who appears powerless to react to the slump or galvanise his team but questions also need asking of players who are strolling through the motions at Goodison. Nuno Espírito Santo sparks the opposite reaction from his team, who cruised to a third consecutive league win thanks to a Rúben Neves penalty, a Raul Jiménez header and Leander Dendoncker’s volley. The game opened ominously for Silva with a penalty conceded clumsily and Wolves operating with a pace, purpose and threat that his team struggled to match all afternoon. Nuno’s visitors were disciplined in defence, sharp in midfield and moved dangerously in attack. Everton were careless, predictable and anonymous by comparison. Idrissa Gana Gueye was again absent as a consequence, according to his manager, of a minor groin injury and not the denial of a dream move to Paris Saint-Germain on transfer deadline day. Leighton Baines was available having been forced out of Tuesday’s victory at Huddersfield with a rib injury but, while welcome in the absence of the suspended Lucas Digne, his return through the pain barrier went unrewarded. Baines received a heavy knock from João Moutinho in the first minute and was then responsible for the visitors’ early lead from the penalty spot. Matt Doherty powered his way past the 34-year-old into the area before being sent sprawling when the left-back caught the back of his legs. A clear penalty, and Neves side-footed it into the bottom left corner as Jordan Pickford dived to his right. The reaction of the hosts was passive at best and Wolves wasted several opportunities to double their advantage. A simple ball over the top from Conor Coady was sufficient to catch the Everton defence square and send Diogo Jota clean through on goal. A loose first touch enabled Pickford to collect and spare his defenders punishment. For a while at least. Dendoncker also had an excellent chance for a second when, after Tom Davies lost possession from a Séamus Coleman throw-in, Jimenez found the midfielder racing into the area. Pickford again intervened with a low save from Dendoncker’s drive. In an otherwise anonymous return to the starting lineup Theo Walcott forced Rui Patrício into his first save of the game from a Gylfi Sigurdsson through-ball. Wolves remained the superior team, however, and it was therefore a surprise when André Gomes brought Everton level with his first goal for the club. A fine finish it was too, the midfielder starting and ending a move that involved Davies, Coleman and collecting a lay-off from Cenk Tosun before driving an unstoppable shot into Patrício’s top corner from 18 yards. Everton were roused, only to re-gift Wolves the lead moments before the break with yet another example of weak, disorganised and ill-disciplined defending. The lightweight Michael Keane created the problem with a needless foul on Jota off the ball. From the resulting free-kick, swept towards the penalty spot by Moutinho, Coleman and his teammates stood and admired Jiménez as he followed the flight of the ball alone and planted a textbook header into the bottom corner. It was the fifth set-piece goal that Silva’s side had conceded in a week. Ademola Lookman replaced Walcott as the Everton manager sought inspiration on the hour, only to find confirmation of why trust in the young winger remains scare. Within minutes of his arrival Lookman lost possession in midfield and failed to track back as Jota broke clear on the left. Coleman and Kurt Zouma combined to block the striker’s shot but the rebound fell perfectly for Dendoncker to volley his first Wolves’ goal high into Pickford’s net. Enter the cat.