For some, seeds might conjure images of bird feeders. But hear me out. Seeds are a powerhouse in my kitchen, adding depth to morning smoothies, richness to soups and even forming the base of creamy dressings. And they’re often cheaper than nuts: my staples are sunflower, pumpkin, sesame and poppy. I buy them in bulk bags, use some to make a seed butter (quickly roasted then blitzed - sometimes mixed with some nuts too - for a spread worthy of toast); I roast them with maple syrup, chilli and rosemary for these snacking seeds, perfect for sprinkling on salads, roast roots or simply for eating by the handful. But today’s seeded swede and onion bhajis have been my most recent success, dipped into a lip-smacking, creamy, sunflower seed raita. These are a great snack, but if you want to make a meal of them, wrap a couple in a chapati with lashings of the sunflower raita, some crunchy salad leaves and cucumber. The basic raita recipe (before adding the cucumber and mint) can be used like yoghurt in lots of recipes and dressings. Prep 20 minCook 15 minMakes 12 bhajis For the raita125g toasted sunflower seeds1 thumb-sized knob ginger, peeled and chopped½ garlic clove, roughly chopped30ml sunflower or light olive oilSalt and black pepper½ cucumber, gratedExtra-virgin olive oil, to serveMint leaves, to serve For the bhajis1 tsp nigella seeds2 tsp toasted sunflower seeds1 tsp toasted sesame seeds125g gram flourJuice ½ lemon½ tsp turmeric1 tbsp garam masala1 tsp salt1 large onion, coarsely grated½ swede, coarsely grated1 thumb-sized knob ginger, peeled and gratedSunflower oil, for frying To make the sunflower seed raita, blitz the sunflower seeds with the ginger and garlic until finely ground. Pour in the oil and blitz again, then add 300ml water to emulsify: you want the colour to lighten and for the consistency to be like that of thick Greek yoghurt. Add more water to loosen further, if necessary. Season well, then stir in the grated cucumber. In a large bowl, mix all the bhaji ingredients apart from the vegetables, ginger and frying oil. Add the veg and ginger to the bowl and briefly mix together with your hands. Pour 1cm of sunflower oil into a wide frying pan and heat it to 180C/350F – measure the temperature with a digital thermometer, if you have one; otherwise, the oil is ready when it turns a small piece of bread golden in 30 seconds. Form golf balls with the batter and drop them gently into the oil; you may have to fry in batches, so check the temperature of the oil each time. Cook for about two minutes on each side, until dark golden, turning with two forks, then lift the bhajis out of the pan and drain on kitchen towel. Drizzle a little olive oil on the raita and sprinkle with the mint leaves. Scatter coriander over the bhajis and serve while they’re still warm (although they’re good cold, too). These are thoroughly addictive, and work well as a quick flavour boost to salads, wraps and sandwiches, or to top soups and stews. Prep 5 minCook 15 minMakes about 400g 200g pumpkin seeds100g sunflower seeds2 tbsp linseeds3 tbsp white sesame seeds 2 tbsp maple syrup½ tsp flaked sea salt1 sprig fresh rosemary1 tsp chilli flakes, or to taste Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Put all the ingredients in a bowl, toss, then loosely scatter on a baking sheet so that some bits are clumped together. Bake for 10 minutes, until golden and sticky, then remove and leave to cool, before spooning into jars for snacking. These will keep for up to three days (if you can make them last that long...)