Kepa Arrizabalaga: 4 Enraged Maurizio Sarri with disrespectful refusal to be replaced before conceding four of City’s five penalties. Cesar Azpilicueta: 7 The Spaniard was excellent. Forced Sterling to move to the right flank to find more joy. David Luiz: 6 A leader in central defence, clearing a succession of crosses. Booked for a cynical foul. Antonio Rüdiger: 7 A rugged display from the German, although he was booked for a crude tackle. Emerson Palmieri: 7 Preferred to Marcos Alonso, he kept the left flank secure. Limited opportunities to attack. Jorginho: 6 Fortunate to escape a red card after elbow on Agüero. Showed rare battle in his deep role. N’Golo Kanté: 7 At his energetic best off the ball. Unfortunate not to score in the second half. Ross Barkley: 5 Helped maintain shape in midfield and threatened with a bending effort in the second half. Pedro: 5 Buzzed encouragingly when he had a chance to dribble but his end-product was disappointing. Eden Hazard: 7 Grew into his false No 9 role. Wonderful dribble almost created a goal for Kanté. Willian: 6 There was no faulting the Brazilian’s workrate. He protected Emerson. Lacked options in possession. Subs Callum Hudson-Odoi (for Pedro, 79) 6; Ruben Loftus-Cheek (for Barkley, 89) 6; Gonzalo Higuaín (for Willian, 95) 6 Ederson: 7 The Brazilian had nothing to do until the penalty shootout. Saved well from Jorginho. Kyle Walker: 6 Pressed high to force Chelsea back, but his crosses rarely found their target. Sound defensively. Nicolás Otamendi: 5 Dozed off and almost scored a comical own-goal. Looked exposed when Hazard ran at him. Aymeric Laporte: 4 Passed sloppily and let in Hazard and Kante for chances before being replaced by Vincent Kompany. Oleksandr Zinchenko: 6 Stopped Kanté breaking clear after Laporte’s slip but struggled to offer an attacking threat. Fernandinho: 6 Careless control led to the Brazilian receiving a booking for fouling Barkley. Went off injured. Bernardo Silva: 6 Hinted at menace when he cut on to his left foot, but the killer final pass eluded him. Kevin De Bruyne: 5 Booting two passes out for a throw summed up City’s frustration. Deserved to be substituted. David Silva: 5 The Spaniard has gone off the boil in recent weeks. Substituted after another quiet game. Raheem Sterling: 7 Brilliant late dribble caused panic and he nailed the winning penalty in emphatic style. Sergio Agüero: 6 Goal disallowed and almost scored an extra-time winner, but selfishly ignored Sterling at the end. Subs Vincent Kompany (for Laporte, h-t) 6; Ilkay Gündogan (for David Silva, 79) 6; Leroy Sané (for Kevin De Bruyne, 86) 6; (Danilo for Fernandinho, 91) 6.