Michael Cohen, longtime lawyer and aide to Donald Trump, is set to deliver explosive testimony to Congress this week and could detail how Trump broke the law while in office, according to US media reports. Cohen, who once said he would “take a bullet” for Trump but has since turned against his former boss, arrived on Capitol Hill on Tuesday to begin three days of congressional appearances. The session on Tuesday was held behind closed doors, as the session on Thursday will be too. But the public will hear from Cohen on Wednesday, when he testifies before the House oversight and reform committee. Over the course of the hearings, NBC News said Cohen plans to “provide evidence of alleged criminal conduct by Trump since he became president”, while the New York Times reported Cohen “will use documents and his personal experiences to support his statements”. He will be testifying under penalty of perjury, but will probably be met with skepticism from Republicans who will seek to draw attention to a track record of dishonesty. The White House sought to discredit Cohen on Tuesday before the hearings began. The White House spokeswoman, Sarah Sanders, issued a statement saying he was “going to prison for lying to Congress and making other false statements”. Sanders said it was “laughable that anyone would take a convicted liar like Cohen at his word, and pathetic to see him given yet another opportunity to spread his lies”. Lanny Davis, Cohen’s lawyer, told the Times that Cohen’s response to questions about his credibility will be: “I take full responsibility, I lied in the past; now you have to decide if I’m telling the truth.” Cohen was sentenced to 36 months in prison in December for crimes including lying to Congress about Trump’s business dealings with Russia, and facilitating illegal payments. Cohen is set to surrender on 6 May to begin his sentence, as ordered by a federal judge. In his guilty plea, Cohen said: “I made these misstatements to be consistent with Individual 1’s political messaging and out of loyalty to Individual 1.” Individual 1 was a reference to Trump. According to the New York Times, Cohen is expected to discuss what he says he knows of contacts between Trump and Russia, and lay out details on hush payments – which Cohen says were directed by Trump – made to two women, porn actor Stormy Daniels and former Playboy model Karen McDougal, during Trump’s 2016 campaign. Cohen also plans to tell US lawmakers that Trump asked him several times about a proposed skyscraper project in Moscow long after he secured the Republican presidential nomination, according to reports. Cohen’s assertion that Trump was inquiring about the project as late as June 2016, if true, would show Trump remained personally interested in a business venture in Russia well into his candidacy. On 29 November, Cohen pleaded guilty to lying to Congress by telling lawmakers in 2017 that all efforts relating to the Moscow project had ceased by January 2016. In fact, Cohen said, those efforts continued until June 2016. Trump has repeatedly denied any collusion took place between his campaign and Moscow. Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this article