Looking at a plane this enormous, it felt a miracle that it could fly. And not only fly but soar so quietly, especially compared with the Boeing 747 it was designed to supersede and outclass. Passengers love it. But among the airline buyers, the A380 never completely took off. The announcement from Airbus that the final curtain will come down on the A380’s pan-European production line comes after years of speculation that the superjumbo was doomed. Orders had dried up in a risk-averse airline industry, whose economics and route networks were altered just at the wrong moment for the A380. Airbus had nosed ahead of the pack in producing a plane built with lighter materials, much more fuel-efficient, and potentially offering big savings and profits on routes where airlines could guarantee to load hundreds of passengers on every flight. However, even as the first A380 entered service in 2007, the orders were piling up for a different plane still in the pipeline from rival Boeing: the 787 Dreamliner, which could fly a similar range on only two engines, carrying a more viable number of passengers, making more routes possible. The hub and spokes model of aviation – where airlines competed for space at crowded intercontinental airports with connecting passengers, and the bigger the long-haul plane the better – was evolving. The need for Airbus’s expensive double-decker – wings so wide that airport stands and equipment had to be remodelled to accommodate it – was fading. The aircraft were being reduced from great birds of the sky to mere organ donors in a decade The doubts escalated into a downward spiral when few customers were willing to take a punt on planning for a plane whose future was in question. Only one airline, Emirates, appeared fully behind it, placing giant orders that were single-handedly sustaining the programme. British Airways talked up the plane’s virtues but talked down the price. Qantas, stung by teething problems as an early adopter, stalled on an order made in 2006 and finally axed it only last week. Even Air France cut back on the plane assembled in Toulouse. The most haunting sign was news that two of the first A380s, still in their infancy in aircraft years, were parked in the Pyrenees and being stripped for parts. The aircraft were being reduced from great birds of the sky to mere organ donors in a decade – but it was a more economical solution for their owner than trying to lease them to unwilling airlines. When Emirates finally decided enough was enough, seeking to convert its order to newer, smaller models, it was game over. Few can blame Airbus for wanting to cling on and push this incredible plane, whose virtues are unquestioned. But the world it was built for has not panned out as Airbus hoped. 