David de Gea Untroubled in early stages and then came into his own, saving United from being totally out of tie. 8 Ashley Young One menacing cross caused “oohs” around Old Trafford; had to concede booking to stop Mbappé. 6 Eric Bailly Preferred to Phil Jones because of Mbappé’s pace but could not stop No 7 from scoring. 4 Victor Lindelöf While not the only defender to struggle with Mbappé’s jet heels he failed to stop PSG’s second. 4 Luke Shaw Was bypassed when Mbappé’s pace took him clear and did not offer an option going forward. 4 Ander Herrera Looked to organise United’s press and was always energetic but found Verratti too hard to contain. 6 Nemanja Matic Struggled with Pogba and Herrera to shape pattern of contest and at fault for Kimpembe’s strike. 4 Paul Pogba Swept past Kimpembe once and snuffed out an Mbappé foray but frustrated and was sent off. 3 Jesse Lingard Looked to burst along the right but missed a chance to release Martial before injury forced him off. 6 Anthony Martial Struggled to become involved and though he tried to play on after a knock he had to be substituted. 5 Marcus Rashford Trickery led to Kimpembe booking and caused fear in PSG rearguard but had scant service. 6 Subs Alexis Sánchez (for Lingard, 45) 4, Juan Mata (for Martial, ht) 6, Romelu Lukaku (for Rashford, 84) n/a Gianluigi Buffon Three misplaced passes showed nervousness and though made save from Rashford, garlanded No 1 was a weak link United should have exploited. 5 Thilo Kehrer Played due to Thomas Meunier’s injury and was lucky Martial flitted in and out along his flank before going off. 6 Thiago Silva PSG’s most assured defender, calming his team when required, one fine header clearing a dangerous Young cross. 6 Presnel Kimpembe Early yellow card for Rashford foul, he struggled with speed of match before his goal. 7 Juan Bernat Struggled to control Lingard;deservedly booked for clattering Young, though physical element made PSG steelier. 6 Marco Verratti Italy midfielder pulled strings, broke up play and was one of the pick of the visiting players. 8 Marquinhos Chopped down Lingard and wWas shaky: United should regret not targeting Brazilian centre-back more before return leg. 6 Dani Alves Sent tame free-kick over bar and set Mbappé up for a chance after the break. 7 Julian Draxler Hacked down Herrera for needless yellow and the German was never a true threat. 6 Ángel Di María Was pacy, shot wide, and the former United man was booed in possession, but set up both goals. 8 Kylian Mbappé Initially peripheral then three lightning runs tore through defence, a header went close, before he scored. A menace who might have had a hat-trick. 9 Subs Paredes (for Verratti, 75) 6; Dagba (for Di María, 81) 6