The name artichoke, from Al-Kharshuf, indicates an Arab origin, but Italians developed the varieties that migrated across Europe to England, where 17th-century writer and gardener John Evelyn called them noble thistles. If you are used to the boil-them-whole, admire, tug-leaf-by-leaf, scape-with-bottom-teeth school of artichoke preparation and eating, it comes as a shock when you first see Romans deal, in typically direct style, with their favourite vegetable. First there is the breaking-away of the tougher fleshy petals, or bracts, with a crack not unlike that of a book spine. Following that is a circular whittle with a small knife that cuts off the tougher top of the petals and reduces the artichoke to about half its original size, more pine cone than thistle, more skinhead than elegant still-life. The stem, too, is trimmed, its dark, thick ribs pared away as kids do the bark from sticks, until it is as pale as celery heart and just as tender. Drastic it may be, especially when done to the cricket ball-sized carciofo romanesco or cimarolo, but there is good reason. When you pare in this way – Romans say “capare” – all the inedible parts are trimmed away. There is no need for ciancichi e sputi – chew and spit – because everything left is edible. While they don’t look quite as handsome as a whole boiled artichoke on a plate, its pointy petals waiting to sup up vinaigrette, trimmed ones have their own charm when cooked. Especially when the way of cooking is alla Romana, the head stuffed with mint and garlic, then braised, stems upward, until fusty olive-green and tender enough to be eaten with a spoon. Or alla giudia, Jewish style, fried whole until they resemble a bronze sunflower frazzle you can eat crisp by crisp until you meet the prize: a perforated, velvet heart that tastes all at once like a mushroom, a truffle and something strangely sweet. Roman style and Jewish style: two reasons to visit Rome in early spring, when every market, supermarket, corner shop and corner van is loaded with crates of violet blue-stained carciofi, and every trattoria – good and not so good – boasts of artichokes cooked four ways. As with a first attempt at a crew-cut, first attempts at trimming artichokes are usually at best lopsided and a bit manky, at worst a thistle massacre, in the face of which you continue cutting in the hope that it shapes up, until you realise you have a sink of trimmings and little more than a stump in your hand. What’s more, despite your best attempts to rub with lemon, the exposed flesh discolours as you work, oxidising and turning a dirty brown; and your fingers, too. Which is why this recipe is ideal: they are going to be cut up anyway and braised into a soft, olive-green cream to go with pasta. Cooking artichokes like this, in a steamy braise that works for most vegetables, gives them velvet-like tenderness and deep flavour. Serve with more pecorino and – if you want – another artichoke, trimmed, sliced thin, then fried to a crisp in olive oil. Serves 44 large artichokes1 lemon1 onion, peeled and sliced6 tbsp olive oil, plus more for frying the garnish1 clove garlic, peeled and finely dicedSaltWhite wineBlack pepper400g pasta – casarecce, fusilli or penne50g pecorino, grated Trim the artichokes by pulling the tougher outer leaves downwards and snapping them off just below the base. Then, using a sharp knife, pare away the tough green flesh from the base of the artichoke and stem. As you work, rub the artichoke with lemon. Cut three of the artichokes into eight wedges, then sit the wedges and the remaining whole one in a bowl of water with some lemon juice squeezed in. Bring a large pan of water to a boil for the pasta. In a large, deep frying or saucepan with a lid, fry the onion in the olive oil until soft and translucent. Add the garlic, stir, then add the drained artichoke wedges, a pinch of salt and stir until all the wedges glisten. Add a glass of white wine, cover the pan and cook, covered, over a low flame for 30 minutes, or until the artichokes are tender. If the pan looks dry, add a little more wine or water. Remove half the artichokes from the pan, blend to a cream, then return to the pan. Add salt, if needed, and add few grinds of black pepper. Slice the remaining artichoke into thin slices and fry in olive oil until deep gold and crisp. Lift out with slotted spoon and blot on kitchen towel. Add salt to the boiling water, stir, then add the pasta and cook until al dente. Once the pasta is cooked, drain, saving some of the cooking water. Tip the pasta into the artichoke cream pan, add half the pecorino, a slosh of pasta cooking water and toss everything together. Divide between bowls and top each portion with the remaining pecorino and a scattering of fried artichoke.