England had a plan B against Wales – the problem was it stayed on the bench. Owen Farrell is one of the best fly-halves in the world, if not the best, but everyone has off days and he just did not seem to have a feel for the game. We did not see adaptability from England – if one thing is not working, then try something else – and George Ford could have made all the difference. Do not get me wrong, England have a very strong game-plan. It is based around kicking, it suits the way they play, it suits their strong defence, set piece and power, everyone buys into it and it is their way of winning Six Nations matches. I understand exactly what they are trying to do but you need an ability to say, ‘You know what, our kicking hasn’t been on point’ – it is not going to be 100% of the time – and you look to what else you have in the bag. With 15-20 minutes to go it was time to bring Ford on and try something different to unlock the Wales defence. Wales were very good defensively, very well organised by Jonathan Davies in the wide channels and as a result we did not see space opening up out there as we did against France and a little bit against Ireland. Manu Tuilagi had one brilliant run but England needed more of it, Henry Slade was very strong defensively but not involved in the game and the back three were spectators to what was going on inside. When I say that Farrell did not have a feel for the game, he just seemed a bit too wedded to the kicking strategy. On the few occasions that England made dents with their powerful runners, when they did get on top, that was when Farrell needed to keep playing. You have a look to see where it goes, maybe it forces a penalty, maybe it leads to another linebreak but what we saw too often was another kick and it was obviously not working. That led to frustration, the penalty count started to creep up and that was when Ford needed to be introduced. He has a bit more of an attacking mind-set and England would have benefited from that change of direction, just as Wales did when Dan Biggar came on. England did not play particularly badly. It was a game of fine margins. But there was room to play a bit more when they got in behind. Instead they backed their kicking game, which worked perfectly in the first two matches but will never be perfect every time. Rugby just is not like that and even the All Blacks have to adapt if things are not going to plan. You do that by having different options on the bench and trusting them. With Ford on the pitch, England could have moved the point of attack, which would have brought Slade into proceedings. Davies and Hadleigh Parkes defended very well but, when there are 60-70 minutes on the clock, force them to make more tackles on the outside – not just after four or five phases but 10 or 12. Wales clearly targeted Farrell and starved him of space but, if Ford comes on, Farrell shifts to 12 and you then have two playmakers on and he has that little bit more time on the ball. That takes a bit of pressure off Farrell and allows Ford to control the attacking side of things. Farrell still leads as he does but from a different role. The thing with Ford is that you know he is going to move the ball. You still have Slade on the pitch, Elliot Daly, Farrell and Ben Youngs so you have plenty of kicking options as well as a more attacking mind-set, late in the game when there are a few soft shoulders and you tend to get over the gainline a little bit more. Keep playing, move the point of attack, move the Wales forwards around because they are going to be tired after a hell of a shift. Farrell is a world-class player but there is an expectation that these guys should be performing to their very best every single week. The game is so emotional at Test level and it takes a huge toll. England had that incredible performance in Ireland, then followed it up against France. Then you have a week off and it can often come at the wrong time. You are on such a high, then you all take a breath and then you have to come back up all over again. As Alun Wyn Jones said afterwards, Wales do not want this fallow week. They are on a roll, 12 wins in a row, and they want to keep those emotional levels high. Warren Gatland said it – Wales have forgotten how to lose and that is a great characteristic to have. They are like junkyard dogs, they scrap and fight for everything, Shaun Edwards has the defence very organised, they knew England were going to kick and they prepared for it. They exited on their terms, they won the aerial battle and they looked after the ball so much better than they did against France and Italy. They are the favourites now, the team to beat but that expectation brings a whole new set of pressures, from within and externally.