Charles Leclerc, who is making his debut for Ferrari this year, has said he would like to present the team with the “problem” of challenging his teammate Sebastian Vettel from the off. The Monaco-born driver, 21, is in his second season in F1 and has still yet to win a race but is optimistic he can take the fight to the four-time champion. Mattia Binotto, the team’s principal, has said Vettel would be given priority as their best chance to win the title for more than a decade. But on the final day of testing in Barcelona, during which the Ferrari looked quick and reliable, Leclerc was confident he may change the team’s pecking order as early as the first grand prix in Australia on 17 March. “I can’t hide that I’m pushing to be as ready as possible for the first race,” he said. “If Mattia has the problem to manage two quick drivers, then it’s a good sign for me.” Leclerc was quickest on day two of testing and stressed how comfortable he felt in the car. “I got used to it very quickly,” he said. “I already feel quite at ease. The feeling is very good. It’s a car that is quite easy to drive.” The former world champion Jenson Button has already said that Vettel could come under pressure from Leclerc and that Ferrari are likely to work well with the young driver. Valtteri Bottas echoed the opinion of his Mercedes teammate Lewis Hamilton that Ferrari had built an exceptional car. “Ferrari do seem very strong,” he said. “No matter which kind of fuel load or engine mode they’re running. We try to correct for that, but in any case they are quick. On short runs and long runs. I think we feel at this point they’re a bit ahead.” For Robert Kubica, making his full return to F1 since the accident that brought his career to a halt in 2011, the failure of Williams to bring a car until the third day made his first run a bittersweet affair. “This year we have one main problem – we didn’t have a car,” he said. “I have to try to prepare as much as I can with what I have. If you have no car it’s difficult to prepare. We are not facing an easy period because Australia is next door, but that’s the reality.”