Donald Trump has told a rally in Florida “a new day is coming in Latin America” as he again warned president Nicolás Maduro that he sought a peaceful transition of power “but all options are open”. The US president, sought support from the largest Venezuelan community in the US for opposition leader Juan Guaidó, appealed directly to Venezuela’s armed forces, saying: “We want to restore Venezuelan democracy and we believe the Venezuelan military and its leadership have a vital role to play in the process.” “Today, I ask every member of the Maduro regime: end this nightmare of poverty, hunger, and death for your people. Let your people go. Set your country free,” Trump told the crowd at Florida International University in Miami. Maduro responded with televised comments in which he accused Trump of speaking in an “almost Nazi style” and thinking he could deliver orders to Venezuela’s military. “Who is the commander of the armed forces, Donald Trump from Miami?” Maduro said. “They think they’re the owners of the country.” Critics of Maduro say his re-election last year was fraudulent. The US and other countries recognise Guaidó as the country’s rightful leader. Throughout his presidency, Trump has reportedly asked advisers if US military intervention is possible. I ask every member of the Maduro regime: End this nightmare of poverty, hunger and death. LET YOUR PEOPLE GO. Set your country free! Now is the time for all Venezuelan Patriots to act together, as one united people. Nothing could be better for the future of Venezuela! Greeted by repeated chants of “USA! USA!”, Trump saluted the “determination of millions of everyday Venezuelans, the patriotism of the national assembly and the incredible courage of interim president Juan Guaidó. The people of Venezuela are standing for freedom and democracy and America is right by their side.” Trump praised Venezuelan dissidents, kissing and bringing to the lectern for brief remarks in Spanish the mother of Oscar Pérez, a rebel helicopter pilot who was killed near Caracas last year after dropping grenades on government buildings. “I don’t know what she said but I think I know what she said,” Trump said, vowing the woman’s son “will not have died in vain”. South Florida is home to more than 100,000 Venezuelans and Venezuelan Americans, the largest concentration in the country. The Venezuelan military has blocked the US from moving tons of humanitarian aid airlifted in recent days to the Colombian border. The shipments have been meant in part to dramatize hyperinflation and shortages of food and medicine. “We must work together to end a humanitarian disaster,” Trump said in Miami. “Unfortunately, Dictator Maduro has blocked this lifesaving aid from entering the country,” he said, claiming the leader was happy to see his people starve. Among a number of mentions of Cuba, the socialist country with which the Obama administration moved to normalise relations, Trump claimed the Venezuelan armed forces were “risking their future, their lives and Venezuela’s future for [Maduro], a man controlled by the Cuban military and protected by a private army of Cuban soldiers”. “Maduro is not a Venezuelan patriot,” Trump said. “He is a Cuban puppet, that’s what he is.” “The eyes of the entire world,” he said, were on the Maduro regime “today, and every day in the future. You cannot hide from the choice that no confronts you.” An offer of amnesty from Guaidó could be accepted by Maduro’s supporters, Trump said, as “President Guaidó does not seek retribution against you and neither do we”. But he added: “You can choose to continue to support Maduro. If you choose this path you will find no safe harbour, no easy exit and no way out. You will lose everything.” In his condemnation of “the horrors of socialism and communism”, which he said had produced “a nightmare of poverty, hunger and death”, Trump was also looking to draw a contrast with the policies of progressive Democrats, which he calls “socialist” as he gears up for the 2020 election. “Years of socialist rule have brought this once thriving nation to the brink of ruin,” he said, saying the Venezuelan government had suppressed the press, ruined the economy and destroyed the rule of law. “The results have been catastrophic,” he said, adding: “The twilight of socialism has arrived in our hemisphere and frankly in many other places in the world.” He said socialism was doomed in Nicaragua and Cuba as well. Trump has been spending the holiday weekend at his private club in West Palm Beach, Florida, playing golf each day at his own course.