“I am a fashion designer,” says 28-year-old Londoner Grace Wales Bonner, “doing an art show, which could be seen as … ” She looks away as she searches for the right word. It’s approaching midday and we’re sitting in Chucs, the cafe and restaurant housed in the Zaha Hadid-designed extension to the Serpentine Sackler Gallery in London, having walked around her new exhibition. The fine-featured artist is wearing Céline earrings and a white shirt from her Wales Bonner line, with colourful, crocheted cuffs that, she says, resemble stuff her gran would have in the house. “ … Silly,” she finally says. Silly? For some in the fashion business, silliness is their raison d’etre. Not Wales Bonner, though. For the past four years she has created the kind of beautifully layered, finely cut, deeply referential clothing that’s so beautiful it has ended up in a few of the best shops in the world, and so brainy that it comes with its own reading list. Now, she has repurposed that aesthetic sense and sensibility into a smart, weighty, fine-art gallery exhibition. There’s no room for silliness. In fact, Wales Bonner appears to regard silliness in pretty much the same way that Superman regards kryptonite. On graduating from Central Saint Martins in 2014, this brilliant designer won the L’Oréal Professionnel Talent award. In 2015 she picked up emerging menswear designer at the British fashion awards. The following year it was the LVMH young designer prize, and in 2018 she won the British Land London emerging design medal. Her label, Wales Bonner, is stocked at high-profile stores such as Dover Street Market and Selfridges, she has lectured at Parsons School of Design in New York, been profiled in GQ, the Gentlewoman and Vogue and had her garments displayed at the Victoria & Albert Museum. In the fashion world, you could liken her to Richard Malone, another young Central Saint Martins graduate with an equally innovative approach to the medium; yet it’s probably better to compare her with her friends, such as the American fine artist Arthur Jafa, or the British recording artist Sampha. In the Serpentine Sackler Gallery there isn’t a piece that you’d expect to see in the pages of a glossy magazine. Instead, it has videos, photography, music, books, sculpture and live performances. There are a couple of works by Wales Bonner herself but most of it is by artists she admires. The show is excellent; it has an international, spiritual, mystic feel – there are quite a few works that resemble shrines – and it draws its title, A Time for New Dreams, from a 2011 collection of essays by the Nigerian poet, novelist and Man Booker prize winner Ben Okri. Wales Bonner asked Okri to write a series of texts for the gallery’s walls, and she was very relieved when he said yes: “It’s given me a real confidence, that such important people have trusted me.” Okri’s consent might have surprised her, but it probably didn’t come as a shock to those around her. She’s remarkably focused and determined. “When I was at secondary school, I wasn’t sure if I wanted to be a historian or an artist,” she says. That school was in Tooting, south London; Wales Bonner lived with her mum in Dulwich, and visited her dad in Stockwell. “I spent a lot of time on the bus,” she remembers. “Which meant I saw a lot of different styles of clothing.” Those bus rides weren’t spent daydreaming. “I remember going past Streatham, and we’d stop at a mosque and we’d see people getting on and off with trainers, sportswear and traditional dress,” she remembers. “I would travel through these different mixes of people and that had quite a deep influence on my ideas about style.” Wales Bonner’s mum is white and from England and her dad is Jamaican. She recalls spending time with her Jamaican relatives and browsing through her dad’s collection of books. “He was into all sorts of things,” she says, “Romanticism, Dylan Thomas, stuff like that.” She didn’t really think about her own racial identity until she went to secondary school. “People would say I was black, and black people would say I was white,” she explains. “It wasn’t something that held me back but it was definitely interesting. I had to negotiate an identity.” This is, in part, why she’s so keen on art and history. “I started getting very interested in photography, finding archival material,” she says. “It was about seeing reflections of yourself; knowledge isn’t given to you, you’ve got to spend time creating threads for yourself.” The post-colonial British period was her main interest, though she doesn’t get too heavy. “It was more like stories,” she says. “Histories are just stories and what I do connects to storytelling.” She applied to Central Saint Martins almost on a whim, and found that clothes design was an unusually good fit. “Saint Martins opened me up to fashion,” Wales Bonner says. “I’m big into creating history and research, and fashion is one outcome. What I do in fashion could be considered in a wider context; it could be opened up to expose my thought processes.” Wales Bonner says the Serpentine show draws together the kind of material she would usually pull together – albeit in a less formal way – when making a collection of clothes. In the past, these collections have been inspired by the court dress of Haile Selassie, emperor of Ethiopia; the ballrooms of early 20th-century Harlem; and jazz mystic Alice Coltrane’s Californian ashram years. Her forthcoming haute couture collection, Mumbo Jumbo, which will be shown in the gallery at the end of the show’s run during London fashion week, takes its name from another book, this time a 1972 novel by the US novelist Ishmael Reed. There’s a video of Reed in the exhibition, and Wales Bonner says the black, intellectual dress sense of Reed and others, such as the US artist David Hammons and New Yorker writer Hilton Als, shaped her new collection. “When someone has a strong presence you know what their vibe is, and you see that in intellectuals,” she explains. “They’re serious people. There’s conviction, and continuity over time. There’s tailoring but it’s integrated with something a bit more intimate. There’s something about the way they use clothes, the way they put things together, that no one else would think of.” “I was creating this idea in my mind of the shamanic artist who collects things,” she says. “He will go to a market and pick out a particular scarf, or wear something more feminine. They’re super comfortable with themselves, they gather together things and they’re quite nomadic. There’s a delicacy and intimacy, wearing these things that are quite magical.” Does that mysticism extend to Wales Bonner herself? Could she ever see herself being a shaman? “Er, yeah, I don’t … ” she laughs briefly, breaking an otherwise clear and precise series of responses; she seems both slightly annoyed and amused by the question. Although Wales Bonner now designs for both men and women, she first made her name with menswear, and is glad to be designing for guys at a time when the rules around male dress are a bit less rigid. “I got into menswear at an exciting time,” she says. “My work is about male representation and there is a fluidity, boundaries are opening up. I think people are communicating sensuality and femininity on more of a spectrum. That’s much more in the cultural consciousness and it allows things to be understood in a different way.” Some topics, at least in terms of today’s interview, are off the table. She’d prefer not to talk about racial bias in the fashion business – “I’m not that interested in answering that” – and also demurs on the topic of the Sackler family, the Serpentine Sackler Gallery benefactors whose pharmaceutical company, Purdue Pharma, produces Oxycontin, the pill at the heart of America’s opioid crisis: “I’d prefer not to comment,” she says. Yet on other subjects Wales Bonner is quite open. She hopes the show will expose her work to a much wider audience, and doesn’t want to put off casual, Saturday afternoon gallery goers. “Sometimes these spaces can be intimidating,” she admits. “I hope people feel welcome. I leave behind a bibliography with everything I do, which is there if people want to explore more.” Some artworks take a bit of unpacking but others, such as the performances from Laraaji, a cult African-American musician who plays Eno-style ambience using zithers, thumb pianos and effects pedals, are simply transcendent. Wales Bonner says she hopes inclusions like this will turn the gallery into a chilled, meditative space. “I want people to think they can slow down in the space and reflect,” she says. That’s an odd proposal for older contemporary art gallery-goers, who are used to knotty, highbrow shows. However, A Time for New Dreams opened the same week as new figures from UK charity the Art Fund showed that people under 30 are twice as likely to visit a museum or gallery at least once a month to “de-stress”. Perhaps this mystic, ritualistic show is just what they need. Hans-Ulrich Obrist, artistic director of the Serpentine Galleries, who commissioned the show, says: “[Russian director Andrei] Tarkovsky said back in the 1980s that we have a lack of ritual in our lives. We need to reintroduce rituals; I think that is something we really need to do. And dreams, too. Ben Okri says that some books can be dream books; we need dreams again, also.” Both Wales Bonner and Obrist are fans of Okri, who has combined aspects of Nigerian history with west African folkloric traditions and magical realism to reach a wide readership. Okri’s Booker prize winner, The Famished Road, was the first novel Obrist read when he arrived in London in the mid-1990s. Wales Bonner was equally taken with A Time for New Dreams, which hit her hard when she came across it in 2011. “I was so excited,” she says. “It was such a proposition for our times.” Her favourite bit in the book is about Pablo Picasso’s use of African masks. For many other writers, Picasso’s use of African art in his own paintings and sculptures was an inspired, though slightly troubling, case of cultural appropriation. However, in A Time for New Dreams, Okri flips this. “He retells the story, and has the masks take control of Picasso, to bring him their genius,” says Wales Bonner, smiling. “It’s their intention; they possess him. That was so radical, that made me think in a completely different way.” Perhaps that is the sort of magic we could all use today. Grace Wales Bonner: A Time for New Dreams is at the Serpentine Sackler Gallery, W2, to 16 February