New allegations of sexual misconduct have been made in Israel against Malka Leifer, a former headteacher wanted on dozens of charges of child sexual abuse in Australia. Leifer left Israel in 2000 to run an ultra-Orthodox Jewish girls’ school in Melbourne but returned in 2008 after students raised allegations. The Israeli-Australian citizen is in jail awaiting the outcome of an extradition trial, and denies the allegations. On Tuesday, Israel’s public broadcaster, Kan, said it had spoken to a woman who claimed she was abused as a child by Leifer before the teacher moved to Australia. “She would kind of cling to me,” the unidentified woman said in an audio recording. “One day she invited me to her house, but I have a blackout. I remember that I escaped to my house. I do not remember what happened, I’ve been trying to forget those years. “She was crazy about me; all the time she stroked me. She used to sit with me for private conversations, all the time stroking my leg, up and down on my skirt.” Kan said there were other similar testimonies from Leifer’s time in Israel. Jewish Community Watch, an advocacy group to combat child sexual abuse, said in an email that it was aware of “other alleged Israeli victims” but could not provide more details. The Guardian has not been able to independently verify the testimony. The alleged abuse took place while Leifer was working at a seminary on the outskirts of Tel Aviv almost two decades ago, meaning the statute of limitations to prosecute her has expired. Yehuda Fried, who represents Leifer, said the court is solely focused on the question of extradition and not other allegations. “We reject all attempts from interested parties to influence the court with erroneous publications,” he said in a statement. He refused to comment on the substance of the latest allegation. Dassi Erlich, who has accused Leifer of abusing her in Melbourne and has campaigned for her extradition, said she was “encouraged and heartened by the bravery” of the new accusers. “Each new voice that rises above the fear of remaining silent is so valuable and important in helping to change the world into a better place,” she said. The Israeli case has been beset by delays and suggestions of foul play. Last year, the state prosecution said Leifer had faked mental illness to avoid house arrest. She was subsequently re-arrested. Israel’s deputy health minister, Ya’acov Litzman, who leads an ultra-Orthodox party, was accused this month of obstructing the extradition case. Israeli media have since reported he allegedly pressured doctors to falsify psychiatric evaluations that would deem Leifer unfit to face trial. Litzman’s office has denied any wrongdoing.