The father of one of the choirboys sexually assaulted by Cardinal George Pell has said he will sue Pell and the church after the death of his son following an accidental overdose. Pell has been convicted of sexually abusing two boys in 1996 and 1997, when they were 13 and members of the St Patrick’s Cathedral choir. Pell, who was the archbishop of Melbourne at the time, was convicted on the evidence of one of the victims, now 35. The man, who cannot be named, released a statement on Tuesday saying he had experienced “shame, loneliness, depression and struggle” as a result of the abuse. “At some point we realise that we trusted someone we should have feared and we fear those genuine relationships that we should trust.” Lawyers representing the father of the other victim said the guilty conviction had compelled him to speak out. He believes his son suffered post-traumatic stress disorder because he had been abused. The son died of a heroin overdose in 2014, aged 31. He never spoke to his parents about being abused. But his father now believes that was the reason his son turned to drugs. The legal firm Shine is representing the father. Shine’’s national special counsel for social justice, Leanne McDonald, said the father hoped to bring a civil claim against the church, and possibly against Pell personally. “It is very common for survivors of sexual abuse to turn to drugs as a way to black out the abuse,” McDonald told Guardian Australia. “It is so terrifying for them to come forward. One of the good things that has come out of this conviction today is that it shows people that it doesn’t matter how high up or important you are, you can be held to account. Survivors are seeing through today’s news and things like the royal commission that they will be believed and will be listened to. “The more we start talking about this, the safer kids will be.” A statement issued by Shine’s head of specialist personal injury, Lisa Flynn, said the father “will allege that Pell has blood on his hands”. Pell has maintained his innocence of all the charges and his lawyers have lodged an appeal against his conviction. A sentencing hearing will be held in Melbourne on Wednesday.