It’s not uncommon in theatre to see an actor dying on stage. But how often do we get to choose who that actor is? That’s the premise of A Wake in Progress, an interactive play in which performers throw a “dress rehearsal” wake for a dying character, and the audience decide the roles and what the dress rehearsal will look like. “On the face of it, it’s about a young person who has a terminal illness,” says playwright Joel Samuels, who spent a year creating the show with The Lab Collective. “But the actors don’t know [beforehand] if they’re playing the person who has the terminal illness, their partner, their sibling, their mate, or the celebrant.” It’s proof that this is something we all need to talk about, and will all experience. Death is the one unifying factor Samuels wrote the play as a response to his mother’s death eight years ago. “I realised that with people of a certain age, the words aren’t there,” he says. “We struggle in this country. Other cultures seem to have amazing ways to mourn together. I wanted to do something that pushed us to ask, what is grief? Do we share it? How does it manifest before people die? And how can it manifest after?” The interactive nature of the play, which is at this year’s Vault festival in London, was crucial to answering these questions. “We’re gently challenging people to put themselves in the middle of the narrative,” he says, adding: “It’s one thing to be able to go and see a play that deals with these huge themes, sit back, clap at the end, and go, ‘What an interesting play.’ It’s another thing to find that a little part of your life is now part of that character’s life. It’s a way of being unable to escape the very stark proof that this is something we all need to talk about, and will all experience. Death is the one unifying factor that crosses every creed, class, everything.” Liz Bacon, the play’s director, says: “My dad died about two years ago, so how we bring people together to speak about grief has been on my mind.” Grief can be an isolating experience, says Bacon, and the play is about creating “a conversation that is not about getting it ‘right’, it’s just about talking about it.” Several other shows at the Vault festival confront death, thanks to a collaboration with Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Trust. Digging Deep explores male suicide rates and the politics of high funeral costs; I Run is a solo performance about a grieving father who runs through his pain; Miss Fortunate is a female-focused show “about sex and death”. Elsewhere, recent plays such as Natasha Gordon’s Nine Night have looked at the mourning process, the toll of grief and the rituals of laying the dead to rest. This month, at the Bush in London, Nine Night director Roy Alexander Weise stages The Trick, by Eve Leigh, about a widow coming to terms with her loss. When exploring such sensitive topics, duty of care towards an audience is perhaps necessary for every theatre-maker. But what about the wellbeing of the performers themselves? Jack Rooke staged his show Happy Hour, about a close friend’s suicide, at the Edinburgh festival in 2017. He tells me he had mixed feelings about this rise of shows looking at death. “It’s positive, because death is such a difficult topic to have conversations about, and shows can provide a very personal but anonymous experience for audiences to feel some sort of catharsis and support. But it’s negative when it is exploited. It’s such a vulnerable thing for a performer to articulate.” Rooke’s mental health suffered badly after Happy Hour’s Edinburgh run. “I was so ill and exhausted by mid-November that I cancelled the show and had a week of being severely mentally unwell. [I was] calling the mental health trusts and crying on the phone, begging them to help me.” The irony of this, after performing a show about mental health services and the devastating effect of their cuts, is not lost on him. Now Rooke is about to perform a show at London’s Roundhouse called Love Letters that is categorically not about grief. “This new show is about reminding myself that grief is a huge part of my identity – it’s shaped me more than anything else – but it isn’t my whole identity. I want to tell jokes and entertain people, and if it helps them then great.” For Samuels, incorporating humour into A Wake in Progress was crucial. “It’s a fun show, funny and very human. If there is one way we want to see death on stage from a British perspective – whatever the hell that means – it’s the awkwardness, the stillness and that stuff is just fun to watch. I’ve been calling this a big, soppy hug of a show. We don’t run away from the sentiment. It’s full of love, because that’s what death should feel like.” A Wake in Progress is at the Vault festival, London, 6-10 February.