The reign of Queen Anne, like most of the 18th century, used to be ignored – a dull period in between the Glorious Revolution and the Napoleonic war. Now, suddenly, thanks to Yorgos Lanthimos’s startling film The Favourite and Olivia Colman’s portrayal of the capricious, rabbit-loving, lesbian queen, she is everywhere. Her latest incarnation is as a spendthrift. A report from the archives of Blenheim Palace – home of Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough, the eponymous royal “favourite” until she was displaced in the queen’s affections by her cousin Abigail Masham – suggests that Anne’s personal expenditure between 1708 and 1711 amounted to £12m in today’s money. Large sums were spent on drinking chocolate – a luxury at the time – and much has been made of the fee of £10 and 15 shillings (worth about £2,250 today) handed over to someone described as a “mad Spaniard”. On the surface, this does not look good for Queen Anne. But is £3m a year really so extravagant for a monarch? “What royals spend is always lavish compared with what average people spend,” says Ophelia Field, author of the 2002 biography of Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough (the book is also called The Favourite). “There was a bigger difference then between the queen and the average person, but Queen Anne certainly doesn’t have a reputation for extravagance. If anything, Sarah [as keeper of the privy purse] was criticised for not dressing her lavishly enough. There were people who thought her management of the queen’s personal accounts was too tight.” So, who should get the title of Britain’s most extravagant monarch? Field points out that James I and Charles II spent liberally. George IV topped a poll conducted by English Heritage in 2008 to find “Britain’s worst monarch”. “His lazy, spendthrift nature and unpleasantness to his wife, Queen Caroline, seems to have won him the accolade,” said the historian Andrew Roberts. Henry VIII was even more extravagant, obsessed with expensive ceremonials, banquets and pricey (or bloody) divorces. The early 13th-century monarch King John also has strong claims in a crowded field. He was so profligate that he was unable to pay his mercenary army, and was forced to increase taxes, thus annoying his barons and setting off the chain of events that led to Magna Carta. Royal extravagance as the driver of history – Queen Anne’s taste for lobster racing can’t compete with that.