I’m sitting in the front seat of the car, next to my father, turning into the school gate in time for assembly: him on his way to work, me to school. It’s the 1990s. No, hang on – it’s 2019. Up the drive we go, towards the front office. In the car I feel a sudden constriction in my throat, something about the scene is bending my mind. It’s like time has collapsed, a giant sinkhole where decades disappear, swallowed up into the Earth. Dad drops me at the end of the drive. There is the convent. There is the music room. There is my year 7 classroom. And there is the big old tree we sat under when it was hot. Dad asks me to call him when I am done and he’ll pick me up. And just like that, leaving me at the school gates, an entire adulthood vanishes. * Late last year, an invitation arrived from my old school. Would I speak at the first school assembly about my anti-death penalty activism? Yes, sure, I replied. And I didn’t think much more about it, until the day before when I boarded a flight from Sydney to Melbourne, then a train from Melbourne to Warrnambool, and arrived a little dazed, into the past. In the office foyer nothing much has changed. There was the stained glass window. There was the porcelain statue of Mary, in blue and cream robes, finger crooked near her face as if she’s just remembered something she needs to say. There was a side table with an orchid. There were kids lining up at the office, the rush before assembly starts; notes and money and bags crumbled up in their fists. Same uniform. Same backpacks. The sensation to look for my friends in their number was strong. But I was out of time, in all senses of the word. No specific memories were conjured but small, vivid details jumped out, that gave me that vertiginous, dream-like feeling In the office I was met by an alumni person for a quick tour. The tour was strange – like being in a waking dream, where everything is familiar but slightly displaced, the way it so often is in dreams. The alumni person said she was used to it. The 1,000-yard stares that old collegians had, the strange things that made them stop in their tracks, a fleeting haunted look that passed across their no-longer-young faces. Different things triggered it: the sight of their old locker. The smell of something burning from the home ec room. On my tour, no specific memories were conjured but small, vivid details jumped out, that gave me that vertiginous, dream-like feeling. There was the silver slot where I returned library books, there was the undercroft and the canteen – and on that dry summer’s day I could hear rain from decades ago, hitting the tin roof hard and smell the way the wool of our jumpers, and the old sweat on them, radiated on wet days. The canteen was empty and shuttered but there I was, being served a fat yellow vanilla slice that trembled as I carried it to the patch of garden where I went with my friends at recess. Girls in green dresses, sitting in green grass. Day after day after day after day. The feeling of it came flooding back. It was a feeling of being trapped, hostage to the timetable. Of recess being too short. Lunch being too long. And now, walking past a classroom, the door hanging open, my eyes were drawn to the window, as they had been for all those years. It seems all of school was waiting for something. But what? There were several additions to the school I didn’t recognise, including a barre studio. I was shown a new theatre where there had been once been the much-hated gym. It was 2019 and I didn’t see the plush cinema seats, I just saw the ghost of a battered horse I couldn’t vault over. All the skinned knees, bruised shins, drab house colours (I was brown house), and the stolen moments of the sweet relief of lying on the high jump mat, starfished. I was standing there before the bell went, staring at things long gone. Once or twice I came across a teacher who had taught me. What were they doing here? Surely they had died? After all, they were old then. I couldn’t bring myself to call them by their first names, and around them I felt a shyness that I hadn’t experienced since the first day of school. One teacher, who had purchased my much-adored childhood home said I could go back there, and see it, if I had time. The dream state could be extended, I just had to say the word. Yet I didn’t like the dream state. It was unsettling and I had the sensation of erasing everything that occurred in the intervening decades. It had thrown me back to my teenage years as swiftly as if I had been shot through a cannon. But suddenly I was jolted back into the present. At the new library the alumni person was showing me what could only be described as a “Wall of Brigid”. It was massive. There were photos of me pulled from the internet, blown up and laminated. Spanning the years 2009 to 2019 – my active years as a published author – there were pictures of me signing books, reading books, sitting in front of books, French translations of my books. There was a row of bright yellow Wellmania covers, appropriately in the shape of a cross. Library staff came out with copies of my novel Wild Things to sign. “This book is not suitable for children!” I said. “There is an anal rape scene. And Wellmania is also not suitable, it contains drug use.” The vertigo had disappeared, some sort of grounding had occurred. The wall and the books were part of the sum of my adult years. That time had not disappeared. It had mattered. I had done things. But something magic and strange had happened back there on the tour, things that may happen only once or twice in your life. An extended sensation of being dropped back in the past and the feeling that all that existed between the moments was gone, or didn’t matter or never occurred in the first place. It felt like time was a letter, the paper ends folded – touching. The end kisses the corners of the start. Brigid Delaney is a Guardian Australia columnist.