From falafels to mischievous sloths, dozens of new emojis will bring greater diversity to messaging applications this year, as the organisation behind the symbols responds to a number of campaigns. The introduction of image-based characters such as hearing aids, wheelchairs, prosthetic limbs and guide dogs will help redress the underrepresentation of disabled people on the emoji keyboard, while there will also be a wider range of mixed-gender and ethnicity couples for users to choose from. Disability rights campaigners welcomed the new accessibility-themed icons. “Love them or hate them – emojis have become part of our everyday digital lives,” said Phil Talbot, the head of communications at disability equality charity Scope. “Social media is hugely influential and it’s great to see these new disability-inclusive emojis. Up to now disability has been greatly underrepresented.” Following a campaign by a girls’ rights charity to introduce a period-themed emoji, a new ‘drop of blood’ icon is also being introduced. “The inclusion of an emoji which can express what 800 million women around the world are experiencing every month is a huge step towards normalising periods and smashing the stigma which surrounds them,” said Lucy Russell, the head of girls’ rights and youth at Plan International UK. “An emoji isn’t going to solve this, but it can help change the conversation. Ending the shame around periods begins with talking about it.”Spanning a number of other items that were previously omitted, the 59 newly approved images are expected to be released in the second half of 2019. The perceived ambiguity of one of the new emojis sparked a debate on social media. It is believed that a pinching hand gesture reported to indicate a person’s penis size could be useful for rebuffing “unsolicited dick pics”. Yawning faces, raccoons, a pot containing the South American drink maté, and waffles were among other new emojis that are potentially less open to interpretation. Last year, the highly anticipated addition of emojis depicting cartoon people with ginger hair dominated the headlines, following the annual series of additions from the Unicode Consortium, the body which maintains and regulates the library of characters.