Manu Tuilagi said his reported move to Paris to join Racing 92 is not yet a done deal and his future will not be finalised until the Six Nations is over. The centre remains torn between staying at Leicester or opting for a fresh start in France and described it as “the toughest decision” of his career. Should Tuilagi agree lucrative terms to join Racing he would be ineligible to represent England beyond this autumn’s World Cup, having only recently reclaimed his international starting place after a string of injuries. “It will be the toughest decision I’ve had to make,” he said, speaking in Oxford, where England are in camp. “It’s a massive decision and I have to make the right one for me and my family. There is a lot on the line for everyone.” Reports last week suggested Tuilagi , 27, was bound for Paris but even in defeat last Saturday’s Test against Wales in Cardiff was a reminder of how much he relishes playing for England. “It’s a lot to consider. I’m back with England and I loved playing at Cardiff, even though we lost. I love playing at the Tigers too. I need to take some time after this campaign, put everything on the table and make the right decision.” So far Eddie Jones, the England coach, has made no concerted attempt to influence Tuilagi’s decision, other than to make jokes about the player eating baguettes and croissants. “We’ve not really spoken about it … there’s nothing to be spoken about because I haven’t made a decision,” said Tuilagi, insisting reports he had already signed were premature. “When I saw that [piece saying he had signed] I didn’t know what to say really. I haven’t made a decision yet, so everyone [in the squad] is cool about it.” This week’s retirement of Mathew Tait, his Leicester clubmate who also suffered a catalogue of injuries, however, has reinforced just how precarious top-level rugby careers can be. “You see a lot of players retiring through injury and yesterday it was a good mate of mine, Mathew Tait. I never would have thought he’d be gone that early [aged 33]. Now all of a sudden he’s retired. I have to take all that stuff into consideration and do the right thing.” One potential compromise might be to go to France for two seasons and then, in a perfect world, return for one last tilt at a World Cup before the next tournament in France in 2023. Chris Ashton and James Haskell have already proved it is possible for England players to have their gâteau and eat it, and Racing’s offer exceeds anything Leicester can afford. As things stand Tuilagi seems genuinely in two minds. “I haven’t thought too far ahead. At the moment I’m still committed to Tigers and England and all my focus is here and on trying to finish [the Six Nations] on a high.” England will on Thursday crank up their preparations for the game against Italy at Twickenham on 9 March with a full-on training session against Georgia, whose coach, Milton Haig, says his players will be up for the challenge. “This is a big occasion for our guys,” Haig said. “We will all suit up and there will be some contact, not stupid stuff, but it will be refereed properly and we can challenge for the ball.” Last year Georgia caused England’s forwards significant scrummaging problems in a session in London and Haig reckons that will not have been forgotten. “There is a bit of edge this year and you can understand why. When two sides have a mindset that they don’t want to give an inch or millimetre, you usually get a bit of tension.” England are hopeful the lock Maro Itoje (knee) and wing Jonny May (concussion) will be fit enough to be considered against Italy. Jones’s side can still win the title should Wales slip up over the final two games and the defence coach, John Mitchell, believes the Cardiff result may yet prove a blessing in disguise. “Wales have done us a huge favour in many ways, because they have made us acutely aware of what we must fix,” he said. “We need to do that as quickly as possible. There’s not a lot you really need to tweak because we have a particular way we believe in but, clearly, our strategy will improve because of the Cardiff game.”