Will Smith would like you to take a minute, just sit right there, to ready yourself for the arrival of Destiny, a young black girl who moves to West Philadelphia and whose adventures are detailed in the forthcoming picture book: The Fresh Princess. Based on The Fresh Prince television series, which starred Smith and ran for six years starting in 1990, The Fresh Princess will be the first in a picture book series about Destiny, “a cool, energetic, and strong-willed young girl who approaches every day with her own signature style”. Like Smith’s TV character, she “moves to a brand-new neighbourhood, where nothing looks quite the same as it did at her old house”, but “even with new challenges and new friends to make, Destiny always has a plan”, said publisher HarperCollins. Inspired by Smith and illustrated by Gladys Jose, the series is being written by author Denene Millner, who said Destiny was “our new little star … a spunky, adorable, double-dutching black girl, her awesome family and their new city – West Philly”. Will Smith told Entertainment Weekly: “I couldn’t be more excited that the character I played for so long could inspire such a fun and empowering book for kids everywhere. I know all of my children would have loved Fresh Princess growing up, and being a father who raised a strong daughter I know how important it is to see that type of strength depicted in stories … I’m down to follow Destiny through her growth and adventures, just as I had experienced the journey of the young ‘Will Smith’ as he danced, laughed, made mistakes, and created memorable moments on his road to becoming the Fresh Prince.” HarperCollins children’s books editorial director Margaret Anastas said that Smith “made the Fresh Prince one of the most memorable characters on TV with his zest for life and willingness to be himself”. “Destiny brings that same energy to a whole new generation by living her life with joy and confidence – a great message for girls today,” she said. The first book in the series will be published in April.