Marawa Ibrahim – or, to her fans, Marawa The Amazing – has 12 Guinness World Records. “12. Not 10, not 11, not seven. Someone said seven the other day!” she says, with mock outrage. “I love them. Guinnesses are like – it’s like a superpower club.” Ibrahim splits her time between London, LA and her hometown Melbourne, but we meet in Adelaide, where she’s premiering her new circus show Quality Novelty at the Adelaide fringe festival. She’s also launching her book, the Girl Guide: an illustrated and empowering how-to for girls going through puberty, sub-titled “50 ways to love your changing body”. Ibrahim has kicked a few goals in 30-odd years, but the Guinness for most hoops spun simultaneously became her ambition after she watched Kareena Oates from CircusOz break the record from 99 into 100 on Australian TV, in 2005. “She was the one!” says Ibrahim. “I was like, ‘Imagine if you could get it into 100, that would be the best thing in the world.’ And she did!” The world record, now held by Ibrahim, is 200. She points to her long middle finger, manicured with silver glitter: “Three of [the hoops] rely on that fingernail, just to be holding that extra bit out to the side,” she says. “If I could do anything, I would just do world record TV shows. They’re the best use of humans ever.” In the audience of Quality Novelty, I sit in front of a line of women in their early 20s who are having their minds blown. They talk through the entire show, in awe of the women on stage. “This chick’s epic, man,” one says as Ibrahim glides on to the stage in her high-heeled, silver glittered roller-skates, wearing a sequined bra and hotpants. She holds out pink-fringed hula-hoops, and winks at the young women as she passes them: a line of phones all held up to capture the image. Quality Novelty is the first production bringing these seven performers together. They have an eclectic combination of skills: Fancy Chance flies over the stage, lifted only by a metal hoop in her bun; the LA Roller Girls cartwheel into the splits. It oscillates between displays of awe-inspiring strength, and near excruciating humour. (“Why is this so funny?!”, yell the women behind me during an extended sequence of whoopie-cushion jokes. “Are we four?!”) It’s the sort of work that would, perhaps, make sense only in a fringe festival. There may be fart jokes, but “this show is so much based on strength,” says Ibrahim. Alongside Fancy Chance being lifted by her hair, Veronica Blair performs with straps, their pressure cutting into her skin. “The skills that Veronica is doing – that’s considered to be what boys do in aerial,” says Ibrahim. “And she’s doing it, but she’s got a pink fringe dress on. It’s everything to me.” Creating circus and writing books about puberty may seem like disparate occupations, but at the core of both is a shared celebration of the strength of women, and the importance of having others on your team. The Girl Guide is 50 short chapters demystifing puberty, from high-heels to periods to mental health. Astutely illustrated by Sinem Erkas, paper sculpture is used to anatomically explain the vulva; close-up photos demonstrate stretch marks; a double-page spread simply reads “Inhale, exhale.” It’s the book Ibrahim wishes she had when she was 10. Melding scientific information with light-hearted memoir, the process of writing it forced Ibrahim to reflect back at being on the cusp of puberty, watching her body act in ways she couldn’t understand. She remembers many nights in bed, where she thought, “I’m dying, and nobody knows.” Pre-internet era, Ibrahim would secretively search for information in her mother’s nursing textbooks. Writing the book, she Googled questions 10-year-olds today would have instead, to see what kind of answers they would get. But while the internet presents young girls with so much information, she says, “it’s so hard to navigate and see through”. The Girl Guide and its focus on the tricky parts of puberty feel more than a little indebted to both Dolly Doctor and Dolly’s letter section, How Embarrassment. But it’s also about instilling a sense of joy around the fun and adventure in watching your body change, and in discovering who you are. “It’s so hard for girls,” she says. “This thing of being thin, and lose weight, lose weight, lose weight and exercise to lose weight, and that exercise is somehow a chore, in the way that eating becomes a chore, in the way that everything suddenly becomes a chore and then you’re just stuck in this survival thing.” But, she says, knowing your bodies and the possibilities they offer can be fun. Navigating puberty, suggests The Girl Guide, is about learning to know your body, to hold ambition, to love yourself, and to love the other amazing women you get to share your world with. Quality Novelty has this same ethos at its core. After Adelaide Fringe, the cast will split up to work around the world for the rest of the year. If the show never happens again, says Ibrahim, “this will be a month that we spent together where it was the perfect combo”. “This is the dream.” • Quality Novelty is at Adelaide Fringe festival until 3 March. The Girl Guide is out now through Harper Collins