Darren Weir is facing a four-year ban from racing after he opted not to contest charges brought against him by Racing Victoria of using taser-like devices on horses. Following a lengthy hearing on Monday afternoon, the Melbourne Cup-winning trainer confirmed he would not fight the charges when he appears in front of the Racing Appeals and Disciplinary Board. He is charged with using “jiggers”, usually small electrical devices used in conjunction with a whip to try to stimulate a horse to run faster. They are used in training and the action is then simulated on race day so the horse believes it is about to be shocked again. “He has advised the stewards that he will not contest those charges which have drawn considerable negative publicity to the sport,” Racing Victoria’s executive general manager of integrity Jamie Stier said after Monday’s hearing. “To that end, stewards have requested that the RAD Board expedite the hearing of Mr Weir’s charges at which point they will be seeking a four-year disqualification. “Until such time as the RAD Board convenes to hear and determine Mr Weir’s charges, the stewards have imposed strict conditions on his licence that ensure he is not permitted to enter or race any horses as a trainer or owner.” Stewards opened the hearing on Friday and withdrew all Weir-trained horses from race meetings over the weekend and those of Jarrod McLean, his assistant who is also a licensed trainer and charged with similar offences. The two were also charged with failing to answer questions at the opening of a Racing Victoria stewards inquiry on Thursday, the day after they and officers from the Victoria Police sports integrity unit raided Weir’s stables at Ballarat and Warrnambool. Weir was asked to front an RV panel and demonstrate why he should be allowed to retain a training licence after being issued with a show cause notice following Wednesday’s raids. Weir and two other employees were arrested but after eight hours of questioning were released without charge. On Friday, RV stewards issued six charges against Weir, four against McLean four and two against foreperson Tyson Kermond. Weir was charged with three counts of possession of apparatus designed to deliver an electric shock, failure to give evidence at an inquiry, failure to comply with a direction of the stewards and conduct prejudicial to the image, interests or welfare of racing. Weir, a five-time Melbourne premier trainer and the winner of the 2015 Melbourne Cup with Prince Of Penzance, employs around 150 people in his stables. Until last week, he had more than 600 horses on his books with that number dwindling as owners begin transferring them to other trainers amid uncertainty over their autumn programs. High-profile trainers including Chris Waller, David Hayes and the Lindsay Park team, Ciaron Maher, Kris Lees and Peter and Paul Snowden, are among those either welcoming or awaiting new arrivals.