The police and West Ham are investigating a video in which a supporter can apparently be heard aiming Islamophobic abuse at Liverpool’s Mohamed Salah at the London Stadium on Monday. The incident was captured in a video posted on Twitter and the alleged abuse appeared to occur as Salah took a corner during the first half of the 1-1 draw. In the footage, recorded in a home area of the ground, someone is heard shouting “Salah, you fucking Muslim, fucking Muslim cunt” at the Egyptian forward. Kick It Out, football’s anti-discrimination charity, expressed its dismay at “yet another high-profile incident of discrimination in English football”. The Metropolitan police said they were aware of the video and in the process of reviewing the footage from the Premier League match. “No arrests have been made and inquiries continue,” a Met statement added. “Anyone who witnesses inappropriate behaviour during a match is urged to bring it to the attention of a steward or police officer.” West Ham are examining CCTV footage and are working with the police as they attempt to identify the perpetrator. The club has vowed to take firm action against anyone found guilty of racial abuse. A West Ham spokesperson said: “We have a zero-tolerance policy to any form of violent or abusive behaviour. We are an inclusive football club. Regardless of age, race, religion or belief, marriage or civil partnership, pregnancy or maternity, sex, sexual orientation, gender reassignment or disability, everyone is warmly welcomed at London Stadium. “Anyone identified committing an offence will have their details passed to the police and will face a lifetime ban from London Stadium. There is no place for this kind of behaviour at our stadium.” English football has been plagued by racism controversies this season. In December a Chelsea fan was accused of aiming racial abuse at Manchester City’s Raheem Sterling at Stamford Bridge and a Tottenham fan was arrested after throwing a banana skin at Arsenal’s Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang at the Emirates Stadium. The Football Association is also investigating reports of racist chanting from Millwall fans during the FA Cup win over Everton last month. Kick it Out added: “We have informed the club, the FA and the UK Football Policing Unit and have offered our support to the investigation, which is already underway. We are pleased that West Ham officials have already expressed their determination to identify the supporter and take firm action – this type of behaviour is simply unacceptable and must be challenged swiftly and decisively.”