Standing on the steps of the Brooklyn courthouse amid flurries of sleet and snow, US attorney Richard Donoghue hailed the conviction of Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán as a famous victory in America’s longest conflict. “There are those who say the war on drugs is not worth fighting. Those people are wrong,” he said. But that war – now nearly half a century old – shows no sign of ending, and neither does the trade in illegal narcotics. In the course of Guzmán’s eleven week trial, prosecutors presented the Sinaloa Federation as a vertically-integrated organization with a clear chain of command leading all the way up to one all-powerful boss: El Chapo. But Guzmán was arrested nearly three years ago, since which: • Production of coca, the raw material of cocaine, has soared: some 171,000 hectares were used to grow coca in Colombia in 2017 – up 25,000 hectares (17%) on the year before. Provisional figures for 2018 suggest a further increase to record levels; most Colombian cocaine is shipped by Mexican cartels and their partners to the USA and Europe. • The appetite for cocaine in the US and Europe remains insatiable – cocaine prices in the UK are at their highest since 1990 and the drug is purer than it has been for a decade – and while supplies of methamphetamine and synthetic drugs soar. • Mexico set new records for murder, with 25,394 homicides in the first nine months of 2018, 18% up on the 21,460 recorded in the same period of 2017, the highest figure since records began in 1997, according to the interior ministry. In his final report to the nation, President Enrique Peña Nieto blamed the surge on law enforcement’s inability to combat small criminal gangs which arose after Guzmán and other major cartel leaders were captured. On 10 December 2006, president Felipe Calderón, launched Mexico’s war on drugs by sending 6,500 troops into his home state of Michoacán, where rival cartels were engaged in tit-for-tat massacres. Calderón declared war eight days after taking power – a move widely seen as an attempt to boost his own legitimacy after a bitterly contested election victory. Within two months, around 20,000 troops were involved in operations across the country. The US has donated at least $1.5bn through the Merida Initiative since 2008, while Mexico has spent at least $54bn on security and defence since 2007. Critics say that this influx of cash has helped create an opaque security industry open to corruption at every level. But the biggest costs have been human: since 2007, around 230,000 people have been murdered and more than 28,000 reported as disappeared. Human rights groups have also detailed a vast rise in human rights abuses by security forces. As the cartels have fractured and diversified, other violent crimes such as kidnapping and extortion have also surged. In addition, hundreds of thousands of people have been displaced by violence. Improved collaboration between the US and Mexico has resulted in numerous high-profile arrests and drug busts. Officials say 25 of the 37 drug traffickers on Calderón’s most-wanted list have been jailed, extradited to the US or killed, although not all of these actions have been independently corroborated. The biggest victory – and most embarrassing blunder – under Peña Nieto’s leadership was the recapture, escape and another recapture of Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán, leader of the Sinaloa cartel. While the crackdown and capture of kingpins has won praise from the media and US, it has done little to reduce the violence. Mexico’s decade-long war on drugs would never have been possible without the huge injection of American cash and military cooperation under the Merida Initiative. The funds have continued to flow despite growing evidence of serious human rights violations. But even before El Chapo’s trial, there was always widespread suspicion that successive Mexican governments had collaborated with the Sinaloa Cartel against rivals less easy to control, to forge a “Pax Mafiosa”. On the ground, Sinaloa remains a force to be reckoned with, still shipping drugs north even as the fight for local markets in Mexico sends murder rates soaring. Where the cartel is overstretched – or torn apart by internecine war, rival factions ramp up the violence and other cartels emerge to fill the vacuum. Once seen as a newcomer eager to make its mark, the Jalisco New Generation cartel is now a major player. The Zetas are no longer as strong as they once were, but they never lost the northeast and west coasts, nor the world’s busiest international trade crossing from Nuevo Laredo into Laredo, Texas. Meanwhile Mexican society has become brutalised: in the shadow of narco-trafficking violence come killings over other illicit economies, femicides and appalling levels of domestic violence. The products – cocaine, meth, heroin - flow with the same official impunity with Guzmán arrested, extradited and convicted as at any other time. And Mexico’s new president Andrés Manuel López Obrador seems as committed as his predecessors to the militarized anti-drugs strategy which has only contributed to the bloodshed. Guzmán’s conviction is a historic moment, but its legacy could be measured against that of less trumpeted moments in the narco-narrative. One was an appeal by then Colombian president Juan Manual Santos to the Organisation of American States at its summit in Cartageña in 2010, to tear up the war on drugs battle plan, and start again on the basis of “co-responsibility” between “producing” nations torn apart by violence over narco-traffic, and ‘consuming’ countries where the noses, veins and pill-wrappers are, and where the money gets “cleaned”. The response from President Barak Obama was a rare admission that “it’s really a two-way situation here”, but the war on drugs raged on, racking up more statistics of death and loss. Then there are those other figures: the dollars. The most revealing testimony of the trial came from Jesús Zambada García, the accountant of the Sinaloa Cartel. He explained how a successful shipment to New York would yield $390m in clear profit, to share between five investors, including his brother Ismael Zambada García “El Mayo” who co-founded the federation with Guzmán. Asked how many shipments he would make in a year to US entrepots, Zambada replied: “hundreds”. There’s no evidence to suggest that is not still the case – only that there is a vacancy around the investment opportunity table. Guzmán’s trial marked the end of one of the world’s largest manhunt. His conviction raises the question: who next? An exhaustive report on the micro- and macro-economies of cocaine, published in 2012 by two academics at the Universitad de los Andes in Bogotá concluded that 2.6% of the street value of cocaine from Colombia stays there, while 96.4% swills through distribution networks and banks in “consuming” countries. “Colombian society has suffered to almost no economic advantage from the drugs trade”, said one of the report’s authors Alejandro Gavíria, “while huge profits are made by criminal distribution networks in consuming countries, and recycled by banks which operate with nothing like the restrictions that Colombia’s own banking system is subject to”. At Guzmán’s trial, we heard about shipments, from Colombia via Mexico to the US, but this language that never reached the courtroom; the money always went “back to Mexico”: planes and Samsonite bags of cash flown and hauled here and there. But we know it doesn’t stay in Mexico. Across the East River from the Brooklyn courthouse is the US headquarters of HSBC, through which hundreds of millions of dollars of profits were laundered for distribution through the ‘legal’ economy. The Wachovia bank did the same with even greater amounts, admitted to the US District Court of Southern Florida. In both cases, the punishment was admonition. An indictment of Guzmán filed in El Paso in 2012 accuses him of running “a vast money-laundering apparatus”. An indictment in Southern Florida filed in 2014 – after the Wachovia settlement – lists 92 wire transfers conducted by associates of Guzmán between 2003 and 2007, worth tens and hundreds of dollars each, through a branch of Bank of America in Oklahoma City. None of this language featured at trial. Guzmán’s defence lawyers also adopted the vision of a single integrated cartel, only they argued that it was ruled by El Mayo – the man who co-founded the federation with El Chapo – and then shopped him to the authorities. Guzmán’s trial marked the end of one of the world’s largest manhunt. His conviction raises the question: who next? El Mayo has kept a much lower profile than El Chapo, who was eventually arrested after granting an audience to Hollywood star Sean Penn, but in 2010, Zambada gave a rare interview to Mexico’s Proceso magazine. “One day I may decide to turn myself in, so they can shoot me, and there’ll be general euphoria,” said the veteran drug lord. “But we all know that at the end of the day, nothing will have changed”.