Glenn Murray came off the bench to score twice in extra time as Brighton finally shook off West Brom and set up a fifth-round duel with Derby County. Briefly the Premier League side faced elimination, as Kyle Bartley’s farcical goal in the 78th minute gave West Brom the lead. But Florin Andone drew the sides level four minutes before Murray arrived to settle the tie. Both managers submitted to the irritating orthodoxy that now prevails in their profession, paying homage to the enduring grandeur of the FA Cup before picking shadow sides for the tie. Many of the countries’ top teams have already been eliminated, so the path to the final was as inviting as it is likely to get for West Brom or Brighton in the foreseeable future, but that did not persuade Darren Moore or Chris Hughton to deploy full-strength teams. Instead Moore made seven changes from Wes Brom’s last match in the Championship, while Hughton went even farther, with midfielder Yves Bissouma the only survivor from the lineup that started Saturday’s Premier League draw with Watford. The sparse attendance suggested most fans doubted this had the ingredients for a classic. The teams made a perky start, all the same. West Brom put their faith in fluid movement up front, with 36-year-old Wes Hoolahan given licence to flit about almost as he pleased. Jay Rodriguez forced two awkward saves from David Button in the first 10 minutes. The goalkeeper made rather a meal of both, especially the second, a drive from 25 yards that seemed to catch him by surprise. Moments later Bissouma put Jonathan Bond in similar difficulty at the other end, the goalkeeper pushing the long-range shot around the post. Hoolahan should have scored in the 18th minute but did not get enough power on his close-range flick after a good pull-back by Tyrone Mears. Brighton’s lone striker, Florin Andone, was lucky not to be sent off just before the half hour after catching Sam Field in the face with a stiffened elbow. Five minutes later Andone had a shot deflected wide and from the resulting corner Leon Balogun headed against the bar. Adone then had another chance to open the scoring but fired wide after being put through by Anthony Knockaert. In an open game Hal Robson-Kanu almost made a spectacular breakthrough in the 43rd minute but his beautifully struck volley from more than 20 yards skimmed the crossbar on its way over. Moore rejigged his team at half-time, replacing Rodriguez with Craig Dawson and switching to a 3-5-2 formation. But Brighton had most possession and were the first to threaten in the second period, Alireza Jahanbaksh’s curling shot from the corner of the box demanding a diving save from Bond. Bissouma then beat the goalkeeper from the other corner but his shot whizzed inches past the far post, too. By now West Brom were restricted to sporadic counterattacks. West Brom were almost undone when the 6ft7in Dan Burns ventured forward for a corner but the centre-back headed over from six yards. Soon Burns was involved in the fiasco that led to West Brom’s goal. Not that he was to blame: he did well to head Hoolahan’s free-kick from the left up into the air but Balogun inexplicably stood idle at the back post as Bartley turned the ball into the net from one yard. But four minutes later Bartley goofed, miscontrolling to allow Andone to nick in an equalise. West Brom were unfortunate to be down to 10 men for most of extra time, as Robson-Kanu went off injured after they had made all their substitutions. But Brighton had been dominant even before that. Jürgen Locadia created the decisive goal with a jagged run down the left and a low cross that Hegazi should have intercepted. He did not, so Murray was free to divert it into the net from close range. Morgan Roberts might have forced the tie to a penalty shootout but failed to connect properly with a free header from six yards in the 115th minute. Murray was far more emphatic two minutes later when sent clear by Davy Pröpper.