The Departed is Martin Scorsese’s financially most successful film, and the only one to earn him a best director Oscar. And yet, thanks to its final shot, it might also his most divisive. Fans have long decried the fact that a movie in which police officers and criminals rat on each other ends with a ham-fisted shot of a real rat scurrying across a railing. Now they are doing something about it; a Kickstarter campaign has been launched to digitally erase the rat from The Departed, permanently undoing cinema’s most heavy-handed metaphor. This feels like the start of a movement; no longer is the power to retcon beloved films confined to the likes of George Lucas and JK Rowling. Someone, please, initiate Kickstarters to erase these other movie missteps: If we are going to digitally remove the most heavy-handed symbolism in movie history, we may as well also remove the second most: the moment in The Darjeeling Limited where several characters with complicated pasts literally have to let go of their actual luggage in order to move on with their lives. We should look to remove mistakes and oversights, too. For example, there is a brief moment in Mel Gibson’s Braveheart (set in the 13th century) when we see a car that has been accidentally left in the frame. At first, this seems like a simple oversight. However, as everybody knows, the car symbolises Braveheart not being a very good film. People forget that, right at the end of Dumbo, it is revealed that the US government has licensed Dumbo’s likeness in order to build a fleet of fighter planes with which to destroy its enemies. It is difficult to explain this to a three-year-old, so it must go. And why stop at small errors of judgment? Baby Driver is a great film, but one permanently tainted by the presence of Kevin Spacey. Let’s have him digitally replaced by, literally, anything else. Seriously, another actor, a cartoon, some vegetable clipart. Anything. Grease has already altered its history to some degree (in recent reissues the line “The chicks’ll cream” from Greased Lightning has been replaced with “The chicks’ll scream”, plus scenes of smoking have been digitally removed), so why not also get rid of the “Did she put up a fight?” line from Summer Nights? At this point, it just seems like the polite thing to do. Finally, remember that scene where Sean Connery dressed up as an excruciatingly racist portrayal of a Japanese man in You Only Live Twice, complete with altered eyes and bushier eyebrows? Surely the technology exists to do something about that. Surely.