Harrowing details emerged on the first day of a sentencing hearing for Canadian serial killer Bruce McArthur, as prosecutors described how the Toronto landscape gardener meticulously stalked and targeted his victims, then staged photographs with some of them after he strangled them. The court also heard that a ninth man was found bound and naked inside McArthur’s house when it was raided by police in January 2018. The sentencing hearing, which began on Monday, is expected to last for at least three days, as family and friends read victim impact statements. McArthur pleaded guilty to eight counts of first-degree murder last week, making him the worst known serial killer in the history of Toronto. Wearing a black cable-knit sweater and plaid collared shirt, McArthur sat hunched in the dock of a Toronto courtroom, as the court heard a detailed statement of facts presented by the crown. For more than seven years, McArthur stalked, sexually assaulted, killed and dismembered men he met in Toronto’s gay village district. Before the hearing began, crown prosecutor Michael Cantlon took the unusual step of warning the gallery that the proceedings would involve graphic descriptions and advised the press and public who would be distressed by the statement of facts to leave the courtroom. Cantlon choked up as he read the names of McArthur’s victims: Majeed Kayhan, Soroush Mahmudi, Dean Lisowick, Selim Esen, Andrew Kinsman, Skandaraj (Skanda) Navaratnam, Kirushnakumar Kanagaratnam and Abdulbasir Faizi. The court heard that McArthur staged photographs of his victims’ corpses, posing the bodies in a fur coat and black leather hat, and – in two cases – with a cigar between their lips. Cantlon described the extensive collection of photographs McArthur kept of his victims – many of them taken while they were alive. Police were able to discover additional images of deceased victims that had previously been deleted through forensic analyses of hard drives that belonged to McArthur. McArthur also shaved and stored the facial hair from his victims, Cantlon said. Most of his victims were of Middle Eastern or south Asian descent and lived on the margins of Canadian society. Their disappearances attracted little attention outside the gay community. Cantlon acknowledged that members of Toronto’s gay community had long suspected the string of disappearances was the work of a serial murderer. “For years, members of the LGBT community in Toronto believed they were being targeted by a killer,” Cantlon said. “They were right.” Toronto police had previously launched an investigation into the disappearance of three men, but the 2012 investigation failed to produce McArthur as the suspect. In July of 2017, police formed the taskforce Project Prism and on 18 January 2018, they arrested McArthur after linking him to a pair of disappearances. On the day that he was arrested, the crown said McArthur had lured a man into his bedroom, bound him and placed a black bag over his head. The same fur coat, seen in multiple images of deceased victims, was found in in the room. The first major break for police came investigators the word “Bruce” written on a calendar in the apartment of Andrew Kinsman, McArthur’s last known victim, the court heard. Surveillance images and video showed a van picking Kinsman up, a vehicle that was later traced to McArthur. DNA belonging to Kinsman was later discovered in the van. While the judge has not yet decided whether McArthur’s eight charges will be consecutive or concurrent, he will be ineligible for parole until he is at least 91. In Canada, a charge of first-degree murder brings an automatic life sentence, with no chance of parole for 25 years. He will probably be sentenced at the end of the week.