It was 10:30am last Wednesday morning when Bimbo Gifford, assistant chief of the Cameron fire department in Wisconsin, received notice of a building fire. The wind chill was -50F. It was so cold that when water sprayed from inside escaped through the roof, it fell back on firefighters as ice pellets. Afterwards, Gifford was talking to his colleague, chief Mitch Hansen, when he noticed the sunlight glinting in Hansen’s frozen-solid beard. He snapped a picture – but only after pulling his left eye open, which was partly frozen shut. That picture has since gone viral, highlighting the challenges, including extremely stiff clothing, faced by firefighters in sub-zero temperatures. This is what it looks like after you've fought a fire in -50° wind chill.Cameron, Wisconsin’s Fire Chief Mitch Hansen poses for a photo after battling a fire Wednesday. The overspray from the hoses froze before hitting the firefighters as ice pellets. https://t.co/veCDPXL8KB pic.twitter.com/hh41dxWUT7 Any sitting water will instantly freeze, so hoses need to flow constantly. Ladders become slick with ice, water from hoses transform surfaces into skating rinks, while excess steam decreases visibility. “You get so icy that you can’t move your hands, your suit is so stiff that you have to warm up and melt it off,” said Gifford. Having decent equipment is essential, but “the people are the number one issue for us,” said Steve Davis, chief of the Madison fire department in Wisconsin. “When it’s that cold, the equipment is going to do what it does and you have to adjust. But making sure we keep our people safe was the big concern.” When Davis’s department was called into a structure fire at 3am on Wednesday morning – at -21F, with a windchill of -46F – the city’s metro service provided a bus to use as a warming station, with the team rotating through in shifts. “They adapt as they go,” Davis said of the fire department’s sub-zero strategy. For example, 12 hours into the coldest 48-hour spell, his department elected to drain all of the pumps beforehand to keep from freezing. Davis said his department attended four structure fires during the coldest 48-hour period this week – an uptick over the usual one fire per day. It was an intense period but, David noted, the fire department did “not get through those 48 hours alone”. “We get credit for doing a lot of good work but it’s the support teams that make us able to do that,” said Davis. And while polar vortex conditions remain unusual and record-breaking – for now – Gifford said that training for firefighters comes with each upper midwestern winter. “You get used to it,” he said of the cold. “If I hadn’t been there [at the fire], I would’ve been out ice fishing.”