“This is the biggest and most important fight of my career,” Chris Eubank Jr says quietly, rocking gently on a plastic chair in a tiny office tucked away in his gym on Hove seafront. He nods intently as he considers his battle against James DeGale at the O2 in London on Saturday night. “It’s definitely the one where I have the most to lose. A loss would leave me in no man’s land. DeGale is in exactly the same position. We both cannot afford defeat. We’re both on the edge and someone’s going to fall.” I have asked just one opening question and Eubank has cut to the heart. He and DeGale are preparing for a bout which will surely leave the loser facing the end of his career. Of course this is boxing and so a controversial decision or a narrow defeat might persuade the defeated fighter that one last shot at redemption is possible. But both men recognise their future, and long-term reputations, could be decided this weekend. DeGale has been around boxing so long, as an Olympic gold medallist and a two-times IBF super-middleweight champion, it’s surprising to think he has had one fight fewer than Eubank, whose record is 27-2. At 33, DeGale has achieved far more but he has also been through more wars. Talk of his retirement is a recurring theme. Eubank, who is 29, has much more to prove as he lost to the two world-class operators he has faced in Billy Joe Saunders and George Groves. DeGale also lost to Groves, his bitter rival, but went on an unbeaten run that lasted six-and-a-half years before he dropped a shock decision to Caleb Truax. That loss was avenged last April but DeGale has been ravaged by injury and weariness. He is more skilful than Eubank but the younger man is desperate for the big win that would move him beyond the shadow of his father, Chris Sr, who was such a powerful if eccentric presence in the 1990s. This contest also carries some spite. After they sparred in 2012, Eubank Jr went on Twitter to boast: “Today in sparring I schooled European champ James DeGale. It was the first time I’ve seen a fighter trash talk while getting hit in the face.” Ever since then they have sniped at each other, with DeGale accusing Eubank of being a fraud who lives off his father’s name. Eubank Sr did not always help his son. In 2014 he told me Chris Jr was “the most dangerous man on the planet.” Junior lost his next fight, against Saunders, while hardly throwing a decent punch in the first six rounds. He now has one last chance to match the hype as he is in supreme condition and could outwork DeGale over 12 draining rounds. “People who don’t understand fighting think you need to hate somebody to beat them,” Eubank says. “But I keep hate and anger out of boxing, because it causes mistakes. I’m not going to let the fact that me and James don’t like each other affect me. But I see emotion in James. I’ve definitely got under his skin. He knows he can’t beat me. He knows my determination and focus – and so he’s going to be very fiery at the start. But, once he realises I’m not going anywhere, he’ll break.” Eubank accepts DeGale operates at a far higher level than any of the men he has beaten. “For sure. He’s a brilliant fighter. Former world champion, former Olympic gold medallist. I won’t underestimate him.” Eubank exudes an impressive persona but, surely, his two defeats have dented his self-belief? “No,” he insists. “Both my losses were on points. I’ve never been knocked out, never had an eight count. Never really been hurt. I got cut against Groves, and I couldn’t see out of my eye most of the fight but it didn’t hurt. Groves probably weighed 13½ stone whereas I weighed 12. But he never buzzed me. It was just that cut, which looked so bad, with blood everywhere.” Eubank pauses. “I’m human. When you lose, of course you’re going to be upset. It’s a horrible feeling. Some fighters lose and their spirits are forever broken. A champion comes back stronger. If you’re constantly dwelling on the past, ‘I could have done that, I should have done this’, it doesn’t help. You have to look at the situation intellectually and learn from it.” One of the justified criticisms of Eubank is that against Saunders and Groves he did not listen to any advice from his chaotic corner. He argues that now he has a trainer, Nate Vasquez from Floyd Mayweather’s gym in Las Vegas, to whom he will pay attention. “I’ve got a full-time trainer for the first time and it’s the most focused I’ve ever been. Nate has great knowledge and experience. He’s been in the gym around great fighters and I gelled with Nate from day one. I liked the way he held the pads, the things he said. It felt right.” Eubank is such an individualist it is hard to believe he will follow Vasquez’s instructions. “I’m not going to be completely different,” he concedes. “But his focus helps and I will listen to him. My father and Ronnie Davies have always been in my corner but I didn’t pay much attention to them. This will be the first time I’ll be really listening in the corner. That’s why I flew Nate over from Las Vegas. He’s living with me now.” I’ve been around Eubank often enough to know that someone else cluttering up his pristine home could be disastrous. He grins. “It wasn’t easy at first but I made my mind up to move forward in my career. In these big fights there’s too much on the line to give any advantage away. I need a trainer and a proper camp. Having Nate move in was one of the great challenges as I live alone. “I was thinking: ‘Is this guy going to be leaving stuff around and making the kitchen untidy? Will I have to threaten to kick him out?’ But he’s been great. Quiet, respectful. Luckily my sparring partner, who’s also living with us, is the same. To have two men living with you is a big shock to the system as I’ve lived alone since I was 19. I’ve had girlfriends throughout the years, staying on and off, but nothing permanent.” Why has Eubank not lived with anyone before? “Boxing is a very tough sport to bring most women into. It’s hard to adjust to the sacrifices. You have to be with somebody that understands, however selfish it sounds, boxing and you come first. My life, my health, my financial stability is on the line every time I step into the ring. It’s hard to put your girlfriend or wife in front of that. Some women expect that in a relationship they should come first. That wouldn’t work for me. “Before a fight, I go eight weeks without sex. A lot of women can’t handle that. They can’t understand it. My father, who was world champion, told me he had sex until the day before he fought. That blew my mind. I don’t even know if I believe him. I’ve felt the effects of being with a girlfriend before a training session. The next day I felt flat. On the off chance that not having sex for two months is going to help me, I’ll take the off chance.” It sounds as if he finds it difficult to forge a lasting relationship. “I’ve had some mad experiences with the wrong type of person – men and women. I’ve had guys who said they were my friends but they’re using my name to set up business deals. I’ve had girls that, if not for your name, they’d be with somebody else. I have many acquaintances and just a few real friends. I have the right people around me now.” While his dad drops in twice during this interview to say hello, as Eubank Sr and I go back a long way, since I wrote about him in my book, Dark Trade, Junior stands alone now. “Obviously my father’s mentoring has been invaluable. He will always be a part of my team. But you have to be your own man.” Did his dad, who loves the limelight, accept this decision? “He had no choice. It’s not that he accepted it. His natural vibe is to be around the people he loves. I’ve never had a problem with it but I’m comfortable in my own skin and sometimes opponents have made him a target in the past. I don’t need to give them that ammunition any more.” Boxing is dangerous enough. Three years ago next month Eubank’s fists did so much damage Nick Blackwell ended up in a coma. “It was hard,” Eubank says, his face clouding. “Ending someone’s career, knowing they were seriously injured, was tough. That’s not the goal – to hospitalise your opponent. You want to knock him down but you want him to get up after the count is over. You want him to go back safely to his family. “You read about fighters who lose their lives – or get critically injured. Every fighter thinks it’s never going to happen to them. You can’t go into a fight thinking ‘I could end up in hospital’. You have to believe you’re going to be OK, that you’re going to win. James has branded this a retirement fight but if I have my way I’m going to be out here until I’m 34. I love the fighting and entertaining. I’ll do it as long as I can. And, when it’s over, it’s going to be very painful.” Eubank looks up just days from a fight that might end his career or lift him on to a path of new respect. “Nothing gives you this intensity. No drug, no alcohol, no woman, can match the feeling of having your hand raised after a fight. It would be hard for any fighter to give up but that day has not entered my mind. There’s so much more I want to achieve. But, first, I have to win this fight. It’s all that matters.”