Even as he collected the Most Valuable Player award for Super Bowl LIII, Julian Edelman somehow preserved his image as one of the NFL’s great support acts. He had caught 10 passes for 141 yards on Sunday night, serving as the New England Patriots’ most effective offensive weapon in a 13-3 win over the Los Angeles Rams. And yet, the morning after, he was overshadowed by his head coach. Bill Belichick had put on a masterful performance of his own, devising a defensive gameplan that kept the league’s second-most prolific offense out of the of the end zone. This is the sixth championship that he has won in New England, moving him level with Curly Lambeau and George Halas as the most successful coaches in NFL history. Such feats are not achieved by chance, as Edelman was keen to point out. “I remember seeing coach one day after practice,” said the receiver. “I don’t know if he remembers this, but I was a rookie and by the grace of god we were walking out [of the team facility] at the same time. “I’d said maybe three words to him before that: I’d been on the team for six months. And I just looked at him because I’d seen him on the treadmill watching film at 10 o’clock at night. I said, ‘Coach, you sure like football, huh?’ He goes, ‘It beats being a plumber. See you tomorrow.’” Speaking at the same podium moments later, Belichick was quick to challenge his player on the detail. “First of all, I think Julian might have misquoted me,” he replied, to laughter from the floor. “I have a ton of respect for plumbers. I can’t turn the water on myself.” What he does know how to do is win consistently in a league where it ought not to be possible over such an extended time-frame. Belichick’s first Super Bowl as a head coach was in 2002 – another win over the Rams, who then were based in St Louis – and this was the ninth one that his team has played in since then. Only once, in his 18 seasons as head coach of the Patriots, has the team lost more games than it won. Lambeau and Halas belong to a different era of NFL history, before the league introduced free agency, salary caps and a system for distributing young talent – the annual college draft – in which the teams with the worst records get the first picks. Still, as someone who grew up watching Halas’s Chicago Bears teams, Belichick said it was “incredibly flattering” to be mentioned in the same breath. “But really, for me, it’s about what the team accomplishes,” he continued. “The most important thing is that the team gets to hold that Lombardi trophy up and say that we were champions. It took everybody, it took the entire team, the organization to put forth a superior and supreme effort to achieve that this season, and that’s what it’s really all about. “Julian did a great job for us, but we had 45 other guys out there last night battling, as well as the coaching staff, and it’s what we’re able to accomplish as a team that makes me the most proud.” Edelman is in many ways a prototypical Belichick player, one who owes his professional career to a willingness to put himself at the service of the team. A quarterback in high school and college, he lacked the size to play that position in the pros but impressed New England’s coaches enough during workouts that they decided to take a chance on him in the final round of the 2009 draft. As well trying out at wide receiver, Edelman also offered his services as a defensive back. It was his success and application as a returner on kicks and punts, though, that helped him to hold down a spot on the team until he had developed the skillset to carve out a permanent role on offense. He has since become indispensable: Tom Brady’s favorite receiver. Only the Hall of Famer Jerry Rice has more catches or receiving yards in NFL playoff games. Edelman has gone through darker periods over the past two years, tearing a cruciate ligament in 2017 and then serving a four-game suspension to begin this season after an unidentified substance was detected in his sample from an offseason doping test. Asked how it felt to go from such low moments to Sunday’s high, he professed to not having thought much about it at all. “I’ve been kind of trained, being in New England, to always look at what’s on your plate at a time,” said Edelman. “When you get hurt, you’re competing against yourself each day to try to get your knee better. Then when you’re starting to play, you’re trying to get into the flow of things, you’re thinking about winning games, trying to improve each week. “Maybe in the next couple of weeks I’ll be able to sit back and think about that. But then we’ll be starting up all over again.”