Spain’s socialist government could be forced to call a snap general election if rightwing parties and Catalan secessionists make good on their threats to reject the national budget in a key vote on Wednesday. The prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, faces an uphill battle to secure approval for the budget in the face of opposition from critics of his minority government. Sánchez’s PSOE, which holds 84 of the 350 seats in congress, relied on the support of Basque and Catalan nationalist parties to seize power from the conservative People’s party in a confidence vote last year. If, as seems likely, the budget is rejected by rightwing parties as well as the Catalan Republican Left and the Catalan European Democratic party, Sánchez is expected to call a snap general election in April or May. The next general election is due to be held next year. Government and PSOE party sources said the snap election date had not been set, although 14 April was most likely, followed by 28 April because Sánchez wants a ballot as soon as possible to mobilise left-leaning voters against the threat of the right coming to power. The Socialists are ahead in opinion polls – which show them on around 30% of voting intentions – but the two main right-of-centre parties together poll at more than 30%. In Spain’s most populous region of Andalucía they unseated the socialists last year with the help of the far-right party Vox. “The idea is to announce we’re calling elections as soon as possible once the (vote on) the state’s general budget is lost,” a government source told Reuters, adding that announcing the election swiftly should overshadow the budget vote defeat and create a more positive news flow, helping the socialists. A senior socialist party source confirmed that the announcement of a snap election would probably come quickly: “It is likely, as soon as the voting [on the budget] ends.” The prime minister had been banking on the fact that the prospect of an early election – and a possible win for rightwing parties that fiercely oppose Catalan secession – would make the two big Catalan pro-independence parties swing behind the budget. But, speaking to the Guardian and other European media, the Catalan leader, Quim Torra, said the secessionist groupings would not be forced into supporting Sánchez’s budget plans. “Are we meant to approve the budget because we’re afraid of the Spanish right?” said Torra. “Mr Sánchez can obviously decide to call elections whenever he wants – he’s the prime minister. But why would he make dialogue conditional on approving the budget? “Look, between the far right and a PSOE that won’t accept our right to self-determination, I choose Catalan independence.” Efforts to find a political solution to the independence crisis have been hampered by pressure from rightwing parties – and by the start of the trial in Madrid on Tuesday of 12 Catalan separatist leaders. On Sunday, tens of thousands of people joined a rally in central Madrid to express their vent their fury at what they see as the overly conciliatory stance adopted by the Sánchez, and to demand a snap general election. The demonstration was called by the People’s party and the centre-right Citizens party, and backed by Vox. It also attracted some supporters of fascist and extreme-right groups. On Tuesday morning, Sánchez warned that the Spanish right and Catalan independence leaders risked derailing important social measures in the budget. “Both want the same thing,” he tweeted. “A Catalonia at odds with itself and a Spain at odds with itself. We’re working for a harmonious Catalonia and a united Spain.” Spain’s treasury minister said the government would not cede “to any blackmail by anybody” when it came to the budget. “Under no circumstance will we admit that the right to self-determination in Catalonia appears in any talking points,” María Jesús Montero said as Tuesday morning’s budget debate began. Reuters contributed to this report