Late-night hosts review a long, meandering and teleprompted State of the Union. “We are live, if you call what we just watched living,” Stephen Colbert said at the top of Tuesday’s Late Show, which directly followed Trump’s 82-minute State of the Union address to Congress – “not a particularly good speech, but what it lacked in quality, it made up in length”. In other words, “this speech was like watching paint lie”. As always, the State of the Union was busy – all of Congress, first lady Melania Trump and various veterans, and basically “everybody who is anybody who was not indicted”, were in attendance. In the packed Capitol, the “Democratic side was a sea of white”, Colbert reported of female representatives’ outfits honoring the women’s suffrage movement, “and the Republican side” – a bunch of white men in ties – “also a sea of white”. The speech itself rambled through the usual Trump talking points: the strength of the economy, American greatness, and word circles around illegal immigration and a (broadly unpopular) border wall proposal. There was also the usual Trumpian logic, including “tolerance for illegal immigration is not compassionate – it is actually very cruel.” “I mean, not kids-in-cages cruel, but still pretty bad,” Colbert clarified in the president’s voice. “The point is – and this is my point ultimately – tolerance is cruelty, war is peace, freedom is slavery, and I weigh 239 pounds.” For all the tangents, Trump concluded his speech with a simple ask: that Americans “choose greatness, no matter the trials we face”. “Well in that case, sir,” Colbert responded: “I choose you face a trial, because that would be great.” On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah appreciated the little blessings in the State of the Union: Trump’s tie may have been distractingly askew, but “I guess we should be grateful his fly wasn’t open”. In all seriousness, though, this State of the Union was much more about grandstanding and symbolism than substance – “just an excuse for people to troll each other”, Noah explained. Looking at the meat of the speech, Noah found plenty of fear and despair, particularly in the president’s dire, and misleading, rhetoric around the threat of illegal immigrants – part of his pitch for the proposed border wall that remains unsupported in Congress. “But before you feel dejected, my friends, the president has some good news,” Noah comforted. “You see, these problems could all go away for the low, low price of $5.7bn,” his ask for the wall funding. The one bright spot, though, was the celebration from the white-clad class of Democratic women, whose election Trump celebrated as an achievement of his time in office. “Donald Trump is a rock star, guys – he just took credit for the Democrats electing more women,” Noah joked. “I mean, to be fair, Donald Trump has done more to get women Democrats elected than anyone else, so I guess he does deserve the credit? Yes, the same way we should thank smallpox for getting us into vaccines.” As a whole, the 2019 State of the Union was “one of Trump’s tamer speeches … border wall, illegal immigration, economy is doing great, hashtag no collusion – same old, same old,” Noah said. But though the speech was unlikely to change anyone’s mind, there is one thing we can all agree on: “He read really well.” Thanks to the teleprompter, Noah rests assured. “I don’t know if he’s ready for a second term, but he’s definitely ready for the second grade.” And on Late Night, Seth Meyers acknowledged that Trump is running out of rhetorical options and buzzwords – with the barrage of wall talk, he risks being tuned out. “Sure, the first time you see a crazy guy yelling on the subway you move down to the other end of the car,” he explained. “But the tenth time you see one, you just put your headphones in and listen to a podcast about America’s mental health crisis. “Trump is so unpopular even his tie has moved to the left,” Meyers said of the president’s appearance, but that didn’t stop him from trying out new rhyming phrases, such as his veiled threat against government ethics investigations: “If there is going to be peace and legislation, there cannot be war and investigations. “I’m sorry, you think the investigations are hurting the economy?” Meyers interjected. “If anything, you’ve created thousands of jobs for lawyers. “This is such an insane argument – he’s like a guy who gets pulled over for drunk driving and says, ‘Officer, I can’t focus on the road with a breathalyzer in my mouth.’”