Jeremy Corbyn has called for a snap general election during a meeting of anti-poverty charities in Glasgow. He said people who have experienced “the brunt of nine years of austerity” must be allowed a new vote. The Labour leader met with voluntary organisations and charities working to tackle poverty in south-west Glasgow on Saturday, where he criticised “Tory cuts” while pointing to double-digit yearly increases in food bank use and falling life expectancy in Scotland’s most populated city. “People are suffering under austerity as a direct result of Tory cuts in Westminster passed down by the SNP in Holyrood,” he said. “The people who are bearing the brunt of nine years of austerity cannot wait years for a general election. They need a general election now.” Corbyn paid tribute to the volunteers and charities that have stepped in to support people who are suffering, but said people should not have to rely on the voluntary sector. “It is a disgrace that people are living on the streets and forced to rely on food banks in one of the richest countries in the world,” he added. “The SNP government has not just passed on Tory austerity, it has quadrupled it for local councils. And this week’s budget will mean another £230m in cuts that will hit local services the people of Scotland rely on. “There is a clear choice between more austerity or a Labour government that will put an end to austerity and build a country for the many, not the few.” A third of children in south-west Glasgow live in poverty, according to statistics highlighted by Labour from the End Child Poverty coalition. Life expectancy in the area is almost 74 years for men and 79 for women, markedly lower than the Scottish national averages of 77 and 81. Figures published in December showed that life expectancy had fallen in Scotland for the first time in 35 years, and across the UK life expectancy growth since 2011 has slumped faster than in a number of other leading economies. Joined by Scottish Labour leader, Richard Leonard, and Matt Kerr, the Labour candidate for Glasgow South West, Corbyn said food bank use in Scotland was at record levels. Statistics showed it had increased by 17% in just 12 months, higher than the UK’s 13% rise during the same period. Labour was leading the Conservatives by one percentage point in the latest Survation poll, with others putting the two parties level pegging. Meanwhile, YouGov has consistently polled Labour as trailing the Tories. Recent attempts to persuade a majority of MPs to back a vote of no confidence in Theresa May have failed, but the Fixed Term Parliament Act allows for early elections if two-thirds of MPs vote in favour. A Scottish Conservative spokesman said: “At the last general election, it was the Scottish Conservatives, not Labour, that were making huge gains across the country and winning 12 extra seats. Voters know that Labour are too weak to stand up to the SNP and that the only party that can take on the nationalists and win is the Scottish Conservatives.”