Queens Park Rangers had to wait for this moment. Their previous appearance in the FA Cup fifth round had come at Wimbledon in 1997 and it is doubtful whether any club has since endured a more dismal record in the competition. The London club had won only four ties – each of them in the third round – before this season. Rangers promised to fight and they made light of a run of five consecutive Championship defeats that has sucked them down to 18th in the table to give their Premier League opponents a scare. They were the better team in the first half and, towards the very end, they thought they had fashioned a lifeline to force extra-time. Darnell Furlong drove over a low 87th-minute cross and, when Toni Leistner slid in at the far post, he looked odds-on to steer the ball into the empty net. Agonisingly he poked it the wrong side of the post and the majority inside the sell-out crowd howled their frustration. It is Watford who can sense opportunity. With only seven top-flight clubs left in the competition – and Chelsea playing Manchester United on Monday night – Javi Gracia and his players have to think this could be the year when they finally bring a major trophy to the Hertfordshire club, although the manager refused to look beyond the next game. Watford were not at their best. The captain, Troy Deeney, admitted they were “sloppy at times” yet they showed a resilience to weather the QPR pressure, pinch a goal in first-half stoppage-time through Étienne Capoue and see out the result. Something is stirring at the club, according to Deeney. “In older days we might have lost this,” he said. It was 22 years to the day since QPR lost that fifth-round tie against Wimbledon to end a Cup run which contained many memories, including Trevor Sinclair’s overhead kick from the halfway line against Barnsley in round four (the distance has increased with each passing year). Their determination to bring those images up to date framed the occasion and, if the first goal was always going to be important, QPR’s regret was that they did not score it. They certainly had the chances. Steve McClaren’s team pressed high at the outset, forcing Watford into errors. Their first-half ascendancy, though, was not built purely on brawn. In Luke Freeman they had a box of tricks behind the strikers, a midfielder with lovely touch and vision. QPR’s clearest chance came on 37 minutes following Freeman’s cross from the right. It was perfectly flighted for Nahki Wells, who was onside in the middle but, before it reached him, Matt Smith – who was offside – leaned in to head off target. Previously Massimo Luongo had taken a touch following a weak Heurelho Gomes punch to volley narrowly off target while Freeman’s lofted pass after a driving run on 41 minutes led to Wells guiding a volley towards the corner. Gomes turned it behind. It meant QPR could feel sick when Watford scored. There was an element of fortune to the goal because Tom Cleverley’s volley after José Holebas had crossed following a short corner was miscued. But the ball fell to Capoue and he shot low into the far corner. Watford had not threatened until that point apart from a Daryl Janmaat effort that rose over the bar. Wells went close to the equaliser on 63 minutes, curling a shot wide after Christian Kabasele’s error, but Gracia switched to 5-3-2 and Watford came to look more comfortable. Andre Gray had the ball in the net only to be pulled back for offside and, when Leistner erred, it was over. “Toni’s chance summed us up of late – so close but not close enough,” McClaren said. “It was our third game in six days and to play at that intensity against a top Premier League was fantastic.”