Andy Robertson has said Liverpool are not succumbing to nerves or pressure in the title race but must recover quickly from the “wee blip” that has cut their lead over Manchester City. The Liverpool defender admits his team were below-par at West Ham on Monday, when they drew 1-1 for the second game in succession, but believes a point at the London Stadium with an under-strength side represents a decent return. The result hands City the opportunity to go top of the Premier League with victory at Everton on Wednesday although the full-back insists Jürgen Klopp’s team have no reason to panic. “West Ham are a good team and it’s a good point here, another point, but we need to be better and quick,” Robertson said. “It’s not time to panic – it’s time to relax and enjoy it, and play better football because of that. West Ham have made it a lot harder [at the London Stadium], especially this season. The first time they moved in they struggled, with the transition from Upton Park, but now it feels like home and they pick up good results and they’re better here than they are away from home. Credit to them, they did well and deserved a point, but we weren’t at our best.” Robertson denied that City’s closing presence, combined with the pressure of trying to land a first league championship for 29 years, has started to affect Liverpool’s performances. “It doesn’t make a difference to us,” the left-back said of City. “We need to get back on track to winning games and playing better football. We can’t worry about them. We’re having a wee blip and we need to just try and get over the line in a couple of games. We’ll dust ourselves down. There’s still a long way to go. “I wouldn’t say nerves are showing. Did anyone say that when City dropped points against Palace and Leicester? I don’t think they did. It’s no different for us – people talk about pressure because we’ve not been in this position but it’s February. Everyone needs to relax and try and enjoy the run-in. If you’re fans, or if you’re from another club, you can watch many other clubs who want to be in the position we’re in just now. “Nerves aren’t showing in the changing room – it’s been two poor results and poor performances. It happens during a long season. We might look back on it as a good point, but we don’t know that right now. We need to get back to playing the better football we can but it’s nothing to do with nerves.” Robertson believes fatigue is a more credible factor for Liverpool’s recent downturn than anxiety over the title race. The Scotland captain explained: “Look, it’s a long season. If you ask anyone in any league if they’re as fresh now as they were at the start of the season, they’ll say they’re not, because they’ve played 20, 25 games or whatever it is.” Meanwhile, Klopp has been asked to provide written observations to the Football Association over his comments about referee Kevin Friend after the West Ham game. The German questioned whether Friend’s decision-making was compromised by him potentially finding out Liverpool’s opener had been offside in the build-up. Klopp told Sky Sports: “We had good moments, coming through the channels and scored the goal, which I’ve now been told is offside. This explains a little bit the second half, because I think the referee knew at half-time. He knew it for sure at half-time, and then you saw a lot of strange situations.” His remarks have attracted the attention of the FA, which has sought Klopp’s opinion on the matter. Liverpool 9 Feb Bournemouth (h) 24 Feb Man Utd (a)  27 Feb Watford (h)  3 Mar Everton (a)  10 Mar Burnley (h)  17 Mar Fulham (a)  31 Mar Tottenham (h)  6 Apr Southampton (a) 13 Apr Chelsea (h) 20 Apr Cardiff (a)  27 Apr Huddersfield (h) 4 May Newcastle (a)  12 May Wolves (h) Manchester City 6 Feb Everton (a)10 Feb Chelsea (h) 27 Feb West Ham (h)2 Mar Bournemouth (a) 9 Mar Watford (h) 16 Mar Man Utd (a)30 Mar Fulham (a) 6 Apr Cardiff (h) 13 Apr Crystal Palace (a) 20 Apr Tottenham (h) 27 Apr Burnley (a) 4 May Leicester (h) 12 May Brighton (a) Tottenham 10 Feb Leicester (h)  23 Feb Burnley (a)  27 Feb Chelsea (a)  2 Mar Arsenal (h)  9 Mar Southampton (a)  17 Mar Crystal Palace (h)  31 Mar Liverpool (a)  6 Apr Brighton (h)  13 Apr Huddersfield (h)  20 Apr Man City (a)  27 Apr West Ham (h)  4 May Bournemouth (a)  12 May Everton (h)