“We need wingers. Wingers,” Unai Emery said on Tuesday night, and it was interesting to note the plural. The Arsenal manager added Denis Suárez, who he says can be one solution – even if he is not perhaps an out-and-out winger – but he saw moves fail for Ivan Perisic, Yannick Carrasco and Christopher Nkunku. David Hytner Ins Denis Suárez (Barcelona, loan) Outs Emiliano Martínez (Reading, loan); Emile Smith Rowe (RB Leipzig, loan) A very Bournemouth transfer window, their arrivals being a mix of fringe players from big clubs and one of the Championship’s brighter lights. They’re gambles, with Dominic Solanke’s senior goalscoring record virtually non-existent and Chris Mepham unproven, but Eddie Howe has made a business of polishing rough diamonds in the past. Nick Miller Ins Dominic Solanke (Liverpool, £17m); Nathaniel Clyne (Liverpool, loan); Chris Mepham (Brentford, £12m) Outs Jermain Defoe (Rangers, loan); Marc Pugh (Hull City, loan); Alex Dobre (Yeovil, loan); Tyrell Hamilton (Salisbury, loan); Matt Worthington (Yeovil, loan); Jordan Holmes (St Mirren, loan); Charlie Seaman (Dundee United, loan); Keelan O’Connell (Morton, loan); Aaron Ramsdale (AFC Wimbledon, loan); Tyrone Mings (Aston Villa, loan) It was all very quiet at the seaside until deadline day when two new players – Jan Mlakar from Maribor and Tudor Baluta from Viitorul (Gheorghe Hagi’s team) – were brought in, but then immediately loaned back to their clubs. Brighton’s significant business was done in the summer, and with Chris Hughton’s steady hand and the first team ticking along reasonably well, they were never likely to splurge in January. NM Ins Alexis MacAllister (Argentinos Juniors, undisclosed); Jan Mlakar (Maribor, undisclosed); Tudor Baluta (Viitorul, £2.7m) Outs Oliver Norwood (Sheffield United, undisclosed); Marcus Suttner (Fortuna Düsseldorf, loan); Ezequiel Schelotto (Chievo, loan); Alexis MacAllister (Argentinos Juniors, loan); Jordan Maguire-Drew (Leyton Orient, loan); Ben White (Peterborough, loan); Ben Barclay (Notts County, loan); George Cox (Northampton, loan); Josh Kerr (Derry City, loan); Tom McGill (Basingstoke, loan); Billy Arce (Emelec, loan); Anders Dreyer (St Mirren, loan); Mathias Normann (FC Rostov, undisclosed); Jan Mlakar (Maribor, loan); Tudor Baluta (Viitorul, loan); Aaron Connelly (Luton, loan) Sean Dyche is keen to operate a one-in, one-out policy at Burnley and originally wanted to sign Che Adams from Birmingham before agreeing to let Sam Vokes join Stoke City for £7m. Birmingham turned down a £12m offer for Adams, however, so Burnley took up the option suggested by Stoke, with 38-year-old Peter Crouch moving back into the Premier League as a makeweight to allow the Vokes deal to go through. Youth goalkeeper Conor Mitchell has also joined Linfield on loan until end of season. Paul Wilson Ins Peter Crouch (Stoke, part exchange) Outs Sam Vokes (Stoke, £7m part exchange); Jimmy Dunne (Sunderland, loan); Ntumba Massanka (RWD Molenbeek, loan); Ali Koiki (Swindon, loan); George McMahon (Ashton United, loan); Conor Mitchell (Linfield, loan) From Cardiff’s point of view, the transfer window became irrelevant – in fact, pretty much everything became irrelevant – as soon as those awful reports emerged that Emiliano Sala, their club-record signing, was on board a plane that disappeared near the Channel Islands on 21 January. Strengthening the squad ceased to be a priority thereafter. Stuart James Ins Oumar Niasse (Everton, loan); Leandro Bacuna (Reading, £3m) Outs Omar Bogle (Portsmouth, loan); Ciaron Brown, (Livingston, loan); Mark Harris (Port Vale, loan); Gary Madine (Sheffield United, loan); Paul McKay (Morecambe, loan), Anthony Pilkington (Wigan, free/released); Lee Tomlin (Peterborough, loan) Chelsea backed their head coach, Maurizio Sarri, with the recruitment of Gonzalo Higuaín from Juventus. They would not normally be keen on hiring a 31-year-old on an initial loan deal, but their forward line has lacked a focal point, and Higuaín knows how Sarri works. Yet, by granting one of the Italian’s wishes, it also allowed the board to postpone the replacement of Cesc Fàbregas for now. Dominic Fifield Ins: Christian Pulisic (Borussia Dortmund, £57.6m); Gonzalo Higuaín (Juventus, loan) Outs: Cesc Fàbregas (Monaco, undisclosed); Kasey Palmer (Bristol City, loan); Àlvaro Morata (Atlético Madrid, loan); Christian Pulisic (Borussia Dortmund, loan); Matt Miazga (Reading, loan); Lewis Baker (Reading, loan); Victor Moses (Fenerbahce, loan); Lucas Piazon (Chievo, loan); Josh Grant (Yeovil, loan); Karlo Ziger (Sutton United, loan); Charlie Colkett (Östersund, undisclosed); Baba Rahman (Reims, loan); Michy Batshuayi (Crystal Palace, loan) Palace waited late before making a splash in the market. With interest in Dominic Solanke abandoned over the state of the youngster’s hamstring, and Bakary Sako secured on a short-term deal, it was only in the last three hours of the window that the chance to secure Michy Batshuayi from Chelsea was revived. The Belgium international may be the natural finisher this side has craved. Otherwise, the month actually became an exercise in squad trimming. DF Ins Lucas Perri (São Paulo, loan); Bakary Sako (West Bromwich Albion, free); Michy Batshuayi (Chelsea, loan) Outs Jason Puncheon (Huddersfield, loan); Jonny Williams (Charlton, free); Sullay Kaikai (NAC Breda, undisclosed); Alexander Sørloth (Gent, loan); Nya Kirby (Blackpool, loan); Jordon Mutch (released); Joseph Hungbo (Margate, loan); Oliver Webber (Greenwich Borough, loan) Marco Silva’s main concern was keeping Idrissa Gueye, despite a £21.5m bid from PSG and the player’s expressed desire to join the French champions. Ideally he would have wanted a new striker too, but the many expensive mistakes of previous management teams are now catching up with Everton and spending was put on hold until the summer. Andy Hunter Ins None Outs Mason Holgate (West Brom, loan); Kieran Dowell (Sheffield United, loan); Oumar Niasse (Cardiff, loan); Cuco Martina (Feyenoord, loan); Antony Evans (Blackpool, loan); Callum Connolly (Bolton, loan); Beni Baningime (Wigan Athletic, loan); Yannick Bolasie (Anderlecht, loan) Fulham ended up waiting until deadline day before securing a defensive reinforcement though, even then, it was not straightforward. Their interest in the Cameroonian centre-back Michael Ngadeu-Ngadjui at Slavia Prague came to nothing, with Hoffenheim’s Havard Nordtveit taken on instead, before a late deal was struck to bring in Liverpool’s Lazar Markovic on a permanent deal. Their only other addition was Ryan Babel given the significant spending was undertaken last summer. It remains to be seen whether Claudio Ranieri can mould what he has at his disposal into a side who can survive. DF Ins Ryan Babel (Besiktas, £1.8m), Havard Nordtveit (Hoffenheim, loan), Lazar Markovic (free) Outs Cauley Woodrow (Barnsley, free), Aboubakar Kamara (Yeni Malatyaspor, loan); Stephen Humphrys (Southend United, undisclosed); Elijah Adebayo (Stevenage, loan); Stefan Johansen (West Bromwich Albion, loan) The club’s biggest January moves were above the team, with Olaf Rebbe leaving as director of football and Jan Siewert replacing David Wagner as manager. Beyond the loan acquisition of the midfielder Jason Puncheon, the only addition to the squad – promising 21-year-old striker Karlan Grant – is aimed at adding firepower to a team that has struggled all season to score. Paul DoyleIns Jason Puncheon (Crystal Palace, loan); Karlan Grant (Charlton, £2m); Jaden Brown (free) Outs Colin Quaner (Ipswich, loan); Rekeil Pyke (Rochdale, loan); Ramadan Sobhi (Al Ahly, loan); Rajiv van La Parra (Middlesbrough, loan); Ryan Schofield (Notts County, loan); Jaden Brown (Exeter City, loan) Left it late in terms of incomings but made one of the headline signings of the window by bringing in Youri Tielemans on loan from Monaco. The 21-year-old will add a touch of class to the Leicester midfield – a department trimmed followed the departures of Andy King, Adrien Silva and Vicente Iborra. SJ Ins Youri Tielemans (Monaco, loan) Outs Yohan Benalouane (Nottingham Forest, undisclosed); Fousseni Diabate (Sivasspor, loan); Callum Elder (Ipswich, loan); Vicente Iborra (Villarreal, undisclosed); Adrien Silva (Monaco, loan); Andy King (Derby, loan); Darnell Johnson (Hibernian, loan) A five-point lead in the title race explains Jürgen Klopp’s reluctance to delve into the January market even with injuries impacting on his defence. Liverpool outspent their Premier League rivals last summer with a title challenge in mind and, with that on course, prioritised new contracts for the likes of Andy Robertson and Trent Alexander-Arnold while moving on fringe players. AH Ins None Outs Dominic Solanke (Bournemouth, £17m); Nathaniel Clyne (Bournemouth, loan); Kamil Grabara (Aarhus, loan); Ovie Ejaria (Reading, loan); Taiwo Awoniyi (Mouscron, loan); Pedro Chirivella (Extremadura, loan), Lazar Markovic (Fulham, free) Pep Guardiola will have to wait to acquire top-class competition for Fernandinho in the holding midfield position, which now becomes an urgent priority in the close season. Receiving a significant fee for Rabbi Matondo, a player who was never included in a competitive squad, represents smart business – the club believing this shows the academy’s productivity. Jamie Jackson Ins Ko Itakura (Kawasaki Frontale, undisclosed); Ante Palaversa (Hajduk Split, £7m) Outs Brahim Díaz (Real Madrid, £15.5m); Rabbi Matondo (Schalke, £7.9m); Ed Francis (Wolves, undisclosed); Anthony Cáceres (Sydney FC, loan); Itakura (Groningen, loan); Yangel Herrera (SD Huesca, loan); Luke Bolton (Wycombe Wanderers, loan); Marlos Moreno (Santos Laguna, loan); Uriel Antuna (LA Galaxy, loan); Ante Palaversa (Hajduk Split, loan); Ko Itakura (Groningen, loan) Ole Gunnar Solskjær would like to have added at least one central defender but the summer window will now be the time for he or whoever is manager to strengthen this area of the squad. Given this, Anthony Martial signing a fresh long-term contract may prove the club’s best business in the window, while Marouane Fellaini is set to depart for China. JJ Ins None Outs Ethan Hamilton (Rochdale, loan); Regan Poole (Newport, loan); Ro-Shaun Williams (Shrewsbury, undisclosed); Matty Willock (Crawley Town, loan); Zak Dearnley (Oldham, loan); Callum Whelan (Port Vale, loan); Joel Pareira (Kortrijk, loan) After starting the week refusing to rule out the possibility that he might resign as Newcastle’s manager, Rafael Benítez ended it by breaking the club’s 14-year-old transfer record. Benítez has long wanted a natural No 10 and will be delighted that his year long pursuit of Miguel Almirón has finally paid off. He has needed a left-back to challenge Paul Dummett ever since arriving on Tyneside but Antonio Barreca comes with mixed reviews. Louise Taylor Ins Miguel Almirón (Atlanta, £21m); Antonio Barreca (Monaco, loan) Outs Jacob Murphy (West Brom, loan); Achraf Lazaar (Sheffield Wednesday, loan); Rolando Aarons (Sheffield Wednesday loan); Callum Roberts (Colchester, loan); Elias Sörensen (Blackpool, loan); Liam Gibson (Accrington Stanley, loan); Jamie Sterry (Crewe, loan) Ralph Hasenhüttl’s priority was to trim a bloated squad and – bar Fraser Forster - he moved on everybody that he did not want. Incoming business was a struggle, largely because the club blew their January budget on Mark Hughes’s severance package. Hasenhüttl wants to improve his existing players. DH Ins None Outs Manolo Gabbiadini (Sampdoria, £10.8m); Steven Davis, (Rangers, loan); Wesley Hoedt (Celta Vigo, loan); Cédric Soares (Internazionale, loan); Ryan Seager, Yeovil, free); Adam Parkes (Watford, undisclosed); Ryan Seager (Yeovil Town, free); Jake Hesketh (MK Dons, loan) Tottenham were open to making a signing and Mauricio Pochettino admitted he was hopeful of one last week but nothing materialised. Funds are severely restricted by the £1bn new stadium project and upgrading an already strong set of players on a shoestring in a sellers’ market was unsurprisingly impossible. DH Ins None Outs Mousa Dembele (Guangzhou R&F, £11m); Georges-Kévin Nkoudou (Monaco, loan); Jaden Brown (Huddersfield, free); Anthony Georgiou (Levante, loan); Kazaiah Sterling (Sunderland, loan) The main concern before the window opened was whether the club would be able to hold on to its key players, especially Abdoulaye Doucouré, and it has done. Other than some pruning of the squad, mostly through loans, Watford evidently felt no need to make additions to a team that has been making quiet progress under Javi Gracía. PD Ins Filip Stuparevic (FK Vozvodac, undisclosed); Adam Parkes (Southampton, undisclosed) Outs Stefano Okaka (Udinese, loan); Jerome Sinclair (Oxford, loan); Randell Williams (Exeter, loan); Jorge Segura (Atlas, loan); Andrew Eleftheriou (Braintree, loan); Marvin Zeegelaar (Udinese, loan), Dion Perreira (Atlanta United); Younès Kaboul (released); Williams Velásquez (JEF United Chiba, loan); Ben Wilmot (Udinese, loan); Michael Folivi (Wimbledon, loan) The mood was calm after the arrival of Samir Nasri at the start of the month, but that all changed when Marko Arnautovic’s head was turned by a lucrative offer from a club in the Chinese Super League. In the end Arnautovic got a new deal. The feeling was that replacing the Austrian would have been impossible in January – any move for Celta Vigo’s Maxi Gómez will wait until the summer – and the focus turned to shifting Javier Hernández and Lucas Pérez from the wage bill, but both stayed and West Ham’s hopes of bringing in a forward on loan ended when they pulled out of talks with Chelsea’s Michy Batshuayi. Jacob Steinberg Ins Samir Nasri (free); Mesaque Dia (Benfica, free) Outs Joe Powell (Northampton, loan); Vashon Neufville (Newport, loan); Moses Makasi (Stevenage, loan); Sead Haksabanovic (Norrköping, loan); Toni Martínez (Lugo, loan); Reece Oxford (Augsburg, loan); Oladapo Afolayan (Oldham, loan) Frustrated in their attempts to recruit another striker – Wolves thought they had a deal in place to sign Tammy Abraham on loan from Chelsea – but that will hardly matter if Raúl Jiménez maintains his exceptional form. Turning Jonny Castro Otto’s loan into a permanent move was a good piece of business. SJ Ins David Wang (Jumilla B, undisclosed); Ed Francis (Manchester City, undisclosed); Jonny Castro Otto (Atlético Madrid, £15m) Outs Benik Afobe (Stoke, undisclosed); Danny Batth (Stoke, £3m); Harry Burgoyne (Falkirk, loan); Ethan Ebanks-Landell (Rochdale, loan); Bright Enobakhare (Coventry, loan); Kortney Hause (Aston Villa, loan); Ben Stevenson (Colchester, undisclosed); David Wang (Sporting Lisbon, loan)  