Protesters gathered at the BBC’s Salford headquarters for a demonstration organised by Tommy Robinson during which his film Panodrama was shown on a big screen next to the broadcaster’s HQ. The former leader of the English Defence League, whose real name is Stephen Yaxley-Lennon, was protesting against BBC Panorama’s investigations into him. Stand Up To Racism and Unite Against Fascism organised a counter-protest nearby on Saturday afternoon. There were speakers from Momentum, and anti-fascists held placards with slogans including “stop the fascist Tommy Robinson”. “People of various backgrounds, age, gender and race assembled to share a message of hope, unity and community,” said Navendu Mishra, a Labour and Unite activist. “We will not allow anyone to divide us, as our nation faces new challenges globally and at home.” A number of police officers and vehicles were in the area and temporary metal barriers had been placed around the BBC buildings. Greater Manchester police said there had been no arrests, and that around 4,000 people had attended the demonstration. Anti-fascist organisers said around 800 people were at their counter-protest. Michael Bradley from National Stand Up To Racism said: “Robinson and his [supporters] are trying to build off the backs of the growth of the far right in the US, Brazil and across Europe, but a united anti-racist and anti-fascist movement can stop them.” Members of the crowd sang “oh Tommy, Tommy” as Robinson arrived on stage and attacked the media. He went on to claim that “evidence of a corrupt media is that not one single journalist in Britain has reported on Panodrama”. The Ukip leader, Gerard Batten, was one of several that spoke before Robinson aired his film. “He speaks up for things that are right, he tells the truth and he can mobilise lots of people like you, and that’s what they fear,” he told demonstrators. In a statement, the National Union of Journalists (NUJ) said they “roundly condemn Tommy Robinson … and his fellow, far-right thugs who intend to intimidate staff at the corporation, particularly those working on Panorama”. “BBC staff should be free to do their jobs without these threats,” the NUJ spokesperson said. “Intimidation, threats and violence carried out by far-right protesters systematically targeting the media, especially photojournalists, are becoming more frequent and we will always call out this behaviour and report criminal activity to the police.” The BBC confirmed that Panorama is investigating Robinson and rejected the idea that their journalism was faked or biased. “Any programme we broadcast will adhere to the BBC’s strict editorial guidelines,” a spokesman said.