Tom Watson, the deputy Labour leader, has said his party faces an even more severe split if it denounces the seven MPs who quit as traitors instead of addressing the reasons for their departure. In an emotional statement, Watson said he sometimes “no longer recognises” his own party, as he called on colleagues not to adopt the language of betrayal towards the seven who resigned on Monday. He said he was particularly worried by the departure of Luciana Berger, a Jewish MP who accused the party of being “sickeningly institutionally racist” as she announced the formation of a new independent grouping in parliament. Berger was joined by Chuka Umunna, Ann Coffey, Angela Smith, Chris Leslie, Mike Gapes and Gavin Shuker in resigning from Labour in the biggest schism for the party since the gang of four senior figures quit to form the Social Democratic party (SDP) in 1981. Watson said Labour urgently needed to “confront the scale of the problem and meet the consequences to keep others from leaving”, as he urged a “kinder and gentler approach”. “I love this party. But sometimes I no longer recognise it,” he said. That is why I do not regard those who have resigned today as traitors.” His response contrasted with Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, who said he was “disappointed” in their decision and highlighted the popularity of his party’s policies with voters. In a press conference on Monday, the seven MPs delivered a scathing attack on the party for being “institutionally racist” and betraying its members over Brexit. Umunna said they were taking the first step to forming a new movement, as he called on politicians from other parties to join them. The former shadow cabinet minister said the established parties could not change because they had become the problem, and put party interests above the national interest. He said it was “time we dumped this country’s old-fashioned politics” and created an alternative. “We have taken the step in leaving the old politics behind and invite others to do the same,” he said. Berger, the MP for Liverpool Wavertree, said it had been a “difficult, painful but necessary decision” for them all, before criticising Labour for becoming “sickeningly institutionally racist”. The MP, who has been subject to antisemitic abuse, said she had become “embarrassed and ashamed” to be in the Labour party because of its failure to tackle antisemitism in its ranks. “I am leaving behind a culture of bullying, bigotry and intimidation. I look forward to a future serving with colleagues who respect each other,” she said. Leslie, the MP for Nottingham East and a former shadow chancellor, said Labour had been “hijacked by the machine politics of the hard left” and was no longer the party he and others had joined. Gapes, MP for Ilford South, said: “I aam sickened that the party is now a racist, antisemitic party and furious the Labour leadership is facilitating Brexit.” The MP, who has been a Labour member for 50 years, said he believed Corbyn would be a threat to national security if he became prime minister and was “on the wrong side on so many international issues” from Russia to Syria to Venezuela. The departure of the MPs was met with a mixture of sadness and fury among Labour colleagues. Corbyn said he was “disappointed that these MPs have felt unable to continue to work together for the Labour policies that inspired millions at the last election and saw us increase our vote by the largest share since 1945”. John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, called on those who left the party to “do the honourable thing” and quit as MPs and fight byelections. He pointed out they all increased their majorities at the last election by standing on Corbyn’s manifesto. Other senior figures also called on the MPs to resign and hold byelections if they were so confident of their support in the country. Corbyn’s chief of staff, Karie Murphy, tweeted: Those who wish to now sit as independents and vote as independents should have the integrity to stand down and fight elections as independents. A Labour party source said: “Now they are standing for different policies and on a different platform, they should resign and put them to the test in a byelection. That is the right and democratic thing to do.” Attention will now turn to other MPs who potentially sympathise with those leaving to form the independent group. Neil Coyle, the MP for Bermondsey and Old Southwark, said he was not following the seven but there were “many, many others” who shared their concerns, as he hit out at the “swaggering brocialists” in the party. Owen Smith, a former leadership candidate, has said he is considering his future although he is understood to have stepped back from the brink. There has also been speculation that several centrist Conservative politicians  were also considering their future in the party over Theresa May’s EU policy. Umunna has worked closely with Anna Soubry, the MP for Broxtowe, Heidi Allen, the MP for South Cambridgeshire, and Sarah Wollaston, the MP for Totnes, on a second referendum. MPs from both parties have been facing the threat of possible deselections where their views clash with local constituency members either over Brexit or their loyalty to the leadership. Some Labour colleagues had spent weeks trying to persuade the MPs to stay to no avail and expressed their upset that the move would harm the party’s electoral prospects, making it easier for the Conservatives to take seats. Although the group is small, McDonnell warned on Sunday that MPs quitting could cause a decade of Tory rule, as it risked splitting the Labour vote in their constituencies. “It would be like the 1980s. In my constituency in Hayes and Harlington we had a Labour MP join the SDP and we lost the seat to the Conservatives,” he told The Andrew Marr Show on Sunday. “And it basically installed Mrs Thatcher in power for that decade. I don’t think any of the people who have even been mentioned around this split would want that.” Momentum dismissed the group as a “fringe minority of MPs”. Laura Parker, a spokeswoman for the grassroots group of Corbyn supporters, said: “These MPs want to take us back to the politics of the past. With a back to the Blair years programme of privatisation, tax cuts for the rich and deregulation of the banks, they offer no concrete solutions, no new ideas and have no support amongst the public.” Last week, Momentum released a spoof Valentine’s Day video aimed at Umunna, set to the song Please Don’t Go. However, others in Labour urged the leadership to reflect on why the group had decided to leave. Dave Prentis, the general secretary of the union Unison, said: “Labour’s overriding concern must be to look long and hard at the reasons why the MPs feel they are no longer able to stay in the party. And it must get its act together over Brexit and ensure the country is spared the calamity of a no deal.”