The political crisis in Virginia escalated dramatically on Wednesday when the state’s attorney general confessed to putting on blackface in the 1980s and a woman went public with detailed allegations of sexual assault against the lieutenant governor. With Governor Ralph Northam’s career already hanging by a thread over a racist photo in his 1984 medical school yearbook, the day’s developments threatened to take down Virginia’s top three elected officials, all of them Democrats. The twin blows began with the attorney general, Mark Herring, issuing a statement saying he had worn brown makeup and a wig in 1980 to look like a rapper during a party as a 19-year-old student at the University of Virginia. Herring, who has been among those calling on Northam to resign, said he was “deeply, deeply sorry for the pain that I cause with this revelation”. He said that in the days ahead, “honest conversations and discussions will make it clear whether I can or should continue to serve as attorney general”. Then, within hours, Vanessa Tyson, the woman whose sexual assault allegations against the lieutenant governor, Justin Fairfax, surfaced earlier this week, issued a detailed statement saying Fairfax forced her to perform oral sex on him in a hotel room in 2004 during the Democratic national convention in Boston. Tyson, a 42-year-old political scientist who is on a fellowship at Stanford University and specializes in the political discourse of sexual assault, said she was not motivated by politics to come forward, writing: “I am a proud Democrat.” Fairfax, who is line to become governor if Northam resigns, has repeatedly denied her allegations, saying that the encounter was consensual and that he is the victim of a strategically timed political smear. “At no time did she express to me any discomfort or concern about our interactions, neither during that encounter, nor during the months following it, when she stayed in touch with me, nor the past 15 years,” he said in a statement. Herring, 57, went public after rumors of a blackface photo of him had circulated at the capitol for a day or more. But in his statement, he said nothing about the existence of a photo. Herring made a name for himself nationally by playing a central role in getting Virginia’s ban on gay marriage lifted, and he had been planning to run for governor in 2021. The chairman of the Virginia legislative black caucus, Lamont Bagby, said its members needed time to process the news about the attorney general: “We’ve got a lot to digest.” In his statement, Herring said he and two friends had dressed up to look like rappers they listened to, including Kurtis Blow, admitting: “It sounds ridiculous even now writing it. “That conduct clearly shows that, as a young man, I had a callous and inexcusable lack of awareness and insensitivity to the pain my behavior could inflict on others,” he said. But he also said: “This conduct is in no way reflective of the man I have become in the nearly 40 years since.” Northam has come under pressure from nearly the entire state and national Democratic establishment to resign after the discovery of a photo on his profile page in the Eastern Virginia Medical School yearbook of someone in blackface standing next to a person in a Ku Klux Klan hood and robe. Northam admitted at first that he was in the photo without saying which costume he was wearing. A day later, he denied he was in the picture. But he acknowledged he once used shoe polish to blacken his face and look like Michael Jackson at a dance contest in Texas in 1984, when he was in the army. Last Friday, Herring condemned the yearbook photo as “indefensible” and said that it was “no longer possible” for Northam to lead the state. Associated Press contributed to this report