The government of Theresa May has survived another parliamentary cliffhanger, with a vote that threatened a cabinet walkout almost certainly shelved. She remains in office – to procrastinate another day. The prime minister did so by admitting she has a plan B if her deal to leave the European Union does not win Commons support in a meaningful vote before 12 March. Mrs May’s strategy is now to say that if her deal is defeated she will offer MPs something she has so far refused to countenance: asking the EU to extend the deadline set by the article 50 process of leaving the bloc by a couple of months. She also told MPs that the United Kingdom “will only leave without a deal on 29 March if there is explicit consent in this House”. Mrs May does not want to extend the Brexit talks. What is not clear, and is an act of political irresponsibility, is whether she would vote against a no-deal Brexit – which would inflict serious damage to the economy but appeals to the fanatics in her party. The prime minister seems to think that by extending article 50 she can offer MPs a choice at the end of June that they would have already rejected: between a version of her Brexit deal and no deal. Mrs May is treating high office as if it were a battering ram, using it to hammer again and again at her opponents until they crack. She says she wants her government to “implement” the 2016 Brexit poll “in a way that commands the support of this House”. MPs, however, have yet to coalesce in a large enough group around a single plan. Parliamentarians are not coming together, they are coming apart. Like Britain, the Conservative party is split down the middle over Brexit. Mrs May obscures this reality by talking up the prospects of negotiations with Brussels over her withdrawal agreement. She aims to continue in this vein until the summer. Mrs May will use the perception of motion – shuttling between London and Brussels – to give the impression she is getting somewhere. In reality she will be going nowhere. The withdrawal agreement, a legally binding treaty, is not going to be rewritten – though material could be added to the accompanying political declaration on the future relationship between the EU and Britain. Mrs May is in search of changes to her deal that will be big enough to bring her rebels on board – as well as luring Labour MPs to her camp – and small enough for the European Union to accept. The Tory party divide is unlikely to be bridged. In that sense Mrs May’s Brexit diplomacy is a substitute for a predicament that serves only to defer it. Mrs May’s manoeuvring is about stifling – rather than giving – voice to antagonisms in her party. The same can be said of Labour’s Jeremy Corbyn. His party is also divided over how to proceed over Brexit, with the membership pushing for a second referendum on the issue. Mr Corbyn has committed himself to a “confirmatory vote” but made progress to it contingent on an improbable sequence of events. Paraded as a noble expression of national dispute, his policy in reality is a repression of it. For parliament there seems no imaginable route of escape from the Brexit straitjacket. The danger is that the public is being lulled into the idea that the apparently impossible would prove possible somehow. Denial for both Mrs May and Mr Corbyn has worked until now; but it is increasingly reckless, especially for the prime minister. The causes of Brexit are still with us, with levels of inequality and poverty rising. Mastering the mechanics of politics is not enough. Politicians need to master its substance.