Sliding closer day by day, you can hear the swelling excitement of the catastrophists at the thrilling prospect of a no-deal smash-out. Into the unknown! Hurl all the old certainties into the air and see what new patterns the broken fragments make on the floor! Break all rules, start again, bring on the Brexit revolution! They take no heed when the Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, cautioned them on Monday: “We are sleep-walking into no-deal scenario. It’s unacceptable and your best friends have to warn you. Wake up. This is real.” European council president Donald Tusk and Irish prime minister Leo Varadkar added warnings of a “chaotic Brexit”, the grown-ups trying to restrain the out-of-control teenagers punching each other up inside what purports to be the British government. Since there can’t be a reopening of the withdrawal agreement or a breaking of the backstop in the Irish border settlement, Tusk says: “It’s absolutely clear that there is no majority in the House of Commons to approve a deal.” So Theresa May tiptoes closer to the edge, at serious risk of an accidental last-minute plunge. Sniff the air and you can sense among some a dangerous appetite for chaos, a ghoulish curiosity to see what no-deal would do. Naturally, Tory extremists and Ukippers eagerly anticipate the anarchy of their low-tax, roll-back-the-state, free-trading brave new world. But among some of the Labour leader’s allies, especially the Unite coterie, you could sometimes sniff it too – that old revolutionary taste for the sound of breaking glass: out of chaos, a new dawn. The worse the national disaster, the more certain that the Tories will be rendered unelectable for a generation. Mercifully, Jeremy Corbyn has swerved away from that with his promise of a “public vote”. Sometimes there’s a hint of longing for revenge among the angriest remainers. Let the right face the full horror of a no-deal Brexit: a crash-out would expose their referendum lies. Watch them squirm to explain empty-shelf food riots and deaths from medical shortages as a price worth paying for British nationalist fantasies. How else will Britain finally learn the value of European comradeship? You see the temptation – but national shame rarely leads to a better political climate. Mercifully, most MPs are not no-dealers and will try their damnedest to prevent crashing out. On Wednesday Yvette Cooper and Oliver Letwin are set to take on the battle to rule out no deal, with an amendment giving parliament a vote to delay withdrawal if Theresa May fails to win a deal by 13 March. With a Labour whip behind it, it should pass, with many fewer Labour rebels this time. Faced with a choice of an unprecedented rebellion inside her government, May looks ready to offer her own promise of a two-month delay if her deal fails. Will that buy off her rebels? It surely shouldn’t, only inching us two months away from a no-deal abyss. So, after an excruciatingly lengthy wait, here at last is backing for a new referendum from Corbyn. He will put up a Labour soft Brexit motion – likely to fail – but then he will need to back Peter Kyle and Phil Wilson’s amendment, which is the cleverest escape from this impasse. It would nod through May’s deal on 12 March – but only in exchange for letting voters confirm this is indeed their will. There is a better chance this one could win cross-party support if, on 12 March, it’s the last chance of saving the country from leaving with no deal. The defection of eight Labour MPs to the Independent Group seems to have had a big effect, breaking the obstinacy of the leadership team. Today the pressure mounted further, with deputy leader Tom Watson talking of setting up a social democratic grouping, and Momentum’s chair, Jon Lansman, openly criticising the leadership over antisemitism. It seems to have finally jolted Corbyn into action. A deepening divide between shadow chancellor John McDonnell and Corbyn over a range of issues has been brewing, but failure to back the Kyle/Wilson plan would be the breaking point for many in Labour, with frontbenchers among those poised to resign. MPs have shown me an avalanche of emails from local party members resigning over Corbyn’s Brexit feebleness. Shadow Brexit secretary Keir Starmer has been the hero of this long march to a sane outcome, soldiering on, pushing, pulling, persuading his leader, as Labour supporters began to suspect Corbyn was himself a Brexiteer. From now on, Labour’s over-riding mission is to do all it can to prevent any kind of Brexit, and let voters decide. So, what do voters think of no deal? Andrew Cooper of Populus, who is conducting weekly polls and focus groups, reports how little people know: a third don’t understand no deal, 12% think it means everything stays as now, and a few think it means not leaving. Those who do understand no deal reject the government’s preparations as scaremongering: the more terrifying, the less convincing. All sides think politicians’ ineptitude has made Britain “a laughing stock” and the “butt of the world’s jokes”. They want Brexit done and dusted now. But when it is explained that after leaving, still longer and more complex trade negotiations lie ahead, that, says Cooper, “brings focus groups to horrified silence”. Leavers and remainers say they had no idea how difficult leaving would be: none of us did. Where do voters stand now? Few switch sides, but the switchers all move towards remain. Those who didn’t vote but would do so next time break 3:1 for remain. If Britain leaves this year, that will be against the will of a significant majority – around 8-10%. That’s why Brexiters vehemently oppose retesting the “will of the people”. Theresa May surely dreads waking up at the helm on 30 March as Britain hits the no-deal iceberg. For it to be avoided, she must heed the warnings of well-wishing EU leaders, and Corbyn needs to campaign hard to fulfil the promise he made today. • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist