One of the first jobs I did was the cover for All in the Mind by the Verve. That one photo got me a lot of work – and on to Noel Gallagher’s radar. You already knew the Gallaghers were going to be stars. Some bands act really relaxed, but when you pick the camera up you’ve got four blocks of wood. Oasis weren’t like that. Their confidence was incredible. The cover shot I did for Definitely Maybe, their 1994 debut album, ended up being completely different from how they envisaged it. Noel had seen a shot of the Beatles in Japan where they’re all sitting around this coffee table. His idea was that the band would be photographed around the dining table at [guitarist] Bonehead’s house in West Didsbury, Manchester. I was disappointed: “We’re not going anywhere exotic?” I went to have a recce and thought: “What are they going to be doing at the table? Playing cards? Having a seance?” There was no way I could see it working. Then I thought: “Well, if we have to do it in Bonehead’s house, let’s shoot in the lounge towards the bay window.” It’s a tiny room. I had to whack in a wide-angle lens just to get everyone in. But Bonehead had stripped floorboards – and with that lens, it looked like an advert for Ronseal varnish. It was a real problem. I’d not long ago been to the Egyptology section of the Manchester Museum and it came to me to have Liam lying on the floor in a kind of transcendental state with his eyes closed, like he’s not of this world. Is he alive, is he dead? I thought it’d be pretty surreal and also solve the problem of filling that space. I was nervous about mentioning it to Liam. Asking the lead singer to lie on the floor: a lot of bands wouldn’t have gone for that. But Liam was up for it straight away. The shoot was littered with Red Stripe cans, but there was no way I was having them in the shot, because it would just look like product placement. They wanted some reference to alcohol in there, though, so I said: “Let’s get some wine.” It’s actually Ribena in the glass, though. The urban myth is that it’s because they couldn’t afford wine, but that’s complete rubbish. When I was at art college, I learned that when you photograph “red wine”, you always use diluted Ribena, because wine just comes out black. I asked them to bring objects that were personal to them. The pink flamingo was Bonehead’s. Liam, Noel and [bassist] Guigsy were City fans, so we put a photo of Rodney Marsh in the fireplace. Bonehead, being a United fan, wanted the George Best picture that’s at the window – and Noel and Liam allowed it, because Best sort of transcended football. I knew it was a big gig. I'd heard the album and knew it was going to be massive Noel brought that Burt Bacharach photo, on the left, which is actually the inside of a gatefold sleeve. On the TV, Noel’s favourite film – The Good, the Bad and the Ugly – is playing. One of the roadies brought in this inflatable globe, and I got a thread and hung it from the ceiling. Noel liked that. “Yeah, global dominance,” he said. Since I was going to use a long exposure, I thought: “I know, I’ll spin it and it’ll blur.” Liam had ordered a Lambretta scooter. Halfway through the shoot, there was a knock on the door and the scooter arrived. Suddenly everyone went out into the street and Liam was off on the scooter with me shouting: “Come back!” I knew it was a big gig. I’d heard the album and knew it was going to be massive. So I was totally focused – you have to treat some album shoots like the singles final at Wimbledon. Once I’d got everyone positioned and the globe was spinning, I looked through the camera and I was buzzing. I knew I’d got it. I get so many emails from Oasis fans. I went back to the house recently and spoke to the people living there now. Apparently this guy from South America had just turned up at their door wanting a look at the living room. They told him: “You do realise this is our house, not a National Trust property?” But they let him in. • Michael Spencer Jones’s exhibition Setting the Scene: Oasis 25 is at Browse Gallery, Berlin, 9 March to 7 April , then at UK galleries later this year. Born: Sheffield, 1961. Training: Bournemouth & Poole College of Art. Influences: Alfred Stieglitz, Edward Steichen, Paul Outerbridge, Angus McBean. High point: “Being at Rockfield studios in Wales with Oasis and listening to the first playback of Champagne Supernova.” Low point: “Borrowing my girlfriend’s car to do a recce for the Verve on Southport beach – only to get it stuck in quicksand with the tide coming in.” Top tip: “It’s the small things that matter. And keep ownership of copyright.”