A media rule of thumb: beware those moments when competing editors, leader writers and commentators agree with each other and politicians leap on the bandwagon. It always heralds a moral panic. This has been perfectly illustrated by the case of Shamima Begum, the 19-year-old Islamic State recruit who gave birth to her third child – the previous two having died – in a Syrian refugee camp. She would have been an easy target at any time. Now, with Britain’s parliament in disarray and the country hopelessly split over Brexit, here was a rallying point for collective outrage. Nobody, surely, could disagree. As the Daily Telegraph’s columnist, Allison Pearson, confidently put it, the belief that “this fanatically stupid young woman … must not under any circumstances be allowed to return to Britain, is pretty much the only thing right now that unites this divided kingdom”. The Sun, no surprise, agreed, with a typically trenchant front page headline: “No regrets. No remorse. No entry”. Convinced that its readers were of one mind, it said the “Jihadi bride … must never set foot in Britain again” because she “would eradicate our way of life if she could”. Its call was explicit: “Strip her of her citizenship.” Enter stage right, far right, Sajid Javid, a home secretary with prime ministerial ambitions who knows how to exploit a wave of press-fuelled righteous indignation when he sees one. Result? Trusting that he had overwhelming public support, he removed Begum’s British citizenship. It would appear that the Sun, the paper with its inky finger on the pulse of a mere 4.2 million readers out of 66 million population, can still call the political tune. Javid would have been better advised to read the much more sensible editorials in newspapers that, despite their conservative leanings, refused to take a knee-jerk line; and, in so doing, urged him to obey the Home Office’s own guidelines on what should be done about returning Isis fighters and their sympathisers. Here’s the Times. Begum “should be allowed to return to her family in Britain and explain her actions … A judgment will have to be made as to whether she is more victim than perpetrator.” Even the new Daily Mail (doubtless to the fury of its former editor) said it accepted “she was a vulnerable child when groomed at her computer by evil recruiters” and thereafter “indoctrinated by jihadists in Syria”. She was, it said, British, and to deny her access “would breach international law”. Those initial newspaper reactions were tempered somewhat by Begum’s misguided comments in her first BBC interview. Did she not realise how inappropriate it was to defend the murderous attack on the Ariana Grande concert in Manchester as “retaliation” for the military action in Syria? Yet it was the clumsiness of her statements that illustrated a point made by the security minister, Ben Wallace, when he once described “minors brought up in the war zone as bordering between ‘victim and brainwashed’ ”. After fleeing her London home at 15 and spending four years with barbaric fanatics, did she know of what she spoke? But Javid could take heart from his press cheerleaders. The Daily Express greeted his decision to remove her citizenship with the headline “Sense at last!” And the Sun was nothing short of ecstatic about “this remorseless teenager” being banned from Britain, praising Javid’s “swift and bold action” and concluding: “Well done, The Saj”. The Saj may have bathed in momentary glory. He had solved a problem by passing the buck to Bangladesh. Again, as a prelude to what was to become a backlash against his high-handed move, he might have done well to turn to the new Mail, which wondered whether “we” were “being too hasty?” In a sensible leading article, it argued that “for all her transgressions” Begum “was made in England” and should be allowed to return “to face British justice”. After all, Britain’s constitution has been“built on the rule of law”. The Times and the Guardian put the same point more forcefully. To remove Begum’s passport, said the Times, was “an unworthy populist gesture”. The Guardian called it “shocking and shameful”, contending that it “does a disservice to this country”. Here was a woman “born in Britain, raised in Britain and radicalised in Britain … now being treated as someone else’s problem”. For an all-too-brief moment, it appeared that the Daily Telegraph had woken up to the consequences of Javid’s illiberal decision by publishing a piece by Nick Timothy in which he argued that dumping unwanted nationals on blameless countries was a grave error. Many lawyers were, by now, making clear their doubts about Begum’s banishment. The Telegraph also carried a reader’s letter that ran counter to its militant line. “Begum was a child when she made a mistake,” it said. “She is a victim; her unborn child is a victim. She should be allowed back into this country to pursue as normal a life as is possible, and to bring up her child. Mercy is a sign of strength.” But the paper, which is now indistinguishable from the Sun only by its shape and the colour of its masthead, was back to form the following day. It gave unswerving support to Javid, partly on the grounds that Jeremy Corbyn had taken the opposite point of view. Indeed, Corbyn’s intervention on behalf of Begum was meat and drink to his press opponents and their reaction was predictable. “What else”, said the Sun, “would we expect from the terrorists’ friend?” As far as the Express was concerned, Javid had spoken “for the majority of Britons when he cut Begum adrift” while the Labour leader’s “judgment is frighteningly perverse”. No wonder Begum told the Sunday Telegraph: “I regret speaking to the media.” For the real perversity of this episode is Javid’s pandering to populism based on an apparent faith in the rightwing press’s ability to represent majority opinion. These newspapers, always players to the gallery, portray only a narrow set of values and interests. They are, by their nature, reactionary. Then again, how refreshing is the new Mail, proof that conservative does not need to mean hide-bound, intolerant and prejudiced by appealing only to the lowest common denominator.