The Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Science has announced the first round of Oscars presenters, following accusations that it pressured actors to avoid presenting at other awards ceremonies before the ceremony later this month. The first list of presenters includes the Crazy Rich Asians stars Awkwafina and Constance Wu, former Golden Globes hosts Tina Fey and Amy Poehler, best actress winners Brie Larson and Charlize Theron, as well as Daniel Craig, Chris Evans, Whoopi Goldberg, Jennifer Lopez, Maya Rudolph, Amandla Stenberg and Tessa Thompson. The Oscars will presumably rely more heavily on presenters this year, as the show is without a host for the first time in 30 years after the Academy’s pick, Kevin Hart, became embroiled in controversy due to past homophobic tweets. (Hart initially recused himself from hosting, then seemed open to returning, with Ellen DeGeneres’s blessing, on her daytime talkshow; he ultimately declared himself “over it” and ruled hosting out.) The lack of host has put more pressure on securing high-profile presenters – pressure that has allegedly translated into intimidation for actors to not appear at other awards ceremonies in the run-up to the Oscars. In a statement last month, the Screen Actors Guild union, Sag-Aftra, claimed that an “extraordinary and unwarranted pressure” was being placed on their members to appear on stage at the Oscars without previously presenting at the Sag awards. “We have received multiple reports of these activities and have experienced firsthand the Academy’s graceless pressure tactics and attempts to control the awards show talent pipeline,” the statement read. “This self-serving intimidation of SAG-AFTRA members is meant to limit their opportunities to be seen and honor the work of their fellow artists throughout the season,” the statement continued. “Actors should be free to accept any offer to participate in industry celebrations. The apparent attempt by the Academy to keep our members from presenting on their own awards show is utterly outrageous and unacceptable.” The Academy also announced on Monday that Gustavo Dudamel and the LA Philharmonic will perform during the In Memoriam segment. The announcement followed rumors that the Academy would cut the telecast to only two live performances of nominees for best song, prompting the Mary Poppins Returns songwriter and performer Lin-Manuel Miranda to tweet his disappointment. The Academy then confirmed on Saturday that at least four of the nominees will perform: Bradley Cooper and Lady Gaga with Shallow from A Star Is Born, Jennifer Hudson with I’ll Fight from RBG, and Gillian Welch and David Rawlings with When a Cowboy Trades His Spurs for Wings from The Ballad of Buster Scruggs. A “special surprise guest” will perform The Place Where Lost Things Go from Mary Poppins Returns. The only song not yet confirmed is Black Panther’s All the Stars, by Kendrick Lamar and SZA. The absurdist historical farce The Favourite is tied for the most Oscar nominations this year – 10 – with Alfonso Cuarón’s autobiographical Roma, which could become the first foreign language film to win best picture. A Star Is Born is close behind with eight nominations. The Oscars will air on 24 February at the Dolby Theater in Hollywood.