Netflix is no longer in the Marvel business. Although this looked to be the case last year when it binned Daredevil, Iron Fist and Luke Cage, this week’s cancellation of Jessica Jones and The Punisher has rubberstamped it. Netflix’s expensive licensing deal with Marvel has run aground for good. But don’t be sad. Sure, plenty of people liked those series, but the likelihood is that they aren’t going away forever. By the end of the year, Disney’s streaming service will be up and running and – since its programming slate already runs to shows about minor Avengers and obscure little subchapters of Star Wars mythology – you can bet your bottom dollar that at least some of the Defenders will make their way to Disney+. The new Disney+ shows will be distinct from the slightly wobbly fare produced or co-produced by ABC Studios. And, again, this is a good thing. Over and over, with Spider-Man and the Incredible Hulk and Doctor Strange (check out his pre-MCU outing for proof), it’s been proven that Marvel characters do better when Marvel has the highest level of direct control. So when the Defenders eventually make their way to Disney+, they should be even better than they already were. With this in mind, here are all the improvements I’d like to see come to their revival. Fewer episodes. This, by the way is going to be a theme. Almost all the Netflix shows were bloated beyond words, with an inevitable four-episode chasm in the middle of each season where the characters all just stood around twiddling their thumbs. However, Luke Cage’s was one of the most pronounced; its first series almost had to regain steam from a standing start halfway through the run. Tighter and better next time, please. The plus side is that Jon Bernthal is already the Punisher, and Disney+ will be hard pushed to find anyone more suited to the role. However, he plays a character called the Punisher, for crying out loud. When he’s revived, could we actually see him punishing some people in anger? This would be more expensive to make, because full-gore, high-velocity action scenes cost more money than directionless mumblefests, but they’re also much more entertaining. Also, the Punisher is a violent, revenge-obsessed jerk. If Disney+ could stop trying to make him so much of a relatable hero, that’d be great too. Well, this one’s easy. Compare season one of Jessica Jones, which was thrilling and fun and heartbreaking all at the same time, with the sluggish nothingness of season two. What was missing? David Tennant’s Kilgrave. Kilgrave was a villain for the ages, managing to be truly monstrous and also kind of fun. He did terrible, terrible things to people, but the glee that Tennant took in the role was so evident that you could easily understand why people fell under his character’s spell. Second time around, Jones was left twisting in the wind without him. Bring Kilgrave back and, while you’re at it, make fewer episodes. I’d suggest a similar approach for Daredevil. Two of its seasons were truly great, and one of them stank like a blocked toilet. The difference, again, was Vincent D’Onofrio’s Kingpin; not just a great villain, but arguably an even more compelling character than Daredevil himself. I’d even be tempted to reframe the series as Daredevil v Kingpin and make the whole thing a sprawling cat-and-mouse two-hander, with the characters as intertwined and codependent as Batman and the Joker. Also, if Foggy got murdered somehow, that’d also be wonderful. Fewer episodes too, please. Fewer episodes. Many fewer episodes. Like, zero episodes. Is it possible to make fewer than zero episodes? If Disney+ gains the capacity to not only not make any new episodes of Iron Fist, but also to erase the idea of Iron Fist from all of history, the world would be a much happier place.