For people working in the outwardly bright and cheerful world of children’s television, the past week was not a happy one. On Thursday, a report on the UK’s television viewing habits confirmed many of their worst fears. Among 4-to-15-year-olds last year, the hours of conventional or “linear” television viewed – that is, television watched at the time it was being broadcast – had fallen by 11% in 12 months. Among 16-to-24s, the decline was 15%: the biggest year-on-year drop ever recorded. The figures mean that British under-25s are now watching exactly half the amount of conventional broadcast television that they did in 2010 – when, according to the report’s authors, the industry felt the first real impact of streaming services, YouTube, and tablet computers. Broadly speaking, 4-to-15-year-olds are defecting to YouTube, and 16-to-24-year-olds to streaming services such as Netflix and Amazon Prime. YouTube, says Julian Aquilina of Enders Analysis, the publisher of the report, looks like the big winner. “The under-16s on average spend two and a half hours a day watching some form of TV or video, and YouTube gets 45 minutes of that – a very large proportion for a single channel.” The big losers, meanwhile, are the conventional broadcasters, forced to watch a glorious past of Blue Peter, Grange Hill and Peppa Pig succumb to digital celebrities such as ThatcherJoe, Zoella and PewDiePie. “It’s fair to say that our television broadcasters are concerned,” Aquilina said. “Their real worry is that their future adult audiences used to be trained up on their children’s channels, and that seems to be ending.” One senior drama producer, who has worked at BBC1 and the commercial channels, puts it more bluntly. “Streaming channels, and even more so YouTube, are cooler, edgier, and do all the things mainstream TV cannot do – simply because their economic models means they don’t have to reach nearly as many viewers, and they’re not policed by the Daily Mail. Young people go to Netflix or YouTubers because those channels feel like they’re directly targeting them. “I look at the new Netflix series Sex Education, or at kids like PewDiePie being frank about their lives on YouTube, and I think: ‘If I was making Hollyoaks, I’d shit myself.’ And you can’t copy it, so what do you do to attract that audience? How do you reach it for an advertiser? You can try to collaborate, but what we all really need are new ideas.” As Enders was announcing its report in central London, a home for some of those new ideas was being prepared at the ExCeL exhibition centre, a few miles away in Docklands. From Thursday to Sunday next week, the ExCeL will host the first UK staging of VidCon, the world’s best-attended and best-known event for YouTubers and the industry that now surrounds them. The new breed of celebrities known as YouTubers seek to gain subscribers to their YouTube channels by regularly posting videos – usually featuring themselves. Through advertising, brand endorsements and their own branded products, they can make substantial fortunes. The world’s most popular YouTuber, Felix Kjellberg – a 29-year-old Swede known to his fans as PewDiePie – has 84.3 million subscribers and in 2016 was reported by Forbes magazine to be earning $15m a year. It was two other successful YouTubers, brothers Hank and John Green (John is also the bestselling author of the novel The Fault in Our Stars) who created VidCon in 2010. An annual event in southern California, it combines thronged guest appearances by YouTube celebrities with earnest talks by stars, thinkers and executives from film, TV and technology. It might seem a curious blend of YouTube, Glastonbury and the Edinburgh international television festival, but it sells out its 30,000 tickets weeks before opening, and is widely regarded as the best place to observe the future of online video culture. VidCon’s chief executive, Jim Louderback, says the event is coming to London because the UK is “the biggest online video audience in Europe, and one of the biggest English-speaking markets in the world”, and because it “has an amazing group of local creators”. Judging from the speakers, though, he’s also well aware that there is a market of broadcasters, programme-makers and advertisers eager to discuss ways of staying in touch with young audiences. On Friday he himself will chair a discussion with speakers from the BBC, Sky and Viacom – the US company that owns MTV, Nickelodeon and, since last February, VidCon. Louderback says: “Back in 2010, online video was widely perceived as an outlier, a backwater of viral videos and user generated content, but we were sure that this was to become a large part of the future of entertainment: but the world of traditional video – television and movies – and the world of online video were separated by a huge gulf. Most online video stars ignored traditional media, while traditional media looked down their noses in disdain at these new upstarts. Today, it’s now all in a continuum that stretches from the newest vlogger in her basement to the biggest movies on the planet.” The real problem for big media companies is that YouTubers are loved precisely because they are amateurish mavericks outside the mainstream. Most YouTube channels are viewed by children on their own, with the YouTuber speaking directly to camera, and a great deal of the content involves riffing on the mundane details of daily life. American YouTuber Robert James Rallison’s animated channel, The Odd1sOut, features lengthy monologues about subjects such as working in Subway or disliking board games; it has 10 million subscribers. This appetite for banality now divides generations in the way that raucous music used to. Parents who grew up with punk may be proudly unshockable when it comes to their kids’ Spotify playlists, but don’t understand why anyone would listen to hour-long discourses on what someone just bought at the mall. The programme-makers among them do, however, understand that the sense of intimacy created in such videos just doesn’t work on a 48-inch TV in the living room. One apparently obvious solution for programme-makers and brands is to partner with YouTubers, who can be slotted into TV formats as characters or contestants – hence the appearance of ThatcherJoe (Joe Sugg) on last year’s Strictly Come Dancing. Even that strategy – the subject of several talks at VidCon – has come into question, though, because of recent controversies involving social media stars. In December, PewDiePie was caught out publicising a fellow YouTuber who had posted videos with antisemitic content, and Netflix’s documentary Fyre, released last month, discredited social media influencers such as the model Kendall Jenner who helped to publicise the disastrous Fyre festival in 2017. James Hacking, founder of the agency Socially Powerful, which brokers relationships between YouTubers, influencers and brands, says the answer lies in understanding what makes a someone successful, rather than judging them on their number of followers. “Brands need to understand,” he says, “who the people are who actually have real influence over their audience – who can actually make their audience move, react, click, buy, attend events and so on. You can’t tell that just from the numbers of followers. Brands need to build long-term relationships with these influencers.” What young audiences are really looking for is authenticity, he says. “You can tell when people have got into the career to make a lot of money, because it comes across in their content and how they portray themselves. They maybe start to put less effort into what they’re creating, working with too many brands, or simply just uploading content for the sake of it. If you’re authentic and stay true to yourself, you’ll evolve and perhaps grow up, but you’ll always be the same person who your audience want to watch and engage with.” Of course, Hacking can detect signs of inauthenticity because he is of the generation that can read the signs; the rest of us must ask a helpful child, or resort to talks at the ExCeL centre. It is tempting, perhaps, to think that all this means we are living through the final days of children’s television’s golden age. But from the children’s point of view, perhaps we are just at the beginning of a new one; it’s just that, if you’re over 24, you’re not really invited in.