Lando Norris, who next month will become the youngest British driver to compete in Formula One, has said he knows he will make mistakes while under the intense scrutiny of his debut season for McLaren. Norris will be 19 at the first grand prix in Melbourne and faces by far the most challenging test of his career as he seeks to make his mark at a team still in the throes of rebuilding after four years of underperformance. Norris and his teammate Carlos Sainz Jr replace Fernando Alonso, who has retired from F1, and Stoffel Vandoorne, who was dropped by McLaren at the end of last season. Vandoorne was a recognised talent but struggled in an uncompetitive car and when measured against Alonso. The task facing Norris is similarly daunting, with Sainz in his fifth season and McLaren with another as yet unproven car, but he does not expect an easy ride. “There’s going to be times when I make mistakes but it’s just knowing that’s part of it,” he said. “No one’s perfect. I’m sure there’s going to be times when I do things wrong that no one’s going to like and everyone’s going to think I’m terrible and rubbish but I know I’m going to go through those times.It’s just understanding that that’s going to happen. “It’s very different when you get to F1 knowing when I make one small mistake a lot more people are going to see it. There’s more pressure in knowing you’re under more scrutiny of making small mistakes.” Norris was speaking at the launch of the McLaren MCL34 at the team’s headquarters in Woking. He joined McLaren as a junior driver in 2017 and was the reserve driver in 2018, taking part in practice at the Belgian GP. He was second in the F2 championship last season and McLaren have high hopes he will be a star, having shown the potential to make it with a string of titles in junior series. Norris will take the wheel of the MCL34 at the first test in Barcelona on Monday and was more than aware of the scale of the challenge that faced him and McLaren. “I’ve spent a lot of time over the winter to try and prepare myself in every way for this moment and for the races,” he said. “But there’s some things you can’t learn until you’re on track and in that situation. The aim is to win races and championships but we have to improve as a team first.” McLaren’s chief executive officer, Zak Brown, acknowledged the team are still undergoing a rebuilding process. They endured three woeful years with an underpowered and unreliable Honda engine until switching to Renault last year. However, optimism of a swift return to the sharp end was crushed when their car proved to have fundamental aerodynamic problems. They finished sixth in the constructors’ standings, flattered by how much Alonso was able to extract from his recalcitrant ride. Brown’s new drivers, especially Norris, are unknown quantities in comparison with Alonso but the American was confident about the British driver’s ability to step up. “Lando is very mature for his age and been in a race car for most of his life,” he said. “He is a relaxed individual and we think he is ready otherwise we would not put him in the car. I am sure he will make some rookie mistakes but we will be there to support him. I think he will hit the ground running and will be on it right away.” McLaren, who have been restructuring their personnel, are awaiting two major new additions. James Key, who was at Toro Rosso, will join as the technical director at a still undisclosed point in the near future and Andreas Seidl, who was in charge of Porsche’s highly successful world endurance championship team, will become their head of F1 operations on 1 May.