Paul Manafort is a hardened criminal who “repeatedly and brazenly” broke the law even while serving as Donald Trump’s campaign chairman, special counsel Robert Mueller has said. Mueller’s team said in a new court filing in Washington DC that Manafort deserved a second prison sentence, which could total 10 years, reflecting the seriousness of his crimes. The prosecutors also said they may ask for that sentence to begin only after Manafort, 69, completes a sentence of up to 24 years for separate convictions in Virginia. Manafort has shown a “hardened adherence to committing crimes and lack of remorse”, they wrote in a sentencing memo released on Saturday afternoon. Mueller’s team did not, however, provide new details on Manafort’s interactions with an alleged Russian intelligence operative, or make any new allegations tying Manafort to Russia’s election interference. Manafort chaired Trump’s 2016 presidential election campaign. He has been in jail since June last year after being caught witness tampering while on bail awaiting trial. Saturday’s filing related to Manafort’s upcoming sentencing for two counts of criminal conspiracy he admitted last September. Mueller’s team said last week Manafort faced 19 to 24 years in prison for separate fraud convictions in Virginia. Manafort’s admission of the conspiracy charges in Washington secured him a plea deal that Mueller scrapped after Manafort continued lying. The violation of the deal freed Mueller’s team from obligations to recommend a lenient sentence. Mueller is investigating whether there were any links or coordination between Trump’s team and Russia’s interference in the 2016 US election, which US intelligence agencies concluded was aimed at helping Trump. Investigators have homed in on Manafort’s interactions in 2016 with Konstantin Kilimnik, a former colleague and an alleged Russian intelligence operative. Kilimnik denies involvement with Russian intelligence. William Barr, the new US attorney general, is expecting to receive a report from Mueller in the coming weeks that would signal the end the special counsel’s investigation, according to several media reports. The filing released on Saturday recapped the conspiracies to which Manafort pleaded guilty in Washington. They spanned several crimes including money laundering, tax fraud and failing to register as an agent of Ukraine in the US. Manafort also confessed to conspiring with Kilimnik to obstruct justice. Early last year, the pair contacted former lobbying colleagues who were likely witnesses in Manafort’s case and urged them to give false testimony. Mueller’s team said that for almost a decade, Manafort used “deceptive tactics” to run a multi-million dollar lobbying campaign in Washington for Ukraine’s former pro-Russian administration, without registering in the US as a foreign agent. The veteran Republican operative knew he was legally required to register, the prosecutors said, because he ran into trouble for the same activity when working for Saudi Arabia during Ronald Reagan’s presidency. Manafort’s criminality “remarkably went unabated even after indictment”, Mueller’s team said in the Saturday filing. He conspired to witness tamper with Kilimnik while out on bail and then committed perjury even after signing his plea deal. Judge Amy Berman Jackson this month agreed with Mueller that Manafort continued lying about three disputed issues: his interactions with Kilimnik, a payment he took from a pro-Trump campaign group and another justice department investigation that has not been identified. Manafort entered his guilty pleas last year shortly before he was due to go on trial a second time. He acted after the jury in Virginia found him guilty in August on eight financial crimes largely committed during the time of his work in eastern Europe. Jurors could not reach a verdict on 10 other charges. Manafort was found to have hidden more than $16m of earnings from US authorities, allowing him to avoid paying $6m in taxes. He also hid tens of millions of dollars in foreign bank accounts and secured $25m in bank loans through fraud. Several other former Trump advisers have been convicted of crimes as a result of Mueller’s investigation. None of the convictions related to Russia’s interference in the election. More than two dozen Russians have been charged for their roles in the operation, which included stealing and leaking emails from senior Democrats and mounting an online disinformation campaign to disrupt the election.