Uefa have charged Sergio Ramos with deliberately picking up a yellow card during Real Madrid’s Champions League last-16 match against Ajax. The defender will find out on Thursday if he will face an extended suspension. The Real Madrid captain was booked in the 89th minute of Madrid’s 2-1 victory in Amsterdam for a foul on Kasper Dolberg – his second booking in this year’s competition – and will miss next week’s second leg at the Bernabéu, serving his suspension before the team’s likely progress to the quarter-finals. Speaking immediately after the match, Ramos was quoted as saying he “would be lying” if he were to deny deliberately earning the booking. Ramos later used social media to claim he had not intentionally collected a caution, referring instead to purposefully giving away a free-kick to prevent an Ajax equaliser. Uefa subsequently launched a disciplinary investigation and confirmed on Tuesday that Ramos had been charged. If found guilty when the case is dealt with by the Uefa Control, Ethics and Disciplinary Body, Ramos could receive a further suspension and potentially miss the quarter-finals. Valencia midfielder Geoffrey Kondogbia was recently handed a two-match ban by Uefa for a similar offence. He was ruled to have deliberately received a yellow card during the Europa League first-leg win at Celtic. The midfielder will only miss the first leg of the tie against Krasnodar, however, with the second leg in Glasgow counting towards the ban. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels In an interview with Spanish newspaper Marca, Ramos has reiterated his denial of any wrongdoing. “I’m very surprised about all this,” the 32-year-old said. “I was referring to forcing the foul – a foul that was inevitable – not to forcing the booking.” Asked if he knew the foul was likely to lead to a yellow card and a ban, he added: “Yes, but I had no choice. It was a very dangerous counter-attack in the 88th minute. That’s why I said ‘I would lie if I said I did not know that I was carrying a penalty’, just as I knew that I had no other choice than to make a mistake.” “That’s what I meant when I said that in football you have to make complicated decisions,” Ramos added. “If I had wanted to force [a booking], I could have done it in the group stage, in the match against Roma because we had already won the group and the last game against CSKA, was inconsequential.” Real Madrid’s 2-0 win at Roma on matchday five ensured they would win Group G regardless of the result against CSKA Moscow in the final group game; Real ultimately lost that game 3-0. Ramos picked up his first booking at home to Roma in the first game of their campaign. Uefa have also confirmed that disciplinary proceedings have been opened following a complaint made by Tottenham, after the Champions League group game at Barcelona on 11 December. Barcelona have been charged with insufficient organisation at the Camp Nou for the match, which ended in a 1-1 draw. The case is set to be dealt with at next month’s meeting of Uefa’s Control, Ethics and Disciplinary Body.