A Grenfell survivor is taking legal action against Kensington and Chelsea council, claiming it failed to provide her with permanent housing more than 20 months after the fire. Helen Gebremeskel and her daughter Lulya, 14, are claiming the borough has failed to implement its own policies for rehousing survivors in the case of her and her daughter. Both mother and daughter have been diagnosed with PTSD following the tower block fire, which claimed 72 lives. Gebremeskel led other survivors down the stairs wrapped in wet towels. She often took the stairs so was more familiar with them than some of the other survivors. They encountered horrific scenes as they left the building, including seeing the bodies of some of those who had died while trying to escape. She became separated from Lulya, who was rescued by a firefighter. For hours after she escaped, Gebremeskel did not know where her daughter was or whether she was alive. Her daughter was taken to hospital and placed in an induced coma for 10 days because of cyanide poisoning from the fire. Mother and daughter were housed in a hotel for 11 months after the fire in June 2017 and are in temporary accommodation. The council has offered Gebremeskel and her daughter permanent accommodation in blocks of flats with lifts. “We cannot live in a block after what we went through,” said Gebremeskel. “I have asked for a house, which some of the other survivors have got. But the council is not responding to our request. “When we went to look at one of the flats in a block, Lulya said: ‘I can’t live in a block,’ and so I have been trying since then to get us accommodation in a house. I feel so hopeless and depressed. What have we done to deserve this? Why are we being treated like this after everything we have been through?” According to the latest figures from the council, of the 202 Grenfell households the council is working with, 178 have been rehoused in permanent accommodation. Of the remainder, 16 households are still in temporary accommodation, three in hotels, four in serviced apartments and one is staying with family. Gebremeskel said she had repeatedly asked the council to give her a budget to select a property as the council has done with other survivors. She said the council had refused to do this. Lulya said: “Me and my mum were promised we’d be rehoused in a month. What I’m wondering is, why it’s taking so long. I already had my safe space but it’s gone. I want to move on so I can get a glimpse of normal life again. All I want is to have my safe place where I can feel my whole self again. I want for the only problems in life to be me having way too much homework that I can’t keep up.” Gebremeskel’s solicitor, Albert Harwood of Howe & Co, said: “Both Helen and her daughter have been diagnosed with PTSD. Their medical team state they will not start the process of recovery until they are placed in permanent accommodation ...We have been in continuous discussions with RKBC. Its failure to implement its own policies has left Helen with no alternative other than legal proceedings. “We consider that this refusal to change position is not only legally flawed, it is also deeply unfair. It is unfortunate that Helen has to pursue legal proceedings to force [the council] to do what is right both legally and morally.” A council spokesman said it had spent £220m to secure 300 homes, so people affected by Grenfell had the maximum choice available. “We have made 1,009 housing offers as part of this process, apart from less than 10 properties which were purchased for specific disabled and bereaved households. “Any properties purchased after January 2018 were acquired to meet the specific needs of households with particular requirements, which could not be met by properties available whilst the purchasing programme was active. Of the 202 households from Grenfell Tower and Grenfell Walk, less than 5% have had a council bespoke property purchase.” A freedom of information response obtained by the Guardian revealed that the council failed to complete on 98 potential property deals for new homes for Grenfell survivors that had reached the stage of solicitor involvement. The council spokesman said there were a variety of legitimate reasons why these deals were not completed. He said: ”In spending over £200m in purchasing properties for those affected by the Grenfell tragedy, our priority was to rapidly acquire properties to make sure we could offer homes that met their needs. This meant we bid on a large number of suitable properties offered for sale in the local area … though the sales process was not completed on some of the properties we bid for.”