England play 11 one-day internationals and two international warm-up matches before the World Cup starts on 30 May, but this five-match series is the last before they must announce their 15-man squad. A 16th space would allow them to cover all bases, but 15 means a corner needs to be cut. They are likely to want two spare seam bowlers, especially as those players are most susceptible to injury, which means they will have to sacrifice either a second back-up batsman (Alex Hales will be the first) or a back-up spinner. Or they could cheat. That’s what they have done with the current squad, in which Joe Denly nominally fills both roles. Denly’s last ODI appearance was in 2009 and England need to find out whether he, with support from Joe Root, is a realistic option should Adil Rashid or Moeen Ali sustain an injury. The alternatives are not irresistible, though Liam Dawson – not in the squad for West Indies – would be a more reliable, like‑for‑like substitute. It feels safe to assume 10 of England’s XI for the first World Cup match against South Africa: Bairstow, Roy, Root, Morgan, Stokes, Buttler, Ali, Woakes, Rashid, Plunkett. That leaves a space for someone to share the new ball with Chris Woakes, and this series will be an unofficial shootout between Mark Wood, Tom Curran and the much improved David Willey. All three are battling for a place in the team – and also, perhaps, for a place in the squad. If England decide Jofra Archer’s talent is too seductive to ignore – he becomes available for selection after this series – one of Wood, Curran and Willey will miss out. The decision is complicated by the fact that all have different virtues: Wood’s pace and effervescence, Curran’s variety and big-stage swagger, Willey’s new-ball threat and lower-order hitting. The West Indies series should provide a strong clue as to whether Wood’s first-innings spell in St Lucia was a magical one-off or something more significant. Before he was recalled for the third Test, Wood was hanging on to a place in the World Cup squad, never mind the team, but if he can regularly bowl at 95mph he will be hard to leave out of the XI. Although Wood’s one-day record is poor – he averages nearly 50 with the ball – most of his success has come in bigger games and pressure moments. When he is in the team and bowling well, English cricket is a much happier place. Woakes has quietly become, along with Adil Rashid, the most irreplaceable player in England’s one-day team. He is Eoin Morgan’s banker with the new ball and at the death, and also averages 38 with the bat since England’s ODI revolution began in 2015. The catch is that Woakes has missed a lot of cricket through injury in recent times, mainly because of a chronic knee problem. The West Indies series, with five games in 11 days, should give England a greater understanding of whether he will be able to cope with the World Cup marathon, or whether they need to ration his appearances. While England would like Wood’s Test form to bleed into ODIs, they will want the opposite with Adil Rashid. Though he had a good series in Sri Lanka, Rashid’s poor performance in Barbados may well be his last at Test level. Rashid is a strange mix of confidence and fragility, nous and naivety, and England will hope he can pick up where he left off in one-day cricket. He has been England’s best bowler since the last World Cup, and only Afghanistan’s Rashid Khan has taken more ODI wickets in that time. There is enough evidence to suggest that he is completely at peace in one‑day cricket, where he is expertly managed by Morgan, and his performance in the warm-up game was encouraging. But England will breathe a little easier once normal service is resumed. There is a history of England making last-minute changes to their World Cup plans, from dropping their best player, Nick Knight, on the eve of the 1999 tournament to sacking Alastair Cook in 2014. There are unlikely to be any surprises this time, such is Morgan’s aversion to such desperate nonsense and the stability of a side that have won their last nine ODI series. But if there is to be a last-minute switch, the most vulnerable players are Liam Plunkett and Jonny Bairstow. Plunkett, whose middle-overs threat has been fundamental to England’s success, turns 34 in April and has shown signs of his birth certificate. Bairstow, after an astonishing spell of form in 50-over cricket last summer, has had a strange few months in all forms of the game – and the openers will always be the most vulnerable batsmen because of Hales’s presence on the sidelines. Plunkett and Bairstow surely have enough credit in the bank, but a strong series would keep any speculation at bay. • This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.    