Mako Vunipola has been ruled out of England’s final three Six Nations matches. The Saracens prop, who missed the autumn campaign because of injury, suffered ankle ligament damage against France on Sunday and will be out of action for an expected 10 weeks. Vunipola has been instrumental in England’s winning start to the tournament. He was the man of the match against Ireland in Dublin at the start of the month when he made 23 tackles. Ben Moon was on the bench against France on Sunday having displaced Ellis Genge, leaving Eddie Jones with a decision to make for the match against Wales in Cardiff next week. “It is very disappointing to lose Mako at this stage,” said the England coach, whose side are potentially a victory in Wales away from reclaiming the title from Ireland having secured a try bonus point in each of their two victories. Italy and Scotland at home follow. “He is an important player for us but it does provide an opportunity for the team to grow.” Saracens said in a statement: “Following medical assessments Mako Vunipola has been ruled out of England’s Six Nations campaign with an ankle ligament injury. Vunipola is expected to be out for 10 weeks. The prop will begin his rehabilitation with Saracens.” Vunipola was out for eight weeks with a calf strain sustained during Saracens’ European Champions Cup match at Glasgow in October. They face the same opponents in the quarter-finals at the end of next month. Wales will be without their No 8 Taulupe Faletau for the whole tournament. He suffered a broken arm playing for Bath last week in his return from the same injury and needs further surgery. Wales had hoped he would be available for at least their final match against Ireland but no date has been put on his comeback. “We’re gutted for Taulupe but this is the best course of action for him,” said the Bath director of rugby, Todd Blackadder. “We will know more in terms of a time frame following the surgery but we’re looking forward to welcoming him back into the squad.” Better news for Wales is the return of Leigh Halfpenny to full training three months after he was concussed during the victory over Australia. He will be available for selection against England but after so long out he is more likely to be a contender for the bench than a starting position. “Leigh is symptom-free and is taking full contact,” said the Scarlets’ coach, Wayne Pivac. “He has trained with us for three days and done everything, including taking high balls and getting clattered. He goes back to Wales available to play. Warren Gatland [the coach] will decide what to do from there.” The Scarlets have a Pro14 match in Treviso on Saturday, for which Halfpenny may be released. “We will get a message about who, if anyone, is getting released after Wales train on Wednesday,” Pivac said. The Gloucester scrum-half Callum Braley has been called up by Italy for next week’s match against Ireland. The 24-year old qualifies through a grandfather.