Australian comedian Hannah Gadsby has announced she will be embarking on her first US tour with a brand new standup show named after her dog, Douglas. Douglas will be a highly anticipated follow-up to global sensation Nanette, which premiered in Australia in 2017 and was picked up by Netflix in June 2018, following an 18-month tour. Nanette was widely praised for deconstructing the genre of standup. In it, Gadsby reckoned with the ways self-deprecating humour compounded trauma inflicted upon her, and encouraged the audience to confront the realities of marginalisation and their complicity in it. The show launched a thousand thinkpieces, with the New York Times calling it “comedy-destroying, soul-affirming” and the Atlantic praising it as a “radical, transformative work”. Roxane Gay, Ellen Page and Lily Allen all publicly praised it, and Gadsby landed a publishing deal for a memoir, Ten Steps to Nanette, which is due out later this year. I have some news... I’m going on a world tour with a brand new show that I’ve called ‘Douglas’. So no... I haven’t quit comedy. It’s beginning in Melbourne next month and then going around the United States with many more dates to come. You can use the link in my bio to sign up to get the pre-sale and all of the details first. A post shared by  Hannah Gadsby (@hannah_gadsby) on Feb 4, 2019 at 6:11am PST Douglas, which is Gadsby’s 11th standup show, will feature new material that in part deals with the success of her last. “How does one who is well-practised in the art of negative attention deal with a sudden influx of positive attention?” she said in an interview with the Hollywood Reporter. “[Douglas] is [based] around my inability to wrangle positive attention.” Gadsby made headlines again in December when she criticised so-called “good men” during her speech at the Women in Entertainment gala: “The last thing I need right now, in this moment in history, is having to listen to men monologue about misogyny, and how other men should just stop being creepy,” she said. On Monday Gadsby told the Hollywood Reporter that while Douglas will tackle big and topical issues, “the humour will be back in” this time. “Nanette was the only way that people [in the US] know me and so that’s the only prism that they view my work,” she said. “It’s pretty much [a view that], I’m a comedian that’s not funny … I don’t have any intention of workshopping any of my traumas on stage again. That took a toll. And also, I kinda did that.” Gadsby said she’s currently whittling down “four hours of show”, but hinted it will be “interested in the dynamics of power and privilege”. She also explained why she changed her mind about quitting comedy – an intention that was at the heart of Nanette, which she has since pulled back from. “I feel like I had every opportunity thrown at me at once [after Nanette]. Everyone wanted a piece of this pie, so to speak,” she said. “And I thought after some time that perhaps my best next move would be to do something that is what I’m really good … instead of trying to learn a whole new skill set. “My whole life and world has changed, so there’s no real reason to change absolutely everything.” oh hi there LOS ANGELES ... I am working on a new little something something on stage at dynasty Typewriter. @JoinTheDynasty Work in progress... Get amongst it. https://t.co/AWpKhglPEF pic.twitter.com/KaL5ddodLm New material for the show is being aired as part of a “work in progress” residency through February and March in Los Angeles, before the show makes its premiere in Melbourne on 27 March and then tours the US. Gadsby, who has been open about the toll that 18 months of touring Nanette took on her, said she is being more cautious with live dates this time around. “I’ve got to be careful because I really exhausted myself with Nanette and touring is a gruelling thing,” she said. “I’ll see how the market responds.”