Pakistan says it will release a captured Indian pilot as a “peace gesture” between the neighbours amid the gravest military crisis in the subcontinent in two decades. Imran Khan, the country’s prime minister, told a joint sitting of parliament that the Indian wing commander, Abhinandan Varthaman, who was shot down over the heavily guarded ceasefire line in disputed Kashmir on Wednesday, would be released on Friday. “We have captured an Indian pilot,” Khan said. “As a peace gesture, tomorrow we are going to release him.” Varthaman was shot down on Wednesday during a dogfight in the Himalayan foothills, the first between the countries to be publicly acknowledged for 48 years. It followed tit-for-tat airstrikes this week that have led to the closure of dozens of airports and put major cities on high alert across the subcontinent. A report in Pakistan’s Dawn newspaper on Thursday quoted witnesses who said he had fought off angry villagers with a pistol at the crash site and had tried to swallow and destroy maps and documents in his possession before he was taken into Pakistani custody. Videos released by Islamabad showed Varthaman being beaten by villagers near the crash site and then interrogated in a bloodied uniform. Both were widely shared on WhatsApp and social media. By late evening, in footage that appeared to be aimed at calming public anger in India, the pilot was shown drinking tea and praising the way he was being treated by his captors, who he said were “thorough gentlemen”. The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, was addressing an audience at a science and technology prize soon after the news of the pilot’s impending release was announced. He made reference to scientists needed to design pilot projects, before quipping: “Just now one pilot project has been completed”. The clashes over the heavily militarised “line of control” that divides Indian and Pakistani-held Kashmirhave sparked calls for restraint from countries including the US, China, Russia and the UK. Khan’s surprise announcement that he was releasing Varthaman, whose welfare has been a major concern in India, will put pressure on Delhi to reciprocate in a way that eases tensions. But India will be reluctant to do so without extracting some demonstration from Pakistan that it is willing to crack down on Islamist militia groups operating on its soil — an issue that has largely been obscured in the past two days by fears the two nuclear powers may be sliding into war. Speaking to reporters in Delhi on condition of anonymity, an Indian government official said he categorically rejected the idea that a conflict was imminent and accused Pakistan of creating a “war psychosis” to distract from its sponsorship of militant groups. Leave was cancelled for health workers and police in the Pakistani province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa on Wednesday night and emergency orders were issued in Karachi. India has been careful to characterise its air strikes in Pakistan on Tuesday morning as “counter-terrorism actions” — language the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, adopted in his statement on the issue on Wednesday. The US president, Donald Trump, who was addressing a press conference in Hanoi on Thursday morning, hinted that diplomatic efforts had begun behind the scenes. “They have been going at it and we have been involved,” Trump said. “We have some reasonably decent news, hopefully it’s going to be coming to an end, this has been going on for a long time, decades and decades.” Speaking before the announcement of Varthaman’s impending release, Indian officials in Delhi said they were unsure what Trump had been referring to and said there was nothing to negotiate until Pakistan took credible and verifiable action against militant groups in the country. Kashmir, a disputed region in the foothills of the Himalayas, has been at the centre of tensions between India and Pakistan since both states came into being in 1947. Both claim it in full, but each controls a section of the territory, separated by one of the most heavily militarised borders in the world: the “line of control” based on a ceasefire border established after a 1947-48 war over the region. China controls another part in the east. India and Pakistan have gone to war three times over Kashmir, most recently in 1999. Artillery, mortar and small arms fire is still frequently exchanged over the ceasefire line. The roots of the conflict date back to the weeks after the partition of colonial India 71 years ago. Small, semi-autonomous “princely states” across the subcontinent were being folded into either India or Pakistan. The ruler of Kashmir dithered over which to join – until tribal fighters poured in from Pakistan, intent on winning the region for Islamabad. Kashmir turned to Delhi for assistance, signing a treaty of accession with India in exchange for the intervention of Indian troops, who fought the Pakistanis to the modern-day line of control. In 1948, the UN security council issued Resolution 47 calling for a referendum among Kashmiris to determine which country the region would join, or whether it would become an independent state. That referendum has never been held. In its 1950 constitution, India granted Kashmir a large measure of independence. But, in the years since, it has eroded some of that autonomy and repeatedly intervened to rig elections and dismiss and jail democratically elected leaders. For the past three decades, Indian-controlled Kashmir has been roiled by an armed insurgency against its rule. Indian soldiers and Pakistan-backed guerillas fought a dirty war replete with accusations of torture, forced disappearances and extra-judicial killing. Until 2004, the militancy was made up largely of Pakistani and Afghan fighters. But since then, especially after massive popular protests were put down with extreme force in 2016, locals have made up a growing share of the anti-India fighters. For Indians, control of Kashmir — part of the country’s only Muslim-majority state — has been proof of its commitment to religious pluralism. For Pakistan, a state founded as a homeland for south Asian Muslims, Kashmir is the last occupied home of its co-religionists. Michael Safi India has rallied France, the UK and the US behind a fresh proposal to have the UN security council add Masood Azhar, the head of Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), to a terrorist watchlist. JeM claimed responsibility for a suicide bombing in Kashmir on 14 February that killed 40 Indian paramilitaries and triggered the current crisis. India responded to the attack on Tuesday by striking what it claims was a JeM training camp in Pakistan. China has repeatedly blocked previous efforts to list Azhar as a terrorist, a move that would put pressure on its ally Pakistan to arrest the militant leader, who operates freely on its soil. Delhi accuses Islamabad of nurturing and assisting militant groups as a form of asymmetrical warfare against India, its larger and more powerful neighbour.