Trent Robinson had promised in the buildup to the World Club Challenge that, irrespective of the purported attitude from Australian rugby league to the event, his Sydney Roosters were here to respect both the competition and the Super League champions, Wigan. That respect may well have been pivotal in ensuring the Roosters were crowned world champions for a record-equalling fourth time. History awaited Wigan, who knew that victory against the all-conquering NRL premiers would ensure they became the first side in rugby league history to win the World Club Challenge five times. They will look back on a desperately below-par opening quarter as their downfall – but can stand proud for their performance thereafter. It proved ultimately to be not enough against a Roosters side who are undoubtedly the best club team in the game. Their victory extendsthe NRL’s impressive recent recordin the World Club Challenge, withthis the ninth time in 11 seasons in which the Australian side has won the event. It is to Wigan’s credit that they managed to preserve some semblance of doubt over the outcome until the final minutes, when Daniel Tupou’s try finally guaranteed the Roosters victory – because at the end of a pulsating and breathless opening 10 minutes the match looked as though it would be a thoroughly one-sided evening’s work for the NRL champions. By the time most of the 21,000-plus crowd had settled into their seats, the Roosters had surged into a 10-0 lead courtesy of two tries from the Australian international Brett Morris – who finished the evening with a hat-trick, only the third player to do so in a World Club Challenge. “He was very special,” Robinson said. “Those tries got us the buffer that allowed us to hold on at the end.” But how Wigan roared back. Though the gap was still 10 at half-time after Tom Davies’ try was cancelled out by Morris’ hat-trick score, heading into the final 15 minutes Wigan were only eight behind after Liam Marshall’s exemplary solo finish in the corner. Further chances came and went for the hosts but in the end Tupou’s late try quelled any hopes of a turnaround. “That was really, really tough,” Robinson said about his side’s second-half defensive display. “You could see there was a lot of pressure being applied on us and the boys stood tall. They found a way to get out of it, and I was really happy with the guys. I think that was as good a test as you’re going to get in the NRL.” It was difficult to argue with the Roosters’ half-time lead but Wigan’s coach was quick to commend his side’s steep improvement after the break – even though it proved in vain. “It was a lot better in the second half,” said Adrian Lam. “We just let a couple of soft tries in at the start and it was not good enough. I knew that, if we had our fair share of the ball, we’d have a chance but we’ve got to get smarter with what we’re doing.” The Roosters had their chances to extend that lead in the moments after half-time but the defensive improvement in Wigan was underlined on the hour mark when Sydney preferred to take a penalty, ratherthan to run the play, to extend their lead to 16-4 via the boot of Sio Siua Taukeiaho. Unperturbed, back came Wigan. Led forward by their talismanic captain, Sean O’Loughlin, the Warriors threatened a grandstand finale when quick hands to the left afforded Marshall a glimmer of space to finish in the corner. He did so with absolute precision, though Zak Hardaker’s wayward conversion attempt ensured a two-score gap remained in the Roosters’ favour. And as the hosts began to chance their arm to eradicate that deficit with the minutes running away, it perhaps inevitably led to an error that the Roosters managed to punish. After forcing the hosts to throw the ball into touch, the visitors finally struck the decisive blow when Tupou claimed Luke Keary’s kick and secured victory for the Roosters. Wigan, however, could certainly hold their heads high after pushing the all-conquering NRL champions all the way.