Late-night hosts discussed the Green New Deal, Fox News and the bill to avert another government shutdown. It has been a week since a few members of Congress, fronted by star congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, introduced the Green New Deal, and the plan to fight climate change has left many Republicans apoplectic. With lines such as “Hide your cows, hide your travel plans”, the loudest criticism has aired on Fox News, “where you can always count on thoughtful analysis based on solid scientific thinking”, said Samantha Bee. For instance, she pointed to a viral clip of a Fox & Friends anchor admitting that he hadn’t washed his hands in 10 years, because “germs are not a real thing. I can’t see them, therefore they’re not real”. “The people at Fox should really be worried about working with patient zero here,” said Bee. Instead, they’re “soiling themselves over the Green New Deal”. Bee admitted that many of the ambitious Green New Deal’s proposals – including an overhaul of America’s transportation system, free higher education and a goal of net-zero emissions – will never pass, “but the plan’s aggressive, even radical goals are bringing much-needed attention to climate change”. Furthermore, she argued, it’s not crazy to use the government to do something big and seemingly ridiculous. She pointed to John F Kennedy’s pledge in 1961 to put a man on the moon by the end of the decade. “It sounded crazy but we dedicated our fullest resources to it, and our hard work paid off eight years later when we managed to convincingly fake the moon landing,” she said, referring to a widespread (and false) conspiracy theory. But in all seriousness, Bee said, “if we don’t act soon to keep our planet livable, we’ll have to figure out a way to send all 8 billion of us to the actual moon”. Seth Meyers also took a serious look at Fox News on Late Night, turning to Donald Trump’s appearance with Fox host Laura Ingraham on Tuesday. The president told Ingraham that he didn’t yet have an opinion on the bipartisan budget deal because, scheduling-wise, “it was between the deal and you, and I had to choose you”. To be clear, Meyers explained: “He literally said: ‘I had a choice between running the government and going on Fox News and I chose Fox News.’ No quote has ever summed up Trump’s presidency better than that.” As for talking about the deal’s specifics, Trump had, as usual, “all the specificity of a Real Housewives promo”, Meyers said. Meyers then dispensed with the jokes. “Every few months we have to go through this exhausting ritual where we pretend the president actually knows what he’s talking about even though it’s clear he doesn’t,” he said. It’s pointless to argue with someone who can’t agree on shared conditions of reality, he continued. “Trump spends all day digesting lies from Fox News, and Fox News in turn reinforces his alternate reality.” The ridiculous dysfunction of American government seemed to even wear out Stephen Colbert, who kicked off Wednesday’s Late Show with a profuse thank you to his audience and a period of reflection on what, exactly, the point of all this is. The show usually helps him process the day’s news and “think about what it means”, which made Wednesday “tough because the one thing everyone is talking about” – whether or not Trump would sign a budget deal to keep the government open – “doesn’t mean anything”. “I truly believe that years from now, people are going to back on this day and be like, ‘Why are we looking back to that day?’” Colbert continued. “Because we’re supposed to care whether Trump won, and Nancy [Pelosi] lost. Or Trump caved and Nancy’s dancing in the end zone. But nothing, nothing that has happened in government in 2019 has affected anyone.” No significant legislation has passed recently, Colbert noted – no infrastructure bill, or immigration bill, or a fix for skyrocketing healthcare costs. And yet, “we’re celebrating, or supposed to be celebrating, that they’re close to a deal to achieve the absolute minimum: having a government”, Colbert said. “That is like celebrating that you’re child finally used the potty on his first day of medical school.” Instead we have an executive branch of kabuki theatre in which Trump doubts he will sign the necessary budget bill while aides quietly reassure that he will after making “the dance to get to yes”, according to a report. At least, Colbert noted, such a dance is a “refreshing change from Trump’s usual MO: the grope to get past ‘no’”.