I think Al Boum Photo shouldn’t have any problem with the trip. I don’t think we’ve seen the best of him yet. The ground in Leopardstown at Christmas, where Kemboy put in a huge performance, was very, very good. If it comes up like that on the fourth day at Cheltenham, which it can, he must have a very good chance and the further he’ll go, the better he’ll be. Bellshill has lots of stamina, he jumps particularly well. That’s a huge plus for him. We can see him improving all the time. He’s always gone on soft or heavy and I took a chance running him on the ground the other day but I felt we had to and he’s by Kings Theatre, they love good ground and he can handle it well, even though he’s a big, heavy type of horse. Invitation would probably have to step up a good bit. Unfortunately he hasn’t had the heavy ground that he wants and probably needs as he gets older. But he still has the same enthusiasm that he alway has. He’s in particularly good form this week, compared to any stage in the past two or three weeks. The Ryanair is his most likely target. Could go Champion Chase or Ryanair and I’m going to leave that decision until much later. You’d say Altior was beaten [three-out in last year’s Champion Chase] but he just has a huge engine and he’s never beaten, is he? He seems to miss a beat or two and then gets into gear and goes. [Late decision expected between the Champion Chase and the Ryanair] He schooled very well the other day, a bit more like the old Footpad. Pedigree-wise, and the horse, I think no problem to step up in trip. He’s had two over-reaches. He schooled round Navan the other day, perfectly with no hind shoes, so I’m very happy with that and we might consider that option going to Cheltenham. He’s fine, coming along nicely. You’re looking at him every morning to make sure that he’s all right. So far, so good. But he’s going to have a few more searching bits of work between now and Cheltenham. To me, he was never going to have a run. You’d rather get runs into them. But no point in running at Punchestown and Leopardstown and then find that you can’t get to Cheltenham. She’s in good form, she’ll go for the Mares Hurdle. I think she’s in great order. He’s going for the Stayers, he seems in great form. Ruby hadn’t stirred on him [when Faugheen fell two-out at Christmas]. What would have happened after that, I don’t know. But Ruby was very confident that he hadn’t asked any questions at that stage. I was just waiting for Ruby to pull the lever and it just never happened. He was very, very sore, so I’m very happy to have him back at a stage where I can get him ready for Cheltenham. Looks good, I’m very happy with him. We’re just trying to figure out why he was disappointing the last day. I think we’ve gone backwards on the racetrack but I’m hoping we can change one or two things which might bring back his old form. [Tactics or equipment?] Could be a bit of both. And I’m going to say no more for the time being. He’s a nice surprise this season, he’s improved beyond all recognition. He probably is what we thought he was, coming up to Christmas two years ago when he fell at Leopardstown. He just lost his way a little bit after that but he now he seems on his way back to being a really good horse. (If there are any other Mullins-trained Cheltenham horses you want to know about, please ask in the comments below) It’s Devon National day at Exeter and Courtown Oscar (4.20) could be the one at 14-1 for Phil Kirby, who was in the news this week. Jonjo Jr is a good booking for this veteran, who may bowl along in front and keep going on this dry ground. Annie Mc (3.45) could set the jockey up for a double at 2-1. At Warwick, Doitforthevillage (2.50) is a fair 9-4 in a shrinking field. He beat everything bar Cyrname in an Ascot handicap last time. Warwick 1.10 My Way 1.40 Honorable 2.15 Sheneededtherun 2.50 Doitforthevillage (nb) 3.20 Pray For A Rainbow 3.55 Quarenta 4.30 Burren Walk Catterick 1.20 Young Wolf 1.55 Cap Du Nord 2.30 Horst 3.05 Reve 3.35 Ballycrystal 4.10 Floating Rock Exeter 1.30 Printing Dollars 2.05 Boyhood 2.40 Epatante 3.10 Accomplice 3.45 Annie Mc 4.20 Courtown Oscar (nap) 4.50 Molineux 5.20 Eritage Lingfield 1.50 Kingi Compton 2.25 Miss Communicate 3.00 Confrontational 3.30 Dark Magic 4.05 Top Power 4.40 Cracker Factory Chelmsford 5.45 Pentland Lad 6.15 Miracle Works 6.45 Saaheq 7.15 Lope Scholar 7.45 Lion Hearted 8.15 Clearance