It began when eminent German politicians and business leaders wrote a widely shared letter lamenting Brexit, but assuring the UK of continued friendship nonetheless. Now, a corresponding British group, among them Gary Lineker, has penned a response. The new letter, to be published on the front page of the German newspaper Die Welt on Friday, makes no promises about Brexit – among the signatories is the Brexit-backing Conservative MP Anne-Marie Trevelyan – but it shares the same note of poignant regret. “We still want to be friends,” the letter reads. “We love your beer, your football, some of us even like your cooking. Given the challenges we face, we need to stand together to champion the values of tolerance and openness that you say are our hallmark.” The correspondence began a fortnight ago when the German letter was published in the Times, saying the UK would be missed in the EU and would always be welcomed back. It added: “Therefore Britons should know: from the bottom of our hearts, we want them to stay.” It went on: “We would miss the legendary British black humour and going to the pub after work hours to drink an ale. We would miss tea with milk and driving on the left-hand side of the road. And we would miss seeing the panto at Christmas. “But more than anything else, we would miss the British people – our friends across the Channel.” Signatories included Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, who is set to take over from Angela Merkel as chancellor, as well as the leaders of the Social Democratic party and the Greens, and top business figures, not to mention the former German footballer Jens Lehmann. The signatories to the UK letter are, it is perhaps fair to say, less obviously recognisable to readers of Die Welt other than Lineker, who coined the maxim: “Football is a simple game – 22 men chase a ball for 90 minutes and at the end, the Germans always win.” Along with Trevelyan the signatories comprise two other Tory MPs, Nicholas Soames and Tom Tugendhat; the Conservative peer Sayeeda Warsi; from Labour the MP Emma Reynolds and the peer Stewart Wood; and Tom Fletcher, a diplomat-turned academic. The letter begins with thanks for the “funny and touching” correspondence, and notes that the EU’s origins after the second world war show that for many Europeans it is “not about quotas, directives, rebates and control, but something more profound”. It continues: “Your letter has reminded us that however we voted on Brexit we must be clearer that we are not about to retreat from our global responsibilities. Brits are outward-looking and engaged with the world. We all know that openness and diversity are British values and we are grateful that you can see through the noise to the substance – that the defining moment for the UK in the 21st century will not be the referendum itself, but how we respond with greater purpose, drive, solidarity and vision.” The letter assures Germany of the continued UK commitment to Nato and the UK, ending: “Whatever the mechanics and sub-clauses of our future relationship, the tone of the text is unchanged – we are still friends, and very much on the same side.”