Keaton Jennings has been given the chance to resurrect his international career as the chief beneficiary of England’s decision to restore Jonny Bairstow to his favoured wicketkeeping position for the third Test against West Indies. Bairstow kept during last week’s 10-wicket defeat in Antigua after Ben Foakes was struck on the hand by Shannon Gabriel in England’s first innings. But though Foakes is now fully fit and has trained during the lead-up to the St Lucia Test, Joe Root and Trevor Bayliss have opted to leave him out for tactical reasons. Taken in isolation it could be viewed as a harsh call on Foakes, who after replacing the injured Bairstow in Sri Lanka emerged as player of the series in a 3-0 victory through a century on debut in Galle and some immaculate glove work. But Bairstow had been first choice behind the stumps for the best part of three years and, though he made a century on returning to the team in Colombo as a specialist batsman atNo 3, the Yorkshireman has made little secret of his desire to drop back down the order and keep wicket. England, despite thinking highly of Foakes, have clearly decided to cut their losses and revert to their previous formula. The upshot is that Jennings returns at opener alongside Rory Burns, only one Test after being dropped in response to the 381-run defeat in Barbados, with Joe Denly dropping down to No 3, his regular position for Kent. And in a change of tack, perhaps prompted by the 2-0 scoreline that leaves his side scrapping to avoid a first Caribbean whitewash since 1986, Root has now stressed that Ashes places can indeed be secured with strong performances in this next Test, having previously told his players not to look too far ahead. “There is plenty to play for in this game especially off the back of our two previous performances,” said Root. “There is an Ashes around the corner and it is an opportunity for those guys to show how good they are and put their hand up and put in some proper performances.” Another player likely to be offered a Test lifeline is Mark Wood, who with Chris Woakes still nursing a knee injury is set for his first cap in nine months on a pitch expected to aid pace. England’s final decision from a 12 named on Friday appears to be between Ben Stokes and Sam Curran, with the latter on standby should his senior colleague be unable to operate as an all-rounder. Stokes sustained a bruised heel when landing on a rock during a beach fitness session on Wednesday, something which followed a heavy workload in the first two Tests. Root is wary of the 27-year-old’s desire to play injuries down and, if unable to bowl, he will not be risked this early in an important year. The hope is that Wood, who joined the tour following Olly Stone’s stress fracture, can replicate Stokes’s hostility with the ball. The right-armer has battled injuries throughout a Test career that returned only 30 wickets at 41 runs apiece from 12 appearances. But after he was told by Bayliss to go away with the Lions before Christmas and prove he is a cut above the next in line, England believe his confidence and pace are restored. Root added: “He looks in great rhythm. He is bowling with good pace and he has developed his game as well. That is exactly what you want from guys when they have been left out in the past, to come back better players. “I certainly feel that is the case with Mark. He has not taken the wickets he would have liked when he has had previous opportunities. “But looking at him now, he couldn’t be in a better place to go on and do something really good.”