Golden State Warriors center DeMarcus Cousins has attacked college basketball after the game’s top prospect, Zion Williamson, suffered a scary injury on Wednesday night. Williamson, who is expected to be the No1 overall pick in this year’s NBA draft and is tipped as a future superstar in the pros, hurt his knee playing for Duke against North Carolina. The 18-year-old suffered the injury when his shoe fell apart, and at first some feared it could be a career-changing incident. It later transpired the knee was sprained although Williamson may miss the rest of the season. The injury highlighted the lack of a safety net for college players. Despite helping their colleges bring in millions of dollars in revenue, college players are amateurs. Tickets for Wednesday’s game were attracting thousands of dollars on the resale market. “I loved my experience in college,” Cousins said after practice on Thursday. “That was some of the best years of my life playing basketball. But with that being said, just how crooked the whole NCAA business is – I actually saw a post the other day where the highest ticket for that UNC-Duke game was $2,500, $3,500. How much does Zion Williamson see? That’s who they’re coming to see, so how much of that is he getting? Actually, who does it go to? How does it benefit any player on that team? But if they were to get $20 and a free meal, they’re this bad kid, they get a bad rep, uncoachable, or thugs, whatever the case may be. So it’s bullshit. It’s been bullshit.” Cousins, who was a college star at Kentucky, is a four-time All-Star. He saved particular vitriol for the NCAA, college sport’s governing body. “Well, knowing what I know now, college is bullshit” Cousins said. “College basketball and the NCAA is bullshit. So my advice to him is, ‘Do what’s best for you and your family.’ “Obviously college ... it does nothing for you at this point. Proving you’re the No1 pick coming out, proving your talent, get ready for the next level, because it’s happening. That’s my opinion, knowing what I know now. Obviously, when I was that age, you enjoy the moment, you’re enjoying the experience and all that. But there’s so many risks involved to get to the ultimate goal, which is this level. So just do what’s best for him and his family.” Cousins believes more players should go through the D-League, the NBA’s developmental league, where athletes are paid albeit nowhere near the amounts enjoyed by their counterparts in the NBA. “The DLeague/GLeague route,” Cousins said. “I think that’s helpful. Obviously, it’s not a popular thing right now, but I think it will grow over time. You’ve seen a couple of young guys in that program already.” LeBron James, who went straight from high school to the NBA, was more circumspect when asked about Williamson on Thursday. “He has to do what is best for him. His family has always been his support system. I just wish great health for the kid, but that’s not my lane to talk about what he should do going forward.” James was drafted in 2003. In 2005, the NBA and the players’ union reached an agreement that players must be at least 19 and one year removed from high school before they can enter the league. USA Today reported on Thursday that the NBA is considering lowering the age limit to 18.