Born in India, Engelbert Humperdinck, 82, moved to Leicester as a child. He had his first hit in 1967 with Release Me; his other multi-platinum-selling songs include The Last Waltz. In 2017 he celebrated his 50th year in show business with the album The Man I Want To Be, and he continues to tour the world. Ten years ago, his wife, Patricia, was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease. The couple have four children and live in California and Leicester. What was your most embarrassing moment?Splitting my pants on stage. It happened a lot in the early days, because I used to wear very tight pants. I was always asked, “How does one get into those?” and I’d say, “You start off with a kiss!” What is top of your bucket list?If my wife recovers somewhat, I will be delighted to take my entire family to Barbados. We’re working very hard to bring her back to normality, with western and eastern medicine. What is your most treasured possession?My passport. What would your super power be?Healing. What makes you unhappy?Other people’s incompetence, because I feel I do things to the best of my ability. What single thing would improve the quality of your life?I just did it. I wanted to lose weight and respect my body more, and I’ve lost 31 pounds in three months. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you?After an early show, my then manager told me, “You were shit. You only just got by on bullshit and charm.” If you could bring something extinct back to life, what would you choose?Record stores. What do you most dislike about your appearance?Ageing. To whom would you most like to say sorry, and why?My wife. I made mistakes in my early life and hurt her. Everybody thinks the grass is greener, but it’s not. To say sorry to her when she understands will be one of the greatest gifts God has given me. Who would play you in the film of your life?Me – if they can make you old, they can make you young again. When did you last cry, and why? I have to say I am an easy sob. I don’t mind, because there’s no harm in having a big man cry. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party?Sammy Davis Jr, Dean Martin and Elvis – I knew them all. What did you want to be when you were growing up? A saxophonist, but destiny chose another path for me, and I’m glad it happened that way. Which words or phrases do you most overuse?“Sorry, can you say that again – I’m a bit mutton Jeff?” What has been your biggest disappointment?Not understanding the business side of my career enough. I could have probably been much wealthier than I am. What song would you like played at your funeral?I don’t like to think about that. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?Manners. What or who is the greatest love of your life? I’ve had only one love, and that is my wife. I asked her to dance when she was 17 and we’ve been dancing together ever since.