The results of a new survey on the evidence and impact of gay conversion therapy, in which same-sex attracted individuals are “treated” in order to become straight, are shocking. But I for one am not surprised that there still exists bigotry and prejudice towards us. As an out lesbian, I witness it on a regular basis. The survey by the Ozanne Foundation, led by Church of England lesbian activist Jayne Ozanne, attracted more than 4,600 responses. Of those, 458 people said they had tried to become straight; 91 had attempted suicide; and 22 had been forced to have sex with someone of the opposite sex. In 2014 I underwent Christian conversion therapy in a small town near Denver, Colorado, posing as an unhappy lesbian who had been ostracised by church and family. During my time there I was told I was “broken” by the so-called therapist, and that I had either been sexually abused by my father, neglected by my mother, or mollycoddled by both. It was a truly horrific experience, and I was not even doing it for real. I hear from lesbians and gay men involved in the church that, despite progress made over the years as a result of brave campaigners such as Ozanne, gay people are still often considered damaged goods in need of repair. I live a middle-class privileged life, have a wide circle of out and proud lesbian and gay friends, and hang out with heterosexuals who celebrate diversity. But despite living in London, with the largest population of LGBT people in the country, I am constantly reminded that prejudice is still rife. I speak to homeless young LGBT people who have been kicked out of the family home. Only last week, I was called a “fucking dyke” by a man in the street because I refused to move out of his way. For white, male, solvent same-sex couples, perhaps homophobia is a thing of the past. But for many who are single, poor, of colour, and living in religious or otherwise closed communities, things are far from OK. During visits to the working-class community in the north-east of England where I grew up, I speak to lesbians across the generations who tell me stories of violence, abuse and social exclusion, including “punishment rapes” and extreme pressure from family members to marry and live a heterosexual existence. In 2013, I conducted a number of surveys as part of my research for a book on people’s experiences of being lesbian and gay. In a survey of more than 9,500 gay men and lesbians, 78% said they had experienced prejudice during their lifetime, with more than a quarter of them suffering physical assault. Many assume that, since the introduction in 2014 of the right of same-sex couples to marry, things are pretty much sorted. Not so. The latest national LGBT survey conducted by the Government Equalities Office found that all is far from perfect. Although the majority of the 108,000 respondents were positive about the UK’s record on LGBT rights, more than two-thirds said they had avoided holding hands with a same-sex partner for fear of a negative reaction from others; at least two in five had experienced verbal harassment or physical violence in the 12 months preceding the survey; and nine in 10 of the most serious incidents went unreported, often because respondents thought “it happens all the time”. Just under a quarter had accessed mental health services in the previous year. All this shows that social attitudes are seriously lagging behind legislation. While equality may be making inroads in our courts, its progress has been much slower in many hearts and minds. In the UK we have reached a stage where little more can be done to improve our legal rights, but some religious leaders, as well as a number of bigoted, ignorant individuals still see us as a bunch of freaks. And globally, homophobia is a massive problem. Seventy-two countries around the world have legislated against same-sex encounters, and Russia has some of the most draconian attitudes towards its LGBT population imaginable. As a lifelong campaigner for lesbian and gay liberation, I am all too aware that complacency is not an option, so long as there is still violence, bigotry and oppression facing so many within our community. • Julie Bindel is a journalist and political activist, and a founder of Justice for Women