The Premier League table screams with possibility for Tottenham. For so long, this looked like being one of those days when the ball would not go in for them. Erik Lamela hit the crossbar; Christian Eriksen, almost implausibly, saw two efforts cleared off the line and other chances went begging. Yet this is a team that does not do draws, which fights until the end and, thanks to Son Heung-min’s late winner, they have clambered above Manchester City into second place and sit four points behind the leaders, Liverpool, albeit having played a game more than both. Mauricio Pochettino has insisted that his squad is not equipped to win the title. With trips to Anfield and the Ehitad to come, they remain a tantalising outside bet. Son has now scored 14 goals in all competitions at club level in a season that has twice been interrupted by commitments with South Korea, firstly at the Asian Games and, more recently, the Asian Cup. His form since the November international break has been irrepressible. He has 12 goals in 17 Spurs games since then and it has reached the point where he has played himself into the conversation for the player-of-the-year awards. His goal here was a disaster for the Newcastle goalkeeper, Martin Dubravka. The forward had shifted the ball smartly on to his right foot on the edge of the area, throwing a couple of defenders, and the shot was well struck. But it was pretty much straight at Dubravka and not swerving with any menace. Dubravka, though, allowed the ball to squirm under his gloves and, in a heartbeat, Newcastle’s resistance was punctured. With the owner, Mike Ashley, in attendance, they had created some decent openings and hit the post through Salomón Rondón. The late concession was a bitter pill. Son had returned from the Asian Cup to fire the late comeback win over Watford last Wednesday – he scored the equaliser on 80 minutes – and this match was not dissimilar. Spurs were not at their best but they refused to accept that dropped points were a part of the script. “We fully deserved to win because we dominated the game,” Pochettino said. “We don’t need to be in this position to convince ourselves about our capacity. We always believe in ourselves. Then, it’s if we are capable to go close to our opponent to be champions. We will see what happens.” Rafael Benítez turned on his heel and grimaced when Son’s goal went in. It had been a good week for Newcastle, what with Tuesday’s home win over Manchester City and the club-record transfer deadline-day signing of Miguel Almirón, together with the loan of Antonio Barreca. But it would not get even better. Almirón did not feature because he does not yet have his visa. “To concede the way we did was really disappointing,” Benítez said. “I don’t blame anyone [for the goal]. Everybody can make a mistake. It’s a goal we could have avoided.” Benítez made the point that Newcastle had to be better on the ball in the second half but he felt they defended well in his 5-4-1 system while they enjoyed some encouragement on the counter-attack. Matt Ritchie was a threat with his crosses from left wing-back while Ayoze Pérez showed his twinkle-toes. Newcastle went close on the half-hour when Ritchie crossed and Pérez, who was gloriously placed, could not make a clean connection. Rondón would be inches from scoring on 51 minutes when he headed against the upright from DeAndre Yedlin’s cross while Pérez extended Hugo Lloris from the edge of the area. Tottenham had the greater number of chances and there were some gilt-edged ones, none more so than Lucas Moura’s free header early on. Lamela nodded against the woodwork from Jan Vertonghen’s cross; Moussa Sissoko was denied by Dubrakva while the substitute, Fernando Llorente, blew a looping header. Eriksen twice flicked goalwards following corners only for Fabian Schär and Ritchie to clear off the line. Schär’s stretch back to hook away was particularly dramatic. Son, however, would cut through the frustration.