Chris Gayle, the veteran West Indies opener and self-styled “Universe Boss”, has warned English cricket that The Hundred will not be a success unless “the greatest player in the world” is invited along. In other words: Chris Gayle. After missing tours to India and Bangladesh in order to pursue short-form contracts, the 39-year-old Jamaican makes his West Indies return against England on Wednesday in the first one-day international at the Kensington Oval. After training on Sunday he served up his latest display of self-confidence. As well as confirming he will retire from international one-day cricket after this year’s World Cup – “The youngsters owe it to me [to lift the trophy]” – Gayle was asked if England’s 100-ball tournament launching in 2020 appeals to him. Sure enough, one of Twenty20 cricket’s most high-profile globetrotters is keen to be involved, even if just for the inaugural season. “Well, if I don’t start it, it won’t be a tournament,” said Gayle. “I guess England should invite me over. Then I’ll explode the tournament and say: ‘Thank you guys, bring in a youngster now.’ I will set the trend for you like I did in all tournaments around the world. Fingers crossed. We’ll see what happens.” The England and Wales Cricket Board is keen to use the eight-team tournament to attract a family audience and Gayle, who has not appeared in Australia’s Big Bash League since asking a female TV reporter out for a drink during an interview and saying: “Don’t blush, baby,” during the awkwardness that ensued, may divide opinion in this regard. Gayle has since turned out for Somerset in the T20 Blast and, with Virat Kohli having ruled himself out of featuring and doubts over the participation of Indian players generally, the ECB may view such a box-office personality as a risk worth taking and offer him a place in the draft. A veteran of 103 Test matches and more than 300 white-ball internationals, Gayle was asked if he was satisfied with his career. “Yes. I’m the greatest player in the world. Of course. I can’t complain. T20s, ODIs, Tests … you’re looking at a great man,” came the reply. Gayle’s fielding may be restricted by age but England will be wary of his explosive tendencies at the top of the order during this five-match series. Is he still the Universe Boss? “Of course. How can that change, man? That will never change, man! I will take that to the grave” he replied. “I don’t know who is opening the bowling [for England] but any bowler is going to be wary of Chris Gayle. That doesn’t change because he is 39 now. They are going to be saying: ‘Yes, he’s got some grey hairs in his beard. Let’s get him now. This is the perfect time to get the universe boss now he is 39.’” West Indies are ranked eighth in one-day cricket, compared with England in top spot. But Gayle aside, a youthful team led by Jason Holder that features six players from the recent 2-1 victory in the Test series should not be taken lightly on home soil. Oshane Thomas, the fast bowler who was held back during the Test series, will be a threat with the ball, as will Shannon Gabriel when he returns for the finale after serving a four-match ban for abusing Joe Root in St Lucia last week. “In the nets I face them. They’re youngsters, man … but I will destroy them anyway,” Gayle said of his teammates. While Gayle was offering his thoughts on an array of topics – including a call for young cricketers to play Test cricket, because it is “the ultimate” – England were warming up for the one-day series with a 171-run win against a University of West Indies XI at the Three Ws Oval in which they posted 371 for seven batting first. Jason Roy struck 15 fours and one six before retiring on 110 from 82 balls – an opening stand of 129 with Jonny Bairstow saw the latter make 46 – before Root carried over his form from the third Test with an 81-ball 114 that was ended when he was stumped in the 49th over attempting a fifth six. Eoin Morgan’s first hit on tour ended when he was run out for eight after a mix-up with Root while Alex Hales, in at No6 for the rested Jos Buttler, squandered his chance when flicking loosely to square-leg for a second-ball duck. All six bowlers deployed in the reply picked up wickets; the return after a knee injury of attack leader Chris Woakes, with two for 28 from seven overs, was the most encouraging news.