The pro-European wing of the Conservative party has traditionally been more loyal to its leaders and more inclined towards compromise than the Eurosceptic faction. That is one reason why Wednesday’s decision by three remain-supporting Tory MPs to abandon their party in despair was so significant, if not surprising. EU issues have tested Conservative unity for a generation, but it is still a dramatic step from dissent to schism. The choice by Anna Soubry, Heidi Allen and Sarah Wollaston to sit as independent MPs is symptomatic of more than disagreement with Theresa May over policy. It expresses more than distress at the way Brexit has been handled. It is the ideological and cultural trajectory of the Conservative party – its capture by an extreme faction – that has led the schismatic MPs to feel they can no longer in good conscience fly its colours. This would be remarkable under any circumstances. Coming in the same week that eight Labour MPs made an equivalent decision to abandon their party, it is extraordinary. With 11 MPs, the newly formed “independent group” marshals as many votes in the Commons as the Liberal Democrats and one more than the DUP. It is not clear how those numbers will be deployed (the group is more easily identified by what it is against than what it is for) but one obvious consequence of Tory defections is that the government’s majority shrinks. Mrs May might well conclude that she is now even more dependent on the votes of hardline Eurosceptics and Ulster unionists to secure a Brexit deal. It would be sadly in keeping with past behaviour if she were to respond to political adversity by digging deeper into an already narrow trench, mortgaging the country’s future still further to people who have never shown her durable loyalty. That would be a tactical mistake and a misreading of the moment. It was not the simple prospect of Britain’s departure from the EU that propelled the defectors from the Conservative party. They all voted in favour of triggering the article 50 withdrawal process in 2017. There is no reason to disbelieve them when they say the bonds of allegiance were broken by the prime minister’s pursuit of a needlessly hard model of Brexit and her refusal to hear moderate voices, even from her own side of the Commons. They also condemn the government for failing to address the grievances that drove support for Brexit in the first place or heal divisions exposed by the 2016 referendum campaign. That criticism is all the more damaging to Mrs May since she once declared the pursuit of social justice to be her greatest priority in Downing Street. Instead she has persuaded once loyal MPs that the Tory party itself is incapable of leading a national healing process. The prime minister should be determined to prove them wrong, not for the sake of her pride but because the country would be better served if she switched to a more consensual approach. The hardline Eurosceptics whom Mrs May indulges cannot claim to speak on behalf of everyone who voted for Brexit, let alone the whole country. Yet the prime minister accepted their narrow interpretation of the referendum result and thereby accelerated their ideological capture of her party. It is too late to woo the defectors back, but it is not too late to recognise the truth in their bleak account of what the Tories are becoming under her leadership – a dogmatic, intolerant, anti-European sect that has lost all sight of how to govern in the national interest. If Mrs May does not want that to be her legacy she is running out of time to do something about it.