Another admirable FA Cup exploit by Ashley Cole, a seven-times winner of the competition, was not enough to prevent Brighton from advancing to the quarter-finals. The 38-year-old full-back came off the bench to score but Frank Lampard’s Derby could not cancel out the lead that Brighton had established in the first half through goals by Anthony Knockaert and Jürgen Locadia. Brighton had been comfortably superior to the disappointing visitors for most of the match but found themselves clinging on in the dying minutes as Derby belatedly resembled the side who produced cup upsets against Manchester United and Southampton this season. The FA Cup thus continues to provide solace to Brighton, whose run of one win from 11 league matches has seen them slip into relegation danger. They have a 10-day break before their next match but Chris Hughton still took no chances with his lineup here, omitting most of his first-choice players. They were still too good for Frank Lampard’s team. Derby fielded almost a full-strength team but the visitors put in a limp performance that never threatened their hosts. The first half hour was a gruelling spectacle, with neither team showing much by way of ingenuity or even ambition. Brighton had more of the ball but did little with it. Derby defended deep and were entirely useless in possession. The only early chances to speak of came from a pair of free-kicks, Knockaert and Yves Bissouma bringing humdrum saves from Kelle Roos. But then the Premier League side took charge with goals of uplifting quality. Bissouma, whose clever bursts from midfield were one of the highlights of the home team’s play, created the first by playing a slinky one-two with Alireza Jahanbakhsh before picking out Knockaert with a low pass from the right. Knockaert gave the move the finish it deserved, guiding a sidefooted shot into the bottom corner from 12 yards. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Derby barely whimpered in response. Martyn Waghorn was presented with a shooting chance following a poor defensive header by Shane Duffy after a free-kick but the striker failed to catch the dropping ball properly, offering David Button an easy save from eight yards. Then Brighton double their lead with sweet finesse. Bissouma showed nimble feet to trick his way past Tom Huddlestone at the edge of the area and then aimed a delicate curling shot past the goalkeeper. It bounced out off the inside of the post but Locadia reacted sharply to prod in the rebound from close range. Derby came back from two goals down to beat Southampton in the previous round but the dullness of their play here made such a transformation seem much more unlikely. Lampard tried to spark something, nonetheless. He made a double substitution during the interval, introducing Cole and Jack Marriott. Those alterations and, no doubt, some frank talking at half-time stimulated a slight upturn from the visitors at the start of the second period. Duffy had to make a good block to prevent a shot by Harry Wilson from finding the target in the 49th minute. As Derby committed more men forward to moderately interesting effect, Brighton filed back, defending competently while remaining on the lookout for opportunities to counterattack. Knockaert led a charge down the left in the 70th minute, concluding the break with a low curling shot from 20 yards that Roos tipped behind for a corner. Everything was going rather swimmingly for the south-coast side until Cole stepped forward to make another impact on the competition in the 80th minute. Following a move began by a smart through-ball from Huddleston, the 38-year-old showed fresh reflexes and expert technique to send a header into the net from 12 yards after Dan Burn sent a rash clearance his way. Derby cranked up the pressure in a frantic finale but it was too little, too late.