Ignore the trousers for now. Yes, that’s right, ignore the shiny, zippered, ketchup-red trousers. They are only here to make a point about the trenchcoat. A trenchcoat is a timeless classic. Everyone knows that. It is perennially chic, it takes you anywhere, it is age-appropriate. It is eminently sustainable: buy one and it will last you decades. This is all marvellous and sound and useful. But just because the trenchcoat is a practical, dependable, sensible piece to own, it doesn’t mean it has to be practical and dependable and sensible all the time. It is allowed to have a bit of fun now and again. It doesn’t always have to be in the mood for a white shirt and straight-leg jeans, or a pencil skirt and a fine-knit sweater. It can be in the mood for, say, shiny, squeaky, zippered, ketchup-red trousers. Also, maybe this is just me, but I find making a trenchcoat look chic and neat is actually really hard. Looking good in a trenchcoat has long been about keeping the silhouette just-so. Reader, I lost a good week of my life in the early part of this decade trying to figure out how to tie the belt of a trenchcoat in an attractive-looking knot. If I fastened it tight, it was ugly; if I left it loose, it was messy. I stood perplexed in front of a full-length mirror, trying to work out why it was that the belt on my trenchcoat looked less elegantly nonchalant Jane Birkin and more like a six-year-old’s shoelaces. And then there were the sleeves. A trenchcoat sleeve looks alluringly French pushed up to the elbow to show bare wrists and forearms. I see this all the time in photos. But if I push a coat sleeve up to my elbow, I can’t move my arms. (Maybe there’s something wrong with my arms? Although they seem to function quite normally.) Anyway. A trenchcoat sleeve also looks alluringly French if set off by a dazzling white shirt sleeve peeking out just-so at the cuff. In photos, that is. On me, a statement cuff looks less like a chic Parisienne off for a Left Bank coffee and more like a tantrum-prone 18th-century boy-prince about to tuck into a roast swan. So let the trenchcoat loosen up. Wear it loose and rogueish, as if it was a cape or a dressing gown. Here. I’m wearing it with a velvet T-shirt from the back of my wardrobe, and with ketchup trousers – to make a point, as discussed. Because a trenchcoat is even more useful if it doesn’t always have to be sensible. • Jess wears trench, £250, arket.com. T-shirt, Jess’s own. Trousers, £55, weekday.com. Boots, £99, office.co.uk. Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Samantha Cooper at Carol Hayes Management. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.