The synergy between art and fashion has always been strong, and it has been part of the Cos universe since the very beginning. For me, art and design offer an interesting take on what is “of the moment”. Often the process of inspiration and refinement begins and ends with cues from the interesting ways in which artists distil form, colour and light down to their essence. People who wear Cos have a shared aesthetic sensibility, and that is something that really inspires and intrigues us as a brand. As creative director, before each season, I take time to research art communities and look at the shows to come. With our creative team, I gather ideas from looking at artists’ work, mixed maybe with a new designer or building, and we shape the concept. Frieze London was our first collaboration, in 2010. Since then, we have had the opportunity to collaborate with different artists on different projects – taking our brand DNA and reimagining it through their work. Process is key to us – I like it when artists have a unique thought process. Studio Swine’s study of the environment, for example, was one of the things that drew us to them. We do have a very culturally aware customer. It is a common interest, so we collaborate with artists who have a vision we really believe in, and we make sure our customer is there to experience that. It’s a moment of sharing. All our installations are open to the public and, for us, the best moment is when the doors open and the audience experience it, and we see the work afresh through their eyes. I don’t think there is anything unique about taking inspiration from art but our latest store, in Coal Drops Yard in London’s King’s Cross, has our collection and the art we love and want to support. It’s like a gallery and shop coming together in one space – closing the circle and showing our inspirations together with our collections. When you work in fashion, you’re always looking to the future and what’s next. I believe that tends to start with art. That’s where I see changes in mindset begin to take place.