Ireland have won every match in the final round of the Six Nations under Joe Schmidt, but they have won only one of their last four on the opening weekend – in France last year when Johnny Sexton’s late, late drop goal took them past France. They were seven points down against England before a number of spectators had found their seats and they didn’t even bear a passing resemblance to the side who had prevented the most free-flowing team in the world, New Zealand, from scoring a try a few months before. In contrast, England have lost only one of their last 10 opening fixtures despite their squad being honed from a larger number of clubs. Eddie Jones’s wish for John Mitchell to be installed as defence coach was not matched by the Twickenham bean-counters who had to fork out to release the New Zealander from his contract with the Bulls and who wondered why their head coach was keen on someone with whom he had never worked. Saturday showed why, as England won the battle of the gainline: Mako Vunipola and Mark Wilson led the tackle count, but the way Kyle Sinckler, Maro Itoje and Billy Vunipola picked off the runners coming round the corner was key in making Ireland play behind the advantage line, slowing down their possession and forcing them to kick on the back foot. The looseness that afflicted England last year was nowhere. Eddie Jones was brave in his selection, resisting the temptation to restore Mike Brown to full-back to deal with Ireland’s box-kicks. It would have been a defensive move and England’s approach from the start was to get on the front foot and dictate. Elliot Daly kept his place and was involved in England’s opening two tries, providing the scoring pass for Jonny May before profiting from his own chip to the line that Jacob Stockdale scuffed. Ireland may have been the form side in the world, with 18 victories in their previous 19 Tests, but Jones was determined that England went quickly through the gears. England were regarded as the underdogs but they played as if they expected to win, sustaining their physical approach but always probing for space in what was a tactical triumph for the Australian. For once, a meeting of France and Wales was not less interesting than the reading material in a dentist’s waiting room. France had a go from the start and kept going even when nursing a 16-point lead in the rain. Having finally got rid of the shackles that in the last few years made them little more than a side who ran in straight lines, they lustily breathed in freedom’s oxygen, but by dropping Mathieu Bastareaud from the 23, not just the starting team, they had no plan B on the bench. A tight tournament demands different ways of playing: Wales had Dan Biggar to offer an alternative. France, for all their freshness on the night, merely had more of the same. For all Gregor Townsend’s frustration at the sloppy finish against Italy when, down to 14 men, Scotland conceded three late tries, he has cause to get stuck in to his players at the start of a week that concludes with the visit of the champions, Ireland, rather than the wooden-spoon holders. Scotland waited patiently for the opening against Italy rather than going gung-ho; opportunities against Ireland will not be as plentiful, but it will be a key day in the progress of a side who not that long ago were Italy’s equals. There will be a measure of expectation after the manner of Ireland’s defeat by England and the injuries they sustained, and it is a chance to show their title ambition, making the final day about what happens at Twickenham rather than in Cardiff. The game that will decide the fate of the Women’s Six Nations in Doncaster next Sunday is likely to be a battle of the forwards on the evidence of France’s 52-3 win against Wales in Montpellier on Saturday. Annick Hayraud’s side used their pack to bludgeon the Welsh with the hooker Caroline Thomas scoring a hat-trick of tries. England are likely to be without flanker Marlie Packer, who was injured in their equally one-sided 51-7 win over Ireland. 15 Stuart Hogg (Scotland) 14 George North (Wales) 13  Henry Slade (England) 12 Sam Johnson (Scotland) 11 Blair Kinghorn (Scotland) 10 Owen Farrell (England) 9 Tom Youngs (England) 1 Mako Vunipola (England) 2 Jamie George (England) 3 Kyle Sinckler (England) 4 Courtney Lawes (England) 5 Alun Wyn Jones (Wales) 6 Josh Navidi (Wales) 7 Arthur Iturria (France) 8 Billy Vunipola (England) Blair Kinghorn’s third and Chris Harris’s at Murrayfield had a flourish, but Jonny May’s in Dublin was a distillation of what England were about. Ireland were still humming their anthem when their opponents attacked them at pace and set the tone for the evening. The Six Nations reluctantly dragged itself into the bonus point era in 2017. If the system has yet to make a difference in the placings, it meant England kept going in Dublin and gave Italy something to play for at the very end of a game they were never in.  Some football clubs are considering ditching match programmes, at least in printed form, because they are not cost effective. Rugby nations are unlikely to follow suit because of the amount they charge for one: if there is more to read than in years past, the format is stale and the effort minimal, a rehashing with different names.