The Cleveland Browns have signed Kareem Hunt two months after the running back was released by the Kansas City Chiefs. The 23-year-old’s departure from the Chiefs came after video emerged of the player knocking over and kicking a woman in a Cleveland hotel hallway last February. Hunt was not arrested or charged over the incident. The Chiefs and the NFL had been aware of the incident since it occurred, but much like the case involving former Ravens running back Ray Rice, the video brought a new dimension to the case. It showed Hunt lunging toward a woman and several others in the hotel hallway, and the second-year pro being restrained several times before knocking two people down. The Chiefs said the video led them to believe Hunt had lied about the incident when they first spoke to him about it. Hunt said that the Chiefs were “right” to release him and apologized to the woman in the video. “My relationship and interaction with Kareem since 2016 in college was an important part of this decision making process but we then did extensive due diligence with many individuals, including clinical professionals, to have a better understanding of the person he is today and whether it was prudent to sign him,” the Browns general manager, John Dorsey, said in a statement. “There were two important factors: one is that Kareem took full responsibility for his egregious actions and showed true remorse and secondly, just as importantly, he is undergoing and is committed to necessary professional treatment and a plan that has been clearly laid out.” Hunt, for his part, said he working to be a “better” person. “First off, I would like to once again apologize for my actions last year. What I did was wrong and inexcusable. That is not the man I was raised to be, and I’ve learned a great deal from that experience and certainly should have been more truthful about it after the fact. I’m extremely grateful that John Dorsey, Dee and Jimmy Haslam and the Cleveland Browns organization are granting me the opportunity to earn their trust and represent their organization in the best way possible on and off the field,” he said. “I am committed to following the necessary steps to learn and to be a better and healthier person from this situation. I also understand the expectations that the Browns have clearly laid out and that I have to earn my way back to the NFL. I’m a work in progress as a person, but I’m committed to taking advantage of the support systems that I have in place to become the best and healthier version of myself.” Hunt was also placed on the NFL’s Commissioner Exempt List in December, and will not be able to play for the Browns until the league concludes its investigation. The 2019 regular season starts on 5 September. Although Hunt was widely condemned for his actions, it was always likely that a team would be willing to give one of the most talented rushers in the league a second chance. Hunt was the NFL’s leading rusher in his rookie season, and had 824 rushing yards in the 2018 season before he was released by the Chiefs.