In grim confirmation that the world is indeed prey to nitpicking jobsworths capable only of reading the manual rather than delivering commonsense West Indies’ captain, Jason Holder, has been suspended from the last Test in St Lucia because of his side’s slow over rate in the Antigua Test, which finished with more than two days to spare. This is a cruel and ridiculous corollary to a famous victory, which provokes a mixture of sympathy and disbelief. It certainly does not detract from Holder’s capacity to lead his national side so impressively. Indeed, it remains conceivable that Holder, despite attracting the ire of the ICC, will one day be held in the same regard as the great West Indian captains of the past, Sir Frank Worrell and Clive Lloyd. This might seem a preposterous thought. The West Indies team under Holder’s leadership has lost many more games than it has won. After two consecutive wins against England the ledger now stands at 15-9 and his side is currently ranked No 8 in the world. Yet there is the sense that his team can now go beyond the odd false dawn. West Indies have just completed their most significant series win for a decade or more and, whatever England’s shortcomings, they have not just pipped them at the post. They have thrashed them with clinical, flint-eyed certainty. The matches in Barbados and Antigua have been as one-sided as any of those in the 80s. Holder cannot yet boast a line of world-class cricketers like those that adorned the sides of Worrell and Lloyd and the hurdles he has faced have been of a different kind. Worrell had to demonstrate that, glory be, a black captain could lead the team better than his predecessors. No pressure there, then. Lloyd’s achievements came not from tactical wizardry but his capacity to bind together the best cricketers from all the nations of the Caribbean, usually with a calm, avuncular word or two. He managed to do that over an extraordinarily long period even when the team might have become bored with their success. In some ways Holder’s task has been even more challenging. Amid a range of arguments between the board and the players and the constant wrangling about how to combine the obvious desires of key players to earn some money in the T20 leagues with West Indies’ international commitments, Holder has managed to stay measured and clear-headed. On top of that there has been the requirement to score runs and take wickets and in recent times he has been doing that in abundance. A glimpse of the passion that exists in that West Indian dressing room came from Alzarri Joseph’s performance on Saturday after his mother’s death. Holder explained afterwards. “It took a lot of heart for him [Joseph] to be on the field. A lot of people would not be able to do that. It was up to him. I didn’t want to deprive him of the opportunity to take to the field and I know he wanted to do something special for his mum. Credit to him. I felt it personally when I got the news. To see him in tears in the morning was even harder. When we came together in the huddle we just wanted to do it for him, to dedicate the day to him and his mum and also to his family. He’s a champion.” For Root the optimism generated by the trip to Sri Lanka has been swept away in the space of seven days. In Barbados England picked a team that would have been described as “brave” by Sir Humphrey in Yes Minister, an adjective that sent shivers down the spine of his boss. In fact, having Sam Curran and Adil Rashid as their fourth and fifth bowlers was more foolhardy than brave. But the main issue has been England’s lamentable batting. It has not helped that Root has been runless; in Antigua he was probably blameless as well since he was the recipient of nasty deliveries in both innings. “Cut off the head and the rest will follow,” was the mantra of the old West Indies side and England are desperately fragile if their captain is not scoring runs. Anyone can identify the problem. Trevor Bayliss himself acknowledges the proliferation of natural No 6s in the team. The solution is trickier. They cannot find an efficient top order. The openers rotate as if operated by a pinball wizard. The blunt figures suggest that Jonny Bairstow has been a modest success at three – in three matches he averages 38.33 there as opposed to 37.29 in all Test cricket – yet it is no secret that he does not really want to bat there. Nor does Root. Nor do any of the other natural sixes. Perhaps there will be further experimentation in St Lucia – especially if Ben Foakes is unfit. It may be that Jos Buttler, originally recalled as a novel No 7, will be elevated but such a move stems from a certain desperation: he is willing; in a selfless way he is prepared to give it a try but it is a bit like playing Raheem Sterling at centre-half. Buttler, Ben Stokes and Bairstow are all more dangerous when they have the freedom to attack. The frustration is the lack of young alternatives queuing up to grab a place in the team at the top of the order and this situation is unlikely to change. In 2020 our best young batsmen will be hell-bent on excelling in the two short-form competitions in around 30 matches that will take place in the heart of the summer from June to August. That is where they can earn a good living. Striving to bat for five hours against a red ball will, increasingly, become a mug’s game.