Japanese TV is on the hunt for strong female leads and they don’t come much tougher than the four women of Mistresses. Years before female-powered programmes from Scott & Bailey to Fleabag displayed every facet of women’s lives, the BBC One drama was groundbreaking. Mistresses was unleashed in the post-Sex and the City but pre-#MeToo era and at its height would pick up just over five million viewers (which is respectable). At that time, any show featuring four women who ate lunch together was dubbed “the British S&TC”, but the drama was more than that. These women weren’t fitting work around a whirlwind of dates. They were juggling careers, family and everything in between, and still finding time for their rampant sex lives (mostly with husbands who were not their own). Lunchtime chardonnay and a thirst for lust made it surprisingly risque viewing, but the Mistresses weren’t having affairs just for the fun of it. Sarah Parish was at her powerful and pouting best as Katie, the doctor who helped her patient kill himself and slept with his son. Shelley Conn played Jessica, a commitment-shy party girl who would bed any man or woman who wasn’t fully available. And although widowed Trudi (Sharon Small) spent the first series as a cake-baking mothering machine, even she got in on the action. And then there was Siobhan, Orla Brady’s unassuming lawyer who left her husband sleeping so she could pick up men in hotel bars. Mistresses showed women holding together work, sex and family life, then blowing it apart. Top-notch acting, tight scripts and enough twists to fuel three series let the well-rounded characters shine. It balanced escapism (great wardrobes and glossy kitchens) with the ingredients of real life such as infertility, infidelity and the healing power of strong female friendships. This isn’t the first time Mistresses has been rebooted for an overseas audience. Alyssa Milano led the cast of a watered-down US version, but the characters lacked that precious quality their British counterparts had: they made you root for their every move, right or (usually spectacularly) wrong.