Kepa Arrizabalaga 5 No chance with first goal but should have done better to prevent Pogba’s header creeping in. César Azpilicueta 6 Not to blame for either goal but still a shadow of his former dependable self. Antonio Rüdiger 4 Unsettled by Rashford’s pace throughout. Looked nervous when in possession. David Luiz 5 Some important blocks but never inspires confidence. Needs more protection from midfield. Marcos Alonso 3 Reliable in attack, not so much in defence. Poor marking for first goal and went missing for second. N’Golo Kanté 7 Still does the work of two players in midfield. Needs to return to his best position. Jorginho 3 Another disappointing display. Chelsea fans are quickly losing patience with his lack of influence. Mateo Kovacic 5 Chased down United’s midfielders all night but took an extra touch too often in possession. Pedro 6 Some decent moments down the right but faded as Chelsea came under pressure. Gonzalo Higuaín 6 Started brightly but will be disappointed not to have hit the target with free header in first half. Eden Hazard 7 A constant menace, he was unplayable at times. His patience must be running thin. Subs Willian (for Pedro 58) Curled free kick way over. 5 Ross Barkley (for Kovacic 71) Has now replaced Croatian 20 times this season. 5 Davide Zappacosta (for Azpilicueta 82) Strange substitution when 2-0 down. 5 Sergio Romero 7 Double save from Pedro and David Luiz free-kick in first half but rarely tested after that. Ashley Young 6 Booed early on after a bad foul earned a deserved booking. Stifled Hazard after the break. Victor Lindelöf 8 Some outstanding interceptions in the nick of time. Growing in stature with every game. Chris Smalling 7 Stuck to his task admirably against the experience of Higuaín and could have scored. Luke Shaw 8 Looked a threat in attack and improving as a defender. Denied Pedro a certain goal. Nemaja Matic 6 Can count himself lucky not to have been sent off after a second-half foul on Kanté. Ander Herrera 7 Never stopped running as United tried to press in the first half and took his goal superbly. Paul Pogba 8 A moment of genius resulted in a magical cross for Herrera before heading home the second himself. Juan Mata 8 Worked his socks off to press Jorginho and left field to a standing ovation at his former club. Romelu Lukaku 7 Chased down everything in tandem with Rashford. Still lacking sharpness in front of goal. Marcus Rashford 9 A joy to watch in full flow. His pace caused Chelsea endless problems and created the second goal. Subs Alexis Sánchez (for Lukaku 73) Working his way back to full fitness. 6 Andreas Pereira (for Mata 76) Helped stifle any comeback. 6 Scott McTominay (for Rashford 90) No time to make an impact. -