For the third match in succession the victory march has been a procession utterly devoid of tension, which has been one of the flaws of the series. This time it was England’s turn to dominate a disappointingly one-sided contest. They won by a massive margin – 232 runs – which can only add to the exasperation in the camp. How could they be so wretched in two Tests yet so overwhelming in this one? The absence of Jason Holder, both as a player and a captain, was highly significant, yet an insufficient explanation for such a transformation. England had the capacity to prevail in this series but at the outset they were flawed in their preparation and selection. Meanwhile West Indies seized their chance brilliantly in Barbados, where they were so much sharper and more disciplined than England. Then, rather than battening down the hatches in Antigua, they played on a sporting surface to snatch that 2-0 lead while England were still blinking at their own ineptitude of the first Test. If the majority of England’s batsmen had had the benefit of competitive cricket before the first Test – in some ODIs perhaps – and they had picked a more appropriate side for that match, who knows? In St Lucia, on an excellent grassy surface that rewarded positive cricketers and despite a constant force three or four breeze, it was plain sailing throughout what proved to be the last day (despite the complaints about the over rates, none of the matches have reached the fifth day). After half an hour Joe Root declared when he was caught at midwicket for 122, having added another 36 with Ben Stokes, who had been in belligerent mood. Then Jimmy Anderson set to work. This has been a streaky series for England’s greatest wicket-taker. He has never bowled badly but there have been barren spells followed by a sudden burst of wickets – in the last session of the first day in Barbados and now on a bright and breezy morning here. Within eight overs he had reduced West Indies, set 485 for victory, to 10 for three. Kraigg Brathwaite edged his first ball between fielders in the slip cordon but after that it all went to plan. John Campbell sliced his first delivery and Moeen Ali, who is rarely sighted in the cordon, stuck out his right hand and there the ball came to rest. Then Anderson found Brathwaite’s edge and this time the ball found the safe hands of Stokes at second slip. The next edge, as Stuart Broad may recall, did not find a pair of secure hands. Shai Hope, yet to score, was given a reprieve by Jos Buttler at third slip, by one estimate the 98th dropped catch off his bowling in Broad’s distinguished career. Without doubt the slip cordon has done Broad few favours on this tour. Here he dealt with the latest spillage with an upper lip as stiff as one would expect from the MCC’s latest captain. There were two consequences of this drop. Soon Chris Woakes was spotted, a rare event on this tour, removing the boundary triangles on the rope at long-on. Obviously they were reflecting the sunlight into the eyes of the cordon. The second change was that Buttler was summarily removed from that cordon. He has a mixed record in the slips and suddenly Moeen had suggested that he could be effective there. It was, in fact, a sign of strength that Buttler was removed so rapidly; it meant that England are not over-sensitive to the delicate feelings of their players. In any case Buttler did not look too bothered. Next Anderson dispatched Darren Bravo, caught at slip by Root, and West Indies were rocking. Mark Wood followed Broad with the wind at his back. There were not quite the pyrotechnics of Sunday but those in the stands watched more eagerly such is the attraction of genuine pace and the batsmen jumped more gingerly. Soon Root’s latest favourite toy had Hope caught in the covers from a leading edge. After lunch Roston Chase dug in before expanding elegantly later in his innings, but a moment of self-destruction coupled with a fine throw from Joe Denly found Shimron Hetmyer out of his crease when seeking to complete a third run. Another fine catch by Stokes at slip brought the end of Shane Dowrich. This was Moeen’s 175th Test wicket, taking him beyond Tony Lock. Only three England spinners are now ahead of him, Jim Laker (193), Graeme Swann (255) and Derek Underwood (297). This is a phenomenal achievement by Moeen. Of English spinners who have taken 100 Test wickets or more, only Swann plus Johnny Briggs, Bobby Peel and Colin Blythe before the first world war have a better strike rate; no one concedes runs as quickly (though this may be a sign of the times). Now one is tempted to describe Moeen as a bowler who bats – except when he plays for Worcestershire. These labels are not really helpful but he can take this as a compliment. In this series his bowling has been increasingly valuable to Root and he ended the series as England’s leading wicket-taker. There were two more tail-end victims for Moeen amid some merry swinging from the tail and some more conventional strokeplay from Chase, who would end up unbeaten with a fine consolation century. So Moeen now has 177 Test wickets, which puts him equal with Angus Fraser. He got there with less perspiration and without ever damaging any footholds at all even when being swatted for six, as he was four times amid the last rites.