When an eating disorder took hold of Samuel Pollen at the age of 12 he felt as if the bad cop within him was taking over. He says anorexia is like having a severe voice in your head that grows to be all-consuming, but is also separate from who you really are. Now, aged 30, he is able to talk openly about his childhood experience. To help others he has written a book, The Year I Didn’t Eat, which chronicles 12 months in the life of fictional 14-year-old Max as he struggles with anorexia. “In the book I draw out a separate character who is the eating disorder … a bad cop version of you is a good way of summarising it [an eating disorder], a severe voice. I guess we all have an internal filter that makes us do things: for example, get up, or think, ‘I should go to the party’. But it’s that on a grand scale and about every aspect of food,” he says. The problem of eating disorders has never been more prominent. There has been a dramatic rise in hospital admissions for conditions such as anorexia and bulimia in recent years. Figures obtained by the Guardian from NHS Digital show year-on-year rises in hospital visits in England, with admission numbers more than doubling from 7,260 in 2010-11 to 16,023 in the year to April 2018. The latest figure is up from 13,885 the year before – the biggest spike in eight years. Experts have said the surge in numbers is down to the failure of NHS services to tackle anorexia and bulimia at an earlier stage, before people become so unwell that they need to be admitted to hospital. There has also been a notable rise in men experiencing the condition. The number of adult men being admitted to hospital with an eating disorder has risen by 70% over the past six years – the same rate of increase as among women. Pollen says the rise could be down to more awareness but he also thinks it’s a wider societal problem. “Eating disorders happen when people look at who they think society wants them or expects them to be and they see a mismatch. It’s a weird way of taking control of that situation, thinking ‘this is the thing I can do’, and that gets worse as we have more self-scrutiny and loneliness.” His disorder started when he got into exercise, running and restricted eating. “It got worse over a period of six months and then I got the flu, and I was too weak to go upstairs. Mum called the doctor, who referred me to children’s mental health services, and I sought outpatient treatment from there,” he explains. He saw a clinical psychologist weekly for the first few months and then less frequently. “I responded well to having a medical authority figure take the problem seriously. Oddly, I think even just the diagnosis helped, because it brought home that something was really wrong.” Pollen believes a quick referral by the NHS in east Cheshire where he lived with his parents was key to his recovery, and that it would be much harder for him today with children facing long waits for treatment. “Early intervention is so critical in eating disorders because breaking patterns and behaviours is such a big part of the treatment. The longer you leave it, the harder it gets,” he says. “I was lucky – my progress from that point was relatively smooth, and I did not have any significant relapses, which is the most common experience, but also one a lot of people don’t have. That is testament to the fact I had a very supportive family. Pollen believes there was no one trigger for his illness, but he says he has always been an anxious person, and someone driven by goals and worries about under-performing. “It [having an eating disorder]is a weird one but it feels sort of clever and something you can do well that others cannot necessarily do, and that is the reinforcer, the idea you are doing something better than others.” He notes that the pressure on women is relentlessly “thin-based”, but it can be more complex for men. “There are lots of related things, such as body dysmorphia … my eating disorder was very fitness based. I ran a lot and obviously everyone has a slightly different experience and something that happened is … that idea of desirable male bodies. I grew up in the age of grunge where thinness in male bodies was cool in a way that has traditionally been the body builder-style physique. I remember being conflicted. I wanted to be really muscly and thin and taller than I was.” His book is one of a growing number that attempt to tackle the problem through fiction for a younger audience. Pollen hopes that his can inject a bit more positivity into the debate. “My message is a hopeful one … Most people recover from eating disorders. I did not get that at all when I had an eating disorder.” In the book, the character of Max is helped by various people, and Pollen says having routines and people being normal is vital. “My friends carried on inviting me to play video games and often I said no as I did not want to see anyone, but it helped.It also helped that I had a very supportive family. My parents kept routines and we did whatever we did as a family. That was really important. A lot of recovery is about keeping routines and slipping back into normal life.” Age: 30. Lives: North-east London. Family: Married. Education: Wilmslow High School, Cheshire; St John’s College, University of Cambridge, natural sciences BA (focusing on zoology and psychology). Career: March 2019: author, The Year I Didn’t Eat (ZunTold Publishing); 2014–present: copywriter/brand writer, Reed Words writing agency. Joined as a writer, then promoted to senior writer; now head of digital writing; 2012–2014: copy and marketing manager, Conran and Partners; 2010–12: Ogilvy graduate fellowship (mixed role in advertising); 2009-10: internship, Schatz Ornstein Studio (fine art/commercial photography). Interests: Running, crochet, dog-walking.