President Donald Trump has appointed his former doctor to be his assistant and chief medical adviser. Saturday’s announcement by the White House follows Trump’s decision to re-nominate Rear Admiral Ronny Jackson for a second star due to inaction by the previous Congress. Jackson’s original nomination was put on hold last year after Trump nominated him to head the Veterans Affairs department. The navy doctor withdrew following allegations of professional misconduct, which the Pentagon continues to investigate. Jackson has denied any wrongdoing. After Trump nominated Jackson for the position last April, Montana Democrat Jon Tester released a document summarizing more than 20 interviews conducted by staffers with people who served with Jackson. The document included allegations of drunkenness, faulty prescribing practices and creating a hostile work environment. It included claims that Jackson “got drunk and wrecked a government vehicle” after a party and described “at least one occasion [when] Dr Jackson could not be reached when needed because he was passed out drunk in his hotel room”. It also alleged that he so freely handed out prescription drugs he was nicknamed “candyman” and had his own “private stocks of controlled substances”. Upon withdrawing his nomination, Jackson denied the allegations made against him. “Unfortunately, because of how Washington works, these false allegations have become a distraction for this president and the important issue we must be addressing – how we give the best care to our nation’s heroes,” he said in a statement put out by the White House. “While I will forever be grateful for the trust and confidence President Trump has placed in me by giving me this opportunity, I am regretfully withdrawing my nomination to be secretary for the Department of Veterans Affairs.” Jackson led the medical team for Trump’s physical exam last year and said the president was in excellent health and had “incredibly good genes”. “I told the president that if he had a healthier diet over the last 20 years, he might live to be 200 years old,” he said at the time. A White House official not authorized to publicly discuss personnel issues said Trump considers Jackson a trustworthy medical adviser and physician. Trump reportedly previously told aides and outside advisers that he is fond of Jackson personally. The president was also impressed with Jackson’s performance at the podium in January 2018, telling aides he liked the doctor’s smooth turn before the cameras and ability to field reporters’ questions as he offered a glowing report on the president’s physical and mental wellbeing. Associated Press contributed to this report