Nancy Pelosi is known as a shrewd political tactician and tireless public servant, but after Tuesday night’s State of the Union address she can add world-class mime to her résumé. Throughout the speech the House speaker managed to undermine Trump without speaking a word, employing subtle eye rolls or apparently ignoring him by reading papers to show her disapproval. Her pièce de résistance came when Trump, who has repeatedly attacked Democrats in the most unsavory terms and engaged in petty tit-for-tat with Pelosi during last month’s partial government shutdown, called on Washington to “reject the politics of revenge, resistance and retribution and embrace the boundless potential of cooperation, compromise and the common good”. She stood up and began applauding Trump with her arms outstretched towards him, in a manner so sarcastic it would probably get her sent off during a soccer game. It quickly became the meme of the evening, with Twitter users, one of whom described it as a “walrus clap”, reimagining the applause as everything from a feminist smirk to a new way of cursing. pic.twitter.com/eRUMnpvz3D When your man says he washed the dishes and needs to be praised. #PelosiClap pic.twitter.com/yjXuLvXMgN Trying to sleep and can’t stop thinking about Nancy Pelosi’s literal clap back. 👏 pic.twitter.com/oJzgUrBOyC It's been brought to my attention that Pelosi stole this from the Thermians in Galaxy Quest. pic.twitter.com/y5BBhIKNES When Pelosi did comment on the address with a more conventional statement (using words) she was only slightly more sanguine, criticising Trump for “fearmongering” and threatening congressional oversight as well as praising Stacey Abrams’ response on behalf of the Democrats. She sadly made no reference to what is now being called the #PelosiClap. However it has already been made into a reaction gif on Twitter, meaning long after the speech has been forgotten, people will still be able to use Pelosi as a way to show disapproval at anything from a Piers Morgan rant to one of Trump’s early-morning missives.