The Democratic governor of Virginia apologized for his appearance in a “racist and offensive” costume in his medical school yearbook, but he defied bipartisan calls to step down Friday evening and intends to serve out his term. “I am deeply sorry for the decision I made to appear as I did in this photo and for the hurt that decision caused then and now,” said Governor Ralph Northam in a statement. The photograph shows a person in blackface standing next to a person wearing the white robes and hood of the Ku Klux Klan. It is not apparent which figure is Northam, and the governor’s statement did not clarify that point, stating only that it shows “me from my 1984 medical school yearbook in a costume that is clearly racist and offensive”. Other photographs on the yearbook page show a young Northam in a suit, wearing a cowboy hat, and sitting by a car. The page lists his interest as “pediatrics” and includes the following quote: “There are more old drunks than old doctors in this world so I think I’ll have another beer.” The 59-year-old Northam was elected governor of Virginia in 2017, after having served a four-year term as lieutenant governor of the state. He had previously served in the US army, attended Eastern Virginia Medical School, and worked as a pediatric neurologist. Northam’s admission that he was one of the figures in the photograph drew immediate calls for his resignation from across the political spectrum. “Leaders are called to a higher standard, and the stain of racism should have no place in the halls of government,” tweeted Senator Kamala Harris, a top contender for the Democratic nomination for president. “The Governor of Virginia should step aside so the public can heal and move forward together.” Fellow Democratic hopefuls Senator Elizabeth Warren and Julián Castro also called on Northam to resign, as did leaders of the NAACP, MoveOn, the pro-choice group Naral and the Democratic Super Pac Priorities USA also issued calls for Northam’s resignation. The Republican party of Virginia (RPV) tweeted: “What Ralph Northam did was unforgivable. Given his statements on the right to life coupled with the most recent revelations, he has lost the moral authority to continue to govern and should resign immediately.” Northam issued an additional statement, this time on video, addressing the calls for his resignation late Friday evening. “I cannot change the decisions I made, nor can I undo the harm my behavior caused then and today,” he said. “But I accept responsibility for my past actions, and I am ready to do the hard work of regaining your trust … I am committed to continuing that fight through the remainder of my term.” The state of Virginia has been grappling with its legacy of slavery and Jim Crow in recent years. Approximately 50 members of the Ku Klux Klan rallied in Charlottesville, Virginia, in July 2017 over plans to remove a statue of the Confederate general Robert E Lee from a city park. The next month, a gathering of hundreds of white nationalists in the city turned deadly and shocked the world with images of angry men chanting “Jews will not replace us”. Northam was elected that November, with a decisive win that was seen by many as a rebuke of Donald Trump and the Republican party’s support of Confederate “heritage”. Should Northam resign, he would be succeeded by his lieutenant governor, Justin Fairfax, who is only the second African American to be elected to statewide office in Virginia. Last month, the Washington Post reported on a small act of protest by Fairfax, who declined to participate in a state senate tribute to Lee.