Chloe Aridjis’s 2009 debut, Book of Clouds, about a young Mexican writer exploring Berlin, and the novel that followed, Asunder, in which a guard at the National Gallery in London reflects on the suffrage movement, count among the more interesting fiction in English of the past decade. You read her more for atmosphere than plot; her eccentrically detailed style holds out the promise of a big-picture coming together in a perpetual tease that, depending on how twitchy you’re feeling, leaves your expectations rewired or just frustrated. It’s typical that her new book, set in Mexico in the late 1980s, should open with its teenage narrator, Luisa, wandering a beach in Oaxaca “aimlessly, purposefully and in search of digressions”. We learn she has run away with Tomás, an older, maybe-boyfriend she barely knows. The trip puts at risk her university place overseas and she wouldn’t have made it in the first place if her television hadn’t broken down, forcing her to seek diversion in a newspaper, where she stumbled across an item about Ukrainian dwarves apparently going awol to the seaside after fleeing a Soviet circus. It’s Luisa’s idea to find the dwarves, but we’re not shocked when her quest turns out to be a proxy for rites of passage that prove equally chimerical. Things don’t work out with Tomás, disappointment hanging over an erratic tale full of left turns. “And it was at the bar one night,” she tells us, “just as I was two-thirds through my second drink and debating what next, that I met the merman”, the “merman” being Luisa’s name for the attractive stranger she’s about to watch build a sandcastle over the next two pages. Aridjis scrambles your brain, not with high-modernist pyrotechnics but by the stealthier means of undermining the assumption that a novel’s words exist to advance the story. When Luisa tells us of a friend who lied about having Morrissey’s autograph or muses on “salt-water macro-organisms that share a fondness for ancient timber”, or an ex-boyfriend “who liked kicking boxes, he’d kick any box he found lying on the street”, it’s just because. There’s a short memoir by Aridjis in the current issue of Granta, recalling her favourite nightclub when, like Luisa, she was a teenager in Mexico City. A few of its passages appear word for word in Sea Monsters, such as this one about another reveller, Adán, in “bomber jacket, goggles and motorcycle boots and aviator cap with earflaps; he always seemed about to lift off yet in reality never left the dance floor”. It’s strange to realise that, in the memoir, you accept these lines as detail for detail’s sake – a bit of colour – while in the novel, you find yourself hoping they might earn their keep some other way too. Aridjis, though, has never been an instrumentalist, kill-your-darlings kind of writer and by the end we’ve learned not to expect much from Adán or any of the zillion other cameos here. A last-minute change of perspective provides a payoff of sorts, but ultimately you enjoy Luisa’s company without ever being quite sure why she wants us around. When, on the beach, she encounters someone who talks “without filters, letting the words pour out without ever stopping to consider what he was saying, [who nonetheless] spoke so much that every now and then he would say something meaningful”, it almost sums up the austere bounty of a novel in which the narrative largesse turns out to be a type of withholding. • Sea Monsters by Chloe Aridjis is published by Jonathan Cape (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99