Fifty years ago, an Australian businessman named Rupert Murdoch took control of the Sun, then a failing Labour-supporting broadsheet, and turned it into a hugely successful tabloid – so successful that it became the country’s best-read paper. The formula was seemingly simple: a relentless focus on celebrities, competitions and sex. Half a century later, the newspaper’s masthead is celebrating with the slogan: “The People’s Paper For 50 Years.” But behind the hype, there is a feeling that the Sun has lost its common touch. It certainly remains the UK’s best-selling newspaper, but it has not escaped the general collapse in sales across the industry, and in the past decade circulation has more than halved, to 1.4m copies a day. It is investing heavily in its website, but came late to the party, by which time its natural audience was already hooked on the celebrity pictures of the Daily Mail website, MailOnline. At the start of this year, the Sun’s parent company declared a headline-grabbing pre-tax loss of £91m, weighed down by issues including the stream of legal cases relating to allegations of historic phone hacking. Most worrying for the newspaper – and to the delight of its critics – there is a nagging fear that the Sun may have lost its swagger. Staff describe an outlet struggling with its identity in a changing Britain, and worry that a newspaper that was able to successfully surf a strand of public opinion for decades could now be losing its touch. Many of those currently at the paper complain that under the leadership of editor Tony Gallagher, the newspaper’s tone has become far more vicious and politics-heavy. They say he has a penchant for obsessively covering minor political rows and stars posing in “vintage glam” shots, with hard news prioritised at the expense of current celebrities. One recently departed journalist describes the atmosphere in the newsroom as “anarchic, intense and a bit sad”, with old-time Sun executives trying to recreate the intensity of the old newspaper operation on a substantially reduced budget. “There’s a Last Days of Rome mentality, that the best days are behind us,” says one. “The problem is that Tony has no sense of humour,” says one individual who worked with Gallagher at the Sun. “And you can’t learn that.” (Gallagher declined to be interviewed for this article.) Murdoch’s Sun rose by giving the public what they wanted: humour, irreverence and a daily figure to hate, all inside a tightly edited print newspaper filled with puns and giveaways. Stick It Up Your Punter!, one of the definitive books on British journalism, describes the chaos and relentless focus of the newspaper in the 80s under the editorship of Kelvin MacKenzie when sales boomed. Peter Chippindale and Chris Horrie’s book describes how the paper chased whatever trend was in vogue that morning, with the editor ordering his aggressive reporters to “put a ferret up the trousers” of whoever was making the news that day, before ordering a “reverse ferret” when it became apparent that this editorial line was unpopular with readers – or Murdoch himself. Reporters were despatched to buy donkeys in Spain, while readers were treated to stories such as Freddie Starr Ate My Hamster, an article concocted with the approval of the publicist Max Clifford. Puns ranged from “It’s Paddy Pantsdown” (on coverage of Paddy Ashdown’s marital woes), “Up Yours Delors” (the paper’s response to Brussels bureaucrat Jacques Delors), and “Swedes 2 Turnips 1”(following England’s defeat to Sweden in Euro 92). They were no less bullish in terms of politics, notoriously declaring on the day of the 1992 general election that the last person in Britain should turn out the lights if Neil Kinnock were elected prime minister. The same year, MacKenzie allegedly told John Major: “I’ve got a large bucket of shit lying on my desk and tomorrow morning I’m going to pour it all over your head.” In 1995, the paper’s influence was such that Tony Blair flew to Australia to convince Murdoch to throw the Sun’s support behind New Labour. Years later there were claims that David Cameron had done the same for the Tories ahead of the 2010 general election. More recently, in the aftermath of the Brexit referendum, which saw the Sun enthusiastically backing leave, a victorious Gallagher told the Guardian: “So much for the waning power of the print media.” The former Sun editor and passionate remainer David Yelland says Gallagher is “far more responsible for the Brexit disaster than [Irish Taoiseach] Leo Varadkar” and has published “half-truths and no truths”. Yet old-time Sun executives treat politics with caution – as something liable to bore readers. Journalists at the paper trade the tale of one reader who rang to complain that it was still running stories about Brexit even though the referendum was won in 2016. James Graham, who wrote the play Ink, based on the newspaper’s early days, said that, despite its reputation for swinging elections, it has followed rather than led its readers since the start and “bent with the prevailing wind ever since”. One centrist Labour MP describes the Sun’s political power as a “generational divide”; colleagues first elected in the Blair years may be concerned about scrutinising the paper’s editorial lines, but younger MPs focus on Twitter reaction and are aware of the paper’s negative reputation among party activists. This negativity is because, in the paper’s 50th year, its past weighs heavily. Its most high-profile mistake – publishing lies about the 1989 Hillsborough disaster under the headline “The Truth” (which led to a boycott of the newspaper across Liverpool) has become more rather than less toxic over the years – with the recent inquest reviving memories. Even the public’s attitude to sex – one of the Sun’s main selling points – has changed, forcing it into more nuanced coverage. For years, Page 3 was a national institution, and one that could turn the likes of Samantha Fox or Katie Price into celebrities. Despite defending its Page 3 topless models to the end – at one point even mocking up the then Labour MP Clare Short as a model – in 2015, the newspaper realised the game was up and moved the feature online. In business terms, the paper has struggled to catch up with the online world. In 2013, it erected a paywall, hoping readers would be willing to cough up for a package offering Premier League goal highlights on their phone. They weren’t. Instead, illegal goal clips were uploaded to social media, while MailOnline rewrote the Sun’s celebrity scoops. After two years, the experiment was abandoned, leaving the paper to build an online audience from scratch, a decade after its rivals. Today, the newspaper boasts its website reaches more Britons than any other, but industry insiders say they are often lured in with a clickbait headline, and stay for a very short time, before bouncing out. Audit Bureau of Circulations figures show Britons clicked on 86m MailOnline articles a day in January 2019 – compared with just 15m a day at the Sun. David Dinsmore, a former Sun editor who is now chief operating officer of ultimate parent company News UK, says the Sun’s regular online audience – the people who come back every day – is “several million” strong. Yet in a recent libel case, which saw Labour’s shadow justice secretary, Richard Burgon, successfully sue the paper over false claims he performed with a band that delights in Nazi imagery, the Sun’s defence partly rested on the argument that limited damage had been caused because a mere 7,000 people read the political scoop on its website in the space of six months – many of whom were lawyers. In a reversal of fortune, it is now the historically loss-making Times that is now the star financial performer in Murdoch’s UK newspaper business. All of this is prompting nervousness at the Sun about what happens if Murdoch’s son Lachlan takes over the family business, especially given revenues at the newspaper have fallen from £456m to £401m in three years, a situation made worse by the tens of millions of pounds put aside to deal with the phone-hacking allegations. The Sun has always strongly insisted that phone hacking took place only at sister paper the News of the World. At the same time, it has paid out millions of pounds to those who claim hacking was “widespread” at the daily paper, in order to settle cases before the accusations can be tested in open court, with legal proceedings over the issue now well into their second decade. Then there are the accusations of racism, whether over coverage of immigration, which has led to countless complaints to the press regulator IPSO, or its treatment of Raheem Sterling. At the end of last year, the newspaper defended itself from claims that its coverage of the England player was unfair. Dinsmore insists: “There is no racism there.” He says: “It would never be told with the intention of being racist – it is more: what is the story? It’s always difficult for editors when it comes to these situations, because you know it is a story that needs to be told but you know there’s going to be a reaction. We must be able to address thorny difficult subjects.” Dinsmore has a plea to his critics: “If you took your blinkers off and read it cover to cover you would like it and it understand it better.”