Remember the days when a British government demonstrated a basic awareness of its own terrible policies? When a prime minister was prepared to spell out obvious truths even though they were unpopular? Margaret Thatcher admitted that closing the mines would lead to job losses. Tony Blair acknowledged that invading Iraq would cost lives. And Theresa May? Not only can’t she admit that Brexit will cause voters hardship, she can’t even bring herself to admit that the hardship will have to be delayed. Anyone who has a passing acquaintance with British law, governance or trade must know that we will not be ready to leave the EU without a deal on 29 March. Too much remains to be done and too much could go wrong. The recent Institute for Government report on the subject makes for grim reading. The government has yet to pass six bills required to bring EU policy areas under domestic competence, including box-office Brexit items such as trade, agriculture and fisheries. More than 500 statutory instruments remain unapproved and 250 haven’t even been introduced. The government has moreover failed to replace dozens of key international agreements. Once again: we are scheduled to leave in eight weeks. The report also makes clear the dire state of preparations at the border and for the smooth transport of medicines and agricultural goods, on which lives and livelihoods depend. Why is it so hard to admit that we can’t and won’t exit on 29 March? Nobody voted to leave at a specific time, and an arbitrary date selected in the backrooms of Downing Street holds no deep significance. It has nevertheless become an article of faith. But pathological denial and zealotry will not preserve jobs and businesses, and the government will not save face if it oversees food shortages. Voters may prove more forgiving if the government climbs out of a prized but unroadworthy vehicle than if it resolves to keep driving with millions of people in the back. The mooted extension to the transition period is a new idea being put forward by the EU to help Theresa May square the circle created by the written agreement last December and the draft withdrawal agreement in March. That committed the UK and the EU to ensuring there was no divergence between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. But it also, after an intervention by the Democratic Unionist party, committed the UK (not the EU) not to have any trading differences between Northern Ireland and Great Britain. The problem is that these are two irreconcilable agreements. They also impinge on the legally binding Good Friday agreement, which brought peace to Northern Ireland and in some senses pooled sovereignty of Northern Ireland giving people a birthright to be Irish or British or both. If the UK leaves the EU along with the customs union and the single market then the border in Ireland becomes the only land border between the UK and the EU forcing customs, tax and regulatory controls. The backstop is one of three options agreed by the EU and the UK in December and would only come into play if option A (overall agreement) or option B (a tailor-made solution) cannot be agreed by the end of transition. The Irish have likened it to an insurance policy. The new EU idea is to extend the transition period to allow time to get to option A or B. But an extension is problematic for Brexiters and leave voters, who want the UK to get out of the EU as soon as possible. The Irish and the EU will also still need the backstop in the withdrawal agreement, which must be signed before the business of the trade deal can get under way. Otherwise it is  a no-deal Brexit. Extending the transition into 2021 would mean another year of paying into the EU budget. Britain would have to negotiate this but it has been estimated at anywhere between £10bn and £17bn. Staying in the EU for another year would also mean continued freedom of movement and being under the European court of justice, which Brexiters would oppose. The substantive objections to delaying Brexit amount to little. The most frequently cited is the necessity to participate in May’s European elections. Because the EU is a democracy, all member states must be represented in its parliament, and no legal means exist to exclude them. Frankly, so what? Let us have a campaign and elect those MEPs. If we end up leaving a few months later, it won’t matter anyway, and if we remain, dozens of British politicians will continue to fight Brexit’s corner in the EU’s corridors. This is a trivial reason to enact a no-deal scenario. It is also true that we would continue paying fully into the EU budget – but this is the reality during the post-Brexit transition period anyway. At least this way we will retain our seat and voice at the EU table, alongside full voting rights to back them up. We will also save some of the £4.2bn being spent on no-deal preparedness. The real point is that no amount of time could prepare us for no deal. We may be able to “take back control” of Britain, but not of France or Belgium. Those countries will always enforce their laws, and that means that they will check our goods and demand tariffs on our exports even if we do not reciprocate. As such, a no-deal scenario that had been war-gamed for years (as opposed to a few chaotic months) would still cripple ports and supply chains. This is not about delaying Brexit to prepare for no deal; it is about delaying Brexit to secure an outcome that will not destroy the economy. Extending article 50 is not the difficulty some Brexiters portray. It requires a simple request by the UK government and the unanimous agreement of the other 27 states. Not one of those has indicated that it would block such a request. Their citizens and businesses also depend on a deal and will be harmed without one. More to the point, any request would be endorsed by the Irish government, for whom a no-deal scenario represents political anathema. How likely is it that the EU would spend two years universally prioritising solidarity with Ireland, only to throw it under the bus at the last minute? Through Brexit’s looking-glass, the clearer something is, the more unsayable it becomes. As with the non-negotiability of the backstop, the need to delay article 50 is nakedly self-evident. Because ministers refuse to say it, however, the media must indulge their derangement like an overawed nanny to a spoilt child. But the problems are just starting. Once the government has conceded the need to delay, someone will have to go further and acknowledge the damage of implementing Brexit altogether. After three years of lies, manipulation and doublespeak, which senior minister will finally break the spell and tell the truth? • Jonathan Lis is deputy director of the thinktank British Influence