After such an emphatic start to the Six Nations, chalking up two wins and 92 points, complacency might be the most dangerous opponent for England’s women in Cardiff at lunchtime on Sunday. Not so, according to the Red Roses’ new captain, Abbie Scott. “Wales will be a big challenge,” says the Harlequins lock. “They’re a different beast away. We can’t be complacent. We’ve played here before and lost.” England, though, are playing on a different level to their Six Nations rivals and their 41-26 win against the champions in Doncaster a fortnight ago makes them near certainties for France’s grand slam crown. Only New Zealand, the World Cup holders, could live with them at present. But the England head coach, Simon Middleton, has made sure his side are not swaggering into Cardiff. He has made seven changes to the side that beat France and believes there is room for improvement. “It was a fantastic win but the mood in the dressing room afterwards was subdued,” he said “It was a great first half but we were disappointed with our defensive display in the second.” Middleton’s changes include picking Scott, who was outstanding in Doncaster, as captain instead of Sarah Hunter, who has to be content with a place on the bench. Poppy Cleall fills Hunter’s place at No 8 alongside the experienced flanker Marlie Packer, who has recovered from a shoulder injured in the win in Dublin. The only enforced change is the absence of Emily Scarratt, the centre who has been outstanding this year after returning from a spell in sevens. Scarratt has a foot injury. “It’s been very painful,” Middleton said. “She was tremendous against France but played the game on painkillers and was hobbling around on crutches all week. I’m optimistic that Emily will be back to face Italy but in the meantime we’ve got Rachael Burford back in the centre. “Rachael is one of a number of players being given an opportunity. I’d like to look at Poppy Cleall at No 8. Sarah Hunter has played a lot for club and country in the last four or five months and putting her on the bench will take a load off her. “Sarah Beckett is playing well and so we won’t be any weaker in the back row. We’ve a fantastic group of back-rowers. Marlie has a great skill set and loads of energy and she’s just the kind of player you need when facing Wales in their own backyard.” Lest we think there is only one team in it at Cardiff Arms Park and that a repeat of last season’s 52-0 win by England in this fixture is inevitable, Wales’s young side earned a creditable 3-3 draw against a resurgent Italy a fortnight ago and in the Ospreys’ Siwan Lillicrap they have a dynamic No 8 whose defensive capabilities – she is Wales’s leading tackler this year – will be invaluable on Sunday. But Wales’s coach, Rowland Phillips, admitted England’s power enables them to create a lot of attacking opportunities. Middleton’s team have scored a try every 10.7 minutes on average in this campaign and Wales, who have handed a first start to the 18-year‑old Scarlets flanker Alex Callender, face a long 80 minutes.