The Amazon CEO, Jeff Bezos, has accused the owner of the National Enquirer of “extortion and blackmail”, alleging that lawyers for David Pecker threatened the tabloid would publish text messages and intimate images if Bezos didn’t halt an investigation into how it had obtained those files. I’ve written a post about developments with the National Enquirer and its parent company, AMI. You can find it here: https://t.co/G1ykJAPPwy In a lengthy Medium blogpost, Bezos accused American Media Inc (AMI), which publishes the National Enquirer, of telling him “they had more of my text messages and photos that they would publish if we didn’t stop our investigation”. Bezos, who is the world richest man and also owns the Washington Post, became the subject of tabloid fodder in January after he and his wife MacKenzie announced they were divorcing. Shortly after, the National Enquirer published “intimate text messages” revealing Bezos’ relationship with Lauren Sanchez, a former tv anchor. After the tabloid published his personal messages, Bezos retained private security consultant Gavin de Becker “to determine the motives for the many unusual actions taken by the Enquirer”, he revealed in his blogpost. Bezos said an “AMI leader” subsequently told him that David Pecker, the chief executive of AMI, was “apoplectic” about the investigation. “My lawyers argued that AMI has no right to publish photos since any person holds the copyright to their own photos, and since the photos in themselves don’t add anything newsworthy,” Bezos wrote. The Amazon CEO said AMI’s chief content officer, Dylan Howard, then emailed threats to Bezos’s lawyer, Martin Singer. “[I]n the interests of expediating [sic] this situation, and with The Washington Post poised to publish unsubstantiated rumors of The National Enquirer’s initial report, I wanted to describe to you the photos obtained during our newsgathering,” Howard wrote. The email, which Bezos published in full, with redactions of personal information, went on to say that the Enquirer had obtained a “below the belt selfie — otherwise colloquially known as a ‘d*ck pick’” as well as nine other images. Those included a selfie, a shirtless photo of him holding his phone “while wearing his wedding ring”, a “full-length body selfie” of him in his underwear, and photos and messages from Sanchez. “It would give no editor pleasure to send this email. I hope common sense can prevail — and quickly,” Howard allegedly wrote. In his blogpost Bezos explained his decision to publish the emails, writing, “Any personal embarrassment AMI could cause me takes a back seat because there’s a much more important matter involved here. If in my position I can’t stand up to this kind of extortion, how many people can?” He continued: “Be assured, no real journalists ever propose anything like what is happening here: I will not report embarrassing information about you if you do X for me. And if you don’t do X quickly, I will report the embarrassing information.” Pecker and AMI have been in the national spotlight for months after the publisher was caught up in the ongoing investigations into Donald Trump, who has repeatedly attacked the Amazon CEO. In December, AMI told prosecutors it coordinated with Trump’s presidential campaign to pay a Playboy model $150,000 in hush money. AMI also said it worked “in concert” with the campaign when it bought Karen McDougal’s story of an affair with Trump and suppressed it “to prevent it from influencing the election”. Bezos mentioned this “catch and kill” arrangement for McDougal’s story in his Medium post, which he titled, “No thank you, Mr. Pecker”. “Rather than capitulate to extortion and blackmail, I’ve decided to publish exactly what they sent me, despite the personal cost and embarrassment they threaten,” Bezos added. Bezos’s blogpost also included an email from Jon Fine, an AMI lawyer, seeking “a public, mutually-agreed upon acknowledgment from the Bezos Parties, released through a mutually-agreeable news outlet, affirming that they have no knowledge or basis for suggesting that AM’s coverage was politically motivated or influenced by political forces, and an agreement that they will cease referring to such a possibility”. The proposed agreement in Fine’s email also said: “AM agrees not to publish, distribute, share, or describe unpublished texts and photos (the “Unpublished Materials”).” National Enquirer and AMI representatives did not immediately respond to request for comment. Amazon and Bezos’ attorney also did not immediately respond to inquiries.