The Super League chief executive, Robert Elstone, has hinted that major changes to the location, format and scheduling of the World Club Challenge may be implemented as early as next season, after conceding the event is “undervalued and underplayed”. The Super League champions, Wigan, host the NRL winners, Sydney Roosters, on Sunday in the 2019 edition of rugby league’s annual fixture to determine the best club side in the world but Elstone believes the concept is due “detailed consideration” in regards to its future and maximising its potential. The concept expanded into the six-team World Club Series in recent seasons before reverting to a standalone fixture last year, while hosting the event in neutral territories has also been mooted in recent years. Elstone, who will hold discussions with the NRL over the event’s long-term future, admits nothing is off the table in the future. “I think it’s definitely undervalued and underplayed,” he said. “It’s the best against the best, so there has to be more potential in it as an event. We’ve got to bring Super League, the NRL and all the clubs into the mix to nail down the discussions and maximise the potential of it as a concept and a sporting event. I think we should be looking at doing something for 2020.” Elstone also suggested he will consider moving the event away from England and Australia even though it has never been held outside those two countries. “I think we’re at the stage with it where we shouldn’t be ruling anything out,” he said. “But first and foremost, I think we have to look at what time of the year we’re playing it. Then there’s the format, as well as the host venue … we’ve got to consider all those.” Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Talks have taken place about moving the fixture from its traditional early-season timeslot to immediately after the conclusion of the Super League and NRL domestic seasons in October. “There might be a degree of logic in doing that,” he said. “You could have it as a conduit pathway into the international programme and stage it in the location where the best of the international calendar is going to take place. “However, we need to consider the commercial potential and the fans’ appetite for the game. If we’re playing a Grand Final at Old Trafford in October, is there an appetite for another game a week later? That’s something we’d need to explore. But there’s no reason why Super League and the NRL can’t subscribe to it having a proper place in the calendar long-term. I’ve had discussions with the NRL already, who are receptive to try and make this a bigger, better event.”