Democratic Senator Cory Booker kicked off his presidential campaign in Iowa with a call for unity, warning a crowd in Waterloo on Friday afternoon against “surrendering to cynicism” and calling for a revival of “civic grace”. “I believe in this country,” he said at Hawkeye Community College, on the first day of a weekend trip to the crucial caucus state that marks a key moment in the beginning of his bid for the Democratic nomination . “I believe in us as a people. I’ve seen what can happen when we come together.” Booker, who had appeared in Mason City earlier in the day, spoke to a crowd of about 100 as part of a roundtable discussion with local leaders. He touched on a range of issues, but devoted the most time to criminal justice reform – a signature issue for the New Jersey Democrat, who was a key champion of the First Step Act, which was signed into law by Donald Trump in a rare bipartisan win last year. Booker touted the overhaul as a success, but called for more steps to be taken to address mass incarceration and a system that has unfairly targeted low-income and minority Americans, framing over-incarceration as both a “cancer on our soul” and also a financial burden on taxpayers. Booker did not directly criticize Donald Trump during the Waterloo appearance – in fact, he didn’t even mention the president’s name – but criticized several of the administration’s policies and offered alternatives on issues like jobs, wages, and healthcare, reiterating his support for a single-system healthcare system. “There’s something almost immoral about being in the richest country on planet earth and people [don’t have access] to lifesaving medication because they can’t afford it,” Booker said. “We’re better than that as a country.” The visit came just over a week after the New Jersey senator announced his 2020 bid. He had been widely expected to run, and joined a crowded field of Democrats vying to challenge Trump with a rousing campaign video shot in Newark – his hometown. “I believe that we can build a country where no one is forgotten, no one is left behind,” Booker said in the video. “It is not a matter of can we. It is a matter of do we have the collective will, the American will? I believe we do.” Booker echoed that message as he began his first excursion to the key early voting state of Iowa as a presidential candidate, and sought to strike a strong rapport with both the audience and the local leaders on the roundtable. “I came to Waterloo to run for president,” Booker said. “You all have me feeling like I want to be a resident.” Booker, 49, had been a star in the Democratic party even before he was elected to the Senate in 2012, making national headlines as the “superhero” mayor of Newark. His profile has continued to rise during the Trump era, serving as a frequent critic of the president and his allies. He’s generally seen as a centrist Democrat, though he has staked out more progressive positions on criminal justice reform, the war on drugs, and social issues. He has also championed legislation to protect the Muller investigation, which Trump has called a “witch hunt”. “He’s got the right values,” said Sharon Silva, a resident of nearby Cedar Falls who was in the crowd at Hawkeye Community College. “He cares about the right things. He likes to solve problems.” Booker has also been scrutinized for his ties to Wall Street and to the pharmaceutical industry. Critics have also raised questions about his authenticity. Still, he appeared to capture the audience in Waterloo, making a strong introduction to the voters who turned up on a frigid day to get their initial impression of the senator, whose whirlwind trip to Iowa also included stops in Cedar Rapids and Des Moines. “He’s right on target,” said Lee Tolbert, a resident of Waterloo in attendance. Tolbert said he had been leaning toward Senator Kamala Harris, who recently announced her own candidacy with a powerful speech in California, but was so impressed with Booker that he now regards him as his top choice to face off against Trump. “Looking at where he’s come from along with his resume, he’s a winner,” Tolbert said. “He’s one that should be in the final round. I don’t see how anybody can take him out.”