Like most students heading off to university, Emily Proctor, 19, felt apprehensive. But it wasn’t just the thought of leaving her family and making new friends that caused her to be anxious; Proctor was concerned about how she’d fit in as a teetotal student. “I was worried as I knew that much of university life involves going out drinking, especially in the first year,” explains Proctor, who is studying law at Swansea University. To help alleviate her concerns, she signed up for the university’s alcohol-free accommodation. “I didn’t want to be around people who were partying constantly and coming home drunk,” she says. “I wanted to be around similar people who I could chill with instead of going out every night.” Proctor, who doesn’t drink alcohol as it’s never appealed to her, says that decision has proven to be a wise choice. “It worked out well in the end as I have friends that I stay in with and we might play cards, or go to the cinema or out for meals.” Proctor is far from an anomaly. A rising number of young people are abstaining from booze, with 36% of 16-24 year-olds in full-time eduction not touching alcohol, according to a survey by University College London. Dr Linda Ng Fat, lead author of the study, believes that an overall decline in drinking has made it more acceptable for young people to shun alcohol. “It seems that non-drinking is becoming more normative, which could make it easier for more and more young people not to drink, should they choose to.” Eva Crossan Jory, vice president (welfare) of the NUS, says that while drinking is still strongly associated with university life, high levels of debt and the pressure to do well means that students are going out less. “The amount of debt means fewer [students] have the free time to go out,” she says. “We have seen an increase in students working while doing their degrees, not just Saturday jobs but often near full-time work alongside study.” Universities are keeping apace with this cultural shift. A growing number of institutions such as Swansea, St Andrews and the University of Aberdeen offer dedicated alcohol-free accommodation. Universities are trying to shake off the drinking culture that has been embedded within university life. Aberdeen University’s student association asks all of its societies and clubs to run at least one alcohol-free event during freshers week, while Bristol holds a number of alcohol-free events during welcome week and has increased the number of alcohol-free drinks available in its union bar. Changes in students’ drinking habits have driven the University of Hull to make a number of adjustments. “We know that many of our students drink less regularly than they did five to 10 years ago, and we have many students who do not drink for cultural or religious reasons,” says Osaro Otobo, president of Hull University union. “We have reduced our club nights from twice to just once a week.” Students are taking the matters into their own hands and establishing societies that don’t revolve around drinking. “Our socials involve meeting for a hot beverage and cake every Thursday,” says Maria Marr, 22, president of the Sober Socials Society at Newcastle University. “We started the society in 2017 with 20 members and have now more than doubled it to 57,” adds Marr, who is studying a master’s in professional translation for European languages. While not completely teetotal – she might have one glass of wine a month – she believes more students are emerging as non-drinkers. “People are realising that you don’t need to give into social pressure. Alcohol is one those things you’re supposed to do when you grow up but a lot of people don’t like the taste and think, ‘I’m not spending money on that.’” George Pitt, 19, a teetotal medicine student at the University of East Anglia, says that while there is undeniably a massive drinking culture at university, “alcohol is not the be-all and end-all of socialisation”. Pitt, who is a member of the UEA Societea, a club where drinkers and non-drinkers meet for tea, adds: “The reality is most people don’t care too much as long as you don’t lord yourself over them or try to change them, so it’s really easy.” For those staying off the booze at uni, Marr’s advice is to look for societies and events where there isn’t a big drinking culture and to be upfront about your habits. “Of course people will try to encourage you to drink. You will have to deal with that, but don’t feel bad for the fact you’re not doing the same as everyone else.” Proctor adds: “Sometimes it can be hard as quite a lot of people drink quite heavily, but I’ve still been able to meet friends through my accommodation, societies and my course. It’s definitely been easier than I thought.”