It felt like one minute to midnight when racing awoke on Thursday morning to the news that all four of the day’s meetings had been cancelled due to an outbreak of equine influenza (EI) at Donald McCain’s stable in Cheshire. Most racing fans still remember 2001, when the Cheltenham Festival was lost amid the foot-and-mouth epidemic on Britain’s farms, and Google did little to ease the nerves, offering up the precedent of Australia’s EI outbreak in 2007, which closed Sydney’s tracks for nearly five months. That doomsday scenario – which would include Cheltenham, Aintree, the Derby and Royal Ascot – receded as the day wore on, even as the BHA extended the suspension of racing until next Wednesday at the earliest. The circumstances in Australia were very different, as its horse population was not vaccinated and EI was able to spread like a bushfire. While the three cases at McCain’s yard occurred in vaccinated horses, it is more likely to be the result of an ineffective vaccine – as is sometimes the case in humans too – than the first sighting of a new super-strain of the virus. The loss of at least 23 meetings, including the high-profile Betfair Hurdle card at Newbury on Saturday, will leave a hole in the sport’s betting revenue in the runup to Cheltenham and could also disrupt the carefully laid running plans of trainers up and down the country before the Cheltenham Festival in 32 days’ time. If racing can resume by the end of next week, however, the damage will be a small price to pay when set against the almost incalculable loss that would result from an extended shutdown and hundreds, perhaps thousands, of sick horses at the height of the National Hunt season. That said, there is still no room for complacency, as no one knows for sure what the hundreds of swabs and bloods will reveal. There is some reassurance, though, in the words of James Tate, whose string in Newmarket was one of the first to be tested since the trainer is himself a qualified vet. Tate had a winner on the card at Wolverhampton on Monday when his three-year-old Solar Park finished 13 lengths clear of his pursuers, two and-a half hours after McCain’s gelding Dark Confidant came home fourth in the opening race. “We weren’t near each other for any length of time at all so I feel relatively relaxed about my sample results,” Tate said, “but I’ll be happier when they’re negative, obviously. What is equine flu? It is not unlike human flu with symptoms of coughing, nasal discharge and a fever but it’s not normally fatal, with horses generally remaining infectious for up to 10 days. It is, however, extremely contagious and explains why the Australian outbreak of 2007 lasted many months. How long is the shutdown? All race meetings have been cancelled until at least next Wednesday (13 February). Racing has not been hit in such circumstances since 2001, when the foot and mouth outbreak saw the Cheltenham Festival called off. At least 23 races will not take place in the next week. Will the Cheltenham Festival go ahead this year? All roads lead to Cheltenham for racing’s participants and punters but there is every hope the year’s most important meeting will go ahead next month given that the mass vaccination already sanctioned by the sport should ensure the action on the Turf resumes before then. What races will be affected? The big loss for the sport is the important card at Newbury scheduled for tomorrow, which included the Denman Chase, featuring last year’s Cheltenham Gold Cup winner. If racing is back on by the end of next week, key races may be rescheduled at Ascot. How will this affect punters and bookies? According to Oddschecker, a total of £25m is staked each day on racing, with today's cancellations causing an 83% drop in bets placed. Hardened punters can also bet on virtual races and action from abroad – including Ireland, which has the all-clear to continue. Tony Paley  “It could be that in a few days’ time it will have been a few isolated cases and not a lot to worry about, but on the other hand, things happen quickly with influenza with the incubation period of a couple of days. “But history tells us that we’ve got a vaccinated, well cared-for and biosecure population. I’m sure it’s not going to be a disaster, but the only question is how much disruption it’s going to cause. If there’s any other positives, we’ll have to take it step by step. It’s a significant, important disease that needs to be taken seriously and the BHA are doing that and I’m sure it will be fine.” As Tate admits, though, the situation is of less immediate concern for a Flat trainer in Newmarket than it will be for a jumps stable with major contenders for the Cheltenham and Aintree festivals over the next two months. “It appears that the vaccination has not been as effective as we would like it to be, and as effective as it has been in recent years,” he says. “So I’m assuming this strain has mutated a little bit. The vaccine probably provides less protection if it was done a year ago versus if it was done three to six months ago, hence the BHA’s advice that if your horses haven’t been vaccinated in the last six months, give them a booster. “As a Flat trainer, I’m probably less nervous than some of my jumping colleagues. We are all trying to make sure they’ve had a booster in the last six months but that’s particularly troublesome for the jumps trainers, because you don’t really want to be giving horses vaccinations when you’re preparing them for a big race. You can’t run for seven days after a booster and some people think they affect them more than others. Some horses don’t seem to blink and some horses do. It’s the same when people go for a flu vaccine at the doctor’s, so it’s not ideal to be doing it to horses with targets coming up.” Angels Breath, ante-post favourite for the Supreme Novice Hurdle at Cheltenham, was the first big name to miss an intended prep for the Festival when the Sidney Banks Novice Hurdle at Huntingdon was abandoned on Thursday. Several more will join the list over the next few days, including Native River, last year’s Gold Cup winner, and Clan Des Obeaux, who took the King George at Kempton on Boxing Day, both of whom were among the entries for the Denman Chase at Newbury on Saturday. If, as currently seems likely, the BHA’s testing shows that the flu outbreak has been contained, it will then do what it can to repair the damage to the programme. Some horses may get the pre-Festival run their trainers were looking for, others may not and the form book will be just a little thinner than usual as the runners go to post on 12 March. If the outbreak has not been contained, of course, it could all prove to be academic in any case. But, after that initial sense of one minute to midnight, the BHA’s swift action will hopefully ensure that racing will soon edge slowly back from the precipice and start looking forward to the spring.