Gwyneth Bebb was born in Oxford in 1889. She was the sixth woman to study law at Oxford University, reading jurisprudence at St Hugh’s College. She completed her studies in 1911 with first class marks, yet she didn’t formally graduate because women at the time couldn’t be awarded degrees. In 1913, Bebb and three other women – Karin Costelloe, Maud Ingram and Lucy Frances Nettlefold – applied to the Law Society to sit the preliminary examinations needed before becoming a solicitor. They refused their applications and returned their fees, because women couldn’t be admitted as solicitors or barristers. Bebb and her colleagues took an action against the Law Society, claiming that it should allow them to take the exams and seeking a declaration that a woman was a “person” within the meaning of the Solicitors Act 1843. Section two of the act said: “No person shall act as an attorney or solicitor … unless such person shall after the passing of this act be admitted and enrolled and otherwise duly qualified as an attorney or solicitor.” Section 48 meanwhile said that “every word importing masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to a female as well as male … unless in any of the cases aforesaid it be otherwise specially provided.” The women were represented by Liberal politician and leading barrister Stanley Buckmaster KC. Buckmaster argued that simple statutory interpretation meant that women could be solicitors, relying on section 48. He also argued that there were precedents for women working as lawyers, even if they were not called “solicitors”. Despite the provisions of the act, Joyce ruled against them, stating that there were no examples of female solicitors or precedent for allowing them to become solicitors; essentially, he argued that women could not be solicitors because no women had ever been one, and said it was up to parliament to change the law, not the court. They appealed to the Court of Appeal, and lost again. The court stated it was bound by “long uniform and interrupted usage, which we ought … to be very loth to depart from” – that as only men had been solicitors, women could not be. The case failed, but the women had made their point and won public support. They did not appeal to the House of Lords, then the highest court in the land, but put their energy into campaigning for law reform, with support from a number of male MPs. The impact of the first world war and the increased awareness of women’s rights due to the suffrage movement meant the time had come for change. The Law Society voted to admit women and in 1919 parliament finally passed the Sex Disqualification (Removal) Act, which declared: “A person shall not be disqualified by sex or marriage from … entering or assuming or carrying on any civil profession or vocation, or admission to any incorporated society.” In 1922, Ingram, Mary Elizabeth Pickup, Mary Elaine Sykes and Carrie Morrison became the first women to pass the Law Society exams. Morrison became the first woman admitted as a solicitor later that year. Bebb herself did not benefit from the law change: she died the year before, aged 31, from complications during childbirth. Dana Denis-Smith, founder of the First 100 Years project which charts the journey of women in the law, says it was an important case. “It showed how the courts used precedent in order to maintain the status quo, and demonstrated the inflexibility and limits of the law,” she says. As Erika Rackley and Rosemary Auchmuty write in the book Women’s Legal Landmarks, the case highlights the “decades-long resistance of the male lawyers, MPs and judges to the idea of allowing women to be lawyers, and the need for feminist campaigners to strategise on all fronts to shift attitudes”. There is still work to be done to achieve real equality in law. But as Law Society president Christina Blacklaws says: “The legal profession owes an enormous debt of gratitude to Gwyneth Bebb and her fellow aspiring female lawyers.”