Bodegas Borsao Garnacha, Campo de Borja, Spain 2017 (£6.19, Rannoch Scott; Slurp) In the frigid depths of February, Spanish garnacha is the antidote to winter blues. Its gush of soft fruit and alcohol feeling like a direct transfer of warming southern European sun is at least as effective in seeing off SAD as an hour in front of a daylight lamp. These wines are the fruit of a variety, known as grenache in France and elsewhere, that is widespread in Spain – often in very old vines – but that has only relatively recently taken its place at the forefront of quality Spanish wine. At their most direct and uncomplicated, Spain’s garnachas offer a mouth-filling dollop of soft succulence – all bright berries and a dash of freshening paprika spiciness. Remarkable value, too, in the case of the evergreen version from Borsao in Aragon’s Campo de Borja region. Domaines Lupier El Terroir Garnacha, Navarra, Spain 2012 (£17.50, The Wine Society) Garnacha’s reputation owes a lot to its use in the star Catalan region of Priorat, where it plays the principal role in a blend with other varieties. Like the region from which they come, these versions of garnacha tend to be more rugged and craggy in texture, more layered, complex and rich, but with a characteristic lick of mineral refreshment. Two to try at relatively accessible prices are the dense liquorice of Morrisons The Best Priorat 2014 (£10) and the bright but intense Marco Abella Loidana Priorat 2015 (£16.50, Cambridge Wine). Garnacha also performs well in the far northern region of Navarra, where one of the most exciting producers, Domaines Lupier, uses small plots of old mountain vines that bring real elegance and freshness to the fragrant juiciness. Comando G Mataborricos, Sierra de Gredos, Spain 2016 (£17.65, Joseph Barnes Wines) While a great deal of garnacha is characterised by an almost extravagant, full-flavoured fruitiness, a new wave of producers is using the variety to make something that is closer to pinot noir or the light and savoury syrahs of France’s northern Rhône Valley. Three of the most influential members of this new garnacha wave – Fernando García, Daniel Jiménez-Landi and Marc Isart – came together to form a project known as Comando G at the beginning of the 2010s, working with old vines they had unearthed in the remote uplands – up to 1,000m above sea level – in the Sierra de Gredos mountains near Madrid. Their garnachas have a wonderful supple lightness of touch, while still being full of wild herbal flavour, not least in their gorgeous amphora-aged beauty, Mataborricos. Follow David on Twitter @Daveydaibach