Maro Itoje is set to miss England’s Six Nations matches against France and Wales and may be out for the rest of the tournament, because of knee ligament damage. In better news for the head coach, Eddie Jones, Manu Tuilagi is clear to face France on Sunday after escaping a citing for a shoulder charge on Ireland’s Jacob Stockdale. Itoje’s absence, though, will be keenly felt. England will confirm on Tuesday the length of Itoje’s injury but the best prognosis is thought to be a return for their last match of the championship, against Scotland on 16 March. England players have been known to make comebacks far quicker than expected but Itoje, who was on crutches during the celebrations after the win against Ireland on Saturday, may also have played his last Test before the World Cup in September. Jones is well stocked at second row and Courtney Lawes made a considerable impact against Ireland off the bench, while Joe Launchbury is expected to come into the matchday squad in Itoje’s absence. It is nonetheless a blow for Jones to lose a player he believes “is going to become the best lock in the world”. Itoje also sustained a knee injury towards the end of last year and spent five weeks out as a result. The initial injury was sustained at England’s October training camp in Portugal but he went on to play in all four of their autumn internationals and once for Saracens before the true extent of the problem became clear. Tuilagi is free to play consecutive England matches for the first time in five years after the citing officer, Jeff Mark, chose not to bring disciplinary proceedings against the centre, thereby ending any possibility of a suspension. It is a boost for the England head coach considering the impact Tuilagi had in his first Six Nations start since 2013. Elliot Daly will leave Wasps at the end of the season and the 26-year-old is widely expected to join Saracens. The full-back, who scored one of England’s four tries against Ireland in Dublin, has triggered a release clause in his contract and joins his Wasps teammate Christian Wade in announcing he is walking away from his boyhood club before his existing deal is up. The flanker CJ Stander is in a fight to be fit before the end of Ireland’s Six Nations campaign because of suspected facial fractures. Ireland expect Stander to be out of action for up to four weeks following the nasty looking injury he sustained in the 32-20 defeat by England on Saturday. The lock Devin Toner, wing Keith Earls and centre Garry Ringrose are all fitness doubts for the trip to face Scotland this Saturday. Stander will hope he is able to return in time for Ireland’s final two Six Nations matches, against France and Wales. “CJ Stander has a facial injury that could rule him out for up to four weeks,” read the IRFU statement. “Keith Earls suffered a hip pointer injury and will be managed across the early part of the week. “Devin Toner aggravated an ankle injury and Garry Ringrose reported some hamstring tightness. Both will be further assessed by the medical team over the next 24 hours. “Andrew Conway presented with some calf tightness following training last Thursday and will rehab in Munster this week.” Stander’s absence is a blow to the head coach, Joe Schmidt, with the South Africa-born back-rower proving a physical mainstay across 29 Ireland caps since his 2016 debut. A four-week lay-off could see Stander return for the Sunday 10 March home match against France, with the final game in Wales on 16 March another likely target. Press Association