Three of the last abortion clinics in Louisiana remain open after the US supreme court stopped a law that threatened to shut them down. Advocates have warned the case shows how women’s reproductive rights in the United States hang by a “dangerously thin” thread. The Louisiana law would have required physicians at abortion clinics to obtain medically unnecessary so-called admitting privileges to hospitals within 30 miles. The law was nearly identical to a Texas case the supreme court struck down in 2016. “While this particular ruling thankfully falls on the right side of history, it illustrates a sobering reminder: the thread that women’s rights hang by is dangerously thin in so many places across the country,” said Ilyse Hogue, the president of the advocacy group Naral Pro-Choice America. In the 2016 Texas case, the court found that requiring abortion providers to have admitting privileges at local hospitals, “provides few, if any, health benefits for women, poses a substantial obstacle to women seeking abortions, and constitutes an ‘undue burden’ on their constitutional right to do so”. Hospital emergency departments are already required by law to treat all patients. Admitting privileges are difficult for abortion providers to obtain because too few of their patients are likely to seek hospital care, as well as because of ideological opposition from hospitals. Common, in-clinic procedures performed by other specialists have far greater risks than abortions. The death rate associated with colonoscopies is 40 times greater than that associated with abortion, according to the American Public Health Association. The supreme court voted late on Thursday evening to stop the law in Louisiana. In a 5-4 vote, the chief justice, John Roberts, joined the court’s liberal members to stop its implementation, in the case called June Medical Service v Gee. Donald Trump’s most recent appointee to the bench, Justice Brett Kavanaugh, voted to allow the law to go into effect and see whether doctors could obtain admitting privileges within 45 days. If they could not, they could come back before the court, he said. Although Kavanaugh does not have an extensive record ruling on reproductive rights cases, Trump promised to appoint only “pro-life” justices. Kavanaugh is Catholic. That the case made its way to the US supreme court at all shows the power of federal appeals court judges, which the Trump administration has made a priority of confirming. Supreme court precedent is supposed to guide appeals court judges, but in a decision advocates called “rogue”, the conservative fifth circuit in Louisiana defied the supreme court’s recent decision and voted to allow the law to go into effect. The fifth circuit also upheld the Texas law, which led to the 2016 precedent. “If the supreme court allows this law to stand, blatantly denying its own recent precedent, it throws into disarray the whole system of judicial review,” said Katherine Ragsdale, the interim CEO of the National Abortion Federation. If the law is later upheld, the court’s decision, “leaves everyone wondering when, if ever, they can rely on the rulings of the court”. At the same time, the threat to women’s reproductive rights has pushed some liberal states to expand rights to abortion. In New York, a new law allows abortion after the 24th week of pregnancy if the fetus will not live outside the womb, or an abortion is necessary to protect a woman’s health. Similar measures are being pushed in Massachusetts and Rhode Island. New Mexico is seeking to repeal an abortion ban on the books since before the supreme court legalized abortion across the country in 1973. A bill in Hawaii would expand the pool of health workers who can provide surgical abortion to include some nurses. Florida and New Jersey both have bills introduced which could protect clinic access. In places like Louisiana, a requirement for doctors to obtain hospital admitting privileges is just the most recent roadblock for women seeking abortion. The state already requires a medically unnecessary ultrasound and a medically unnecessary 24-hour waiting period. Advocates are now asking the supreme court to hear the case next fall. Justices could decide to bring the case before the court as soon as this spring. “The supreme court has stepped in under the wire to protect the rights of Louisiana women,” said Nancy Northup, the CEO of Center for Reproductive Rights. “The three clinics left in Louisiana can stay open while we ask the supreme court to hear our case. This should be an easy case – all that’s needed is a straightforward application of the court’s own precedent.”