There are a handful of obvious questions anyone should be asking when presented with a wine list. But unless – like Cristiano Ronaldo during his recent visit to glitzy Mayfair seafood restaurant Scott’s – you’re untroubled by the prospect of shelling out £18,000 for a bottle of Richebourg Grand Cru, the most pressing will always be: “How much do I want to spend here?” Being clear – and firm – about your budget will curb any urge on the part of your sommelier to – in the industry lingo – “upsell” you something you can’t afford. And, contrary to stubborn popular belief, if that budget only stretches as far as the house wine (or that ever-popular “second-cheapest wine on the list”) that needn’t mean you’re in for a night of bad plonk and disdain. Whether it’s part of a pizza chain or Michelin-starred, any decent restaurant will know that the house wines are their most important bottles, the ones by which customers will judge them. Consequently, they put a lot of effort into getting them right, and are proud of them. If, though, you’re splashing out, always beware the vintage. The majority of the world’s most expensive wines have earned their reputations at least in part through their ability to age; there’s little point shelling out a fortune on a wine so young (less than a decade old in the case of the top reds of Bordeaux, Burgundy or Barolo) that it has yet to show off the qualities that will one day make it truly special. Equally, there’s no point wasting money on a gorgeously subtle wine if you’re going to swamp it with chilli, sugar, vinegar or other wine-troubling ingredients such as artichokes. A good sommelier will help you avoid that kind of clash, with the by-the-glass list (massively improved in quality, range and value in most restaurants in recent years) often the source of the most creative – and economic – solutions. But if you’re in a sommelier-free zone and on your own with the list, it’s worth remembering that some wines are more versatile than others. Lighter, fresh reds (such as beaujolais or Loire cabernet franc), richer whites (such as Rhône-style blends, whether from southern France or South Africa) and fino sherry are, in my experience, among the wines best placed to match a table of different dishes and people – without, of course, breaking the bank. Starter: Crab, celeriac, almond Main: Pheasant, leek and truffle pie Dessert: British cheeses, crab apple and oatcakes The impeccably sourced ingredients, understated cheffy skill and carefully cultivated informality of ambience that characterise the hipper restaurants of London, Edinburgh and Manchester are perfect matches for certain kinds of modern wine. Made by people who are either believers in, or sympathetic to, the back-to-basics, back-to-the-land philosophy of the natural wine scene, these are wines that put a premium on drinkability and food compatibility: qualities not always apparent in the kind of glossy, showy, super-ripe, super-oaky tipples that once dominated the vinous mainstream. Go by the glass or pitcher, and ask your sommelier to recommend a pétillant naturel (pét-nat) sparkler from the Loire as an aperitif; an orange wine from Friuli in north-east Italy or from Georgia to pair with the crab, celeriac and almond; and a natural cinsault from the Languedoc or South Africa to go with the pheasant, leek and truffle pie. To finish: see what kind of age-dated sherry, madeira or marsala they’ve got to match those British cheeses. Starter: Houmous with peri-peri drizzle Main: Chicken wings in peri-peri sauce Dessert: Salted caramel brownie The essence of restaurants such as Nando’s is basically twofold: chicken and spicy peri-peri sauce of various degrees of heat. And it’s the second of those two elements that would be most influential in informing what to drink in this case. Chilli heat works well with wines containing a little sugar – it’s the same principle that goes into the mixing of palm or coconut sugar with chilli in Thai and other south-east Asian cuisines. Not too much sugar: we’re not talking sticky dessert wines, which, with as much as 200g per litre, would be overwhelming. And not too light: the filigree off-dry riesling whites found in Germany’s Mosel region would be blown away by the umami and fatty richness of the chicken. I’m thinking more of the fuller-bodied kind of off-dry white styles found in Alsace, or Alsace-inspired wines made using the same grape varieties, such as pinot gris and gewürztraminer, in New Zealand, Chile, California and elsewhere. And not just in Nando’s. These are wines that work well anywhere that spice is in the mix: from your local Thai or curry house, to Peruvian, Korean and Szechuan Chinese. Starter: Coquille St Jacques in the shell with prawns Main: Rack of lamb with herbs served with mint sauce, redcurrant jelly Dessert: Raspberry millefeuille According to an age-old and generally reliable piece of wine-and-food-matching advice: what grows together, goes together. All of which would suggest that classic French restaurants demand classic French wines. Indeed, in most such places that will be pretty much all you’re offered. Given that, among others, pinot noir from coastal California, Oregon and New Zealand can be just as refined as that from Burgundy; and given that you can find cabernet and merlot-based wines in Napa, the Tuscan coast and South America that live up to the best of Bordeaux, it’s worth asking if the sommelier has any international surprises (which may well be competitively priced) up their sleeves. If it has to be French, you could ask whether they have a good-quality, aged muscadet in lieu of more expensive chablis for the coquilles St Jacques, and you may find that a spicy Languedoc red will be the most economically delicious – and traditional – pairing for a rack of lamb. And to partner the raspberry millefeuille, ask for the by-the-glass list and see if they have such great value sweet wines as montbazillac or jurançon from France’s often-overlooked south-west.