With the Claude Puel cloud lifted, here comes the reign of Brendan Rodgers. Leicester’s manager ran the rule over his new charges as they secured their first home win since Boxing Day thanks to goals by Demarai Gray and Jamie Vardy. Davy Pröpper pulled one back but, if Leicester are looking up again, Brighton cannot be comfortable about being only three points above Southampton, who occupy 18th place. While it would be easy to claim Leicester were inspired by Rodgers’s presence, gifts from Brighton were a major factor. Chris Hughton’s side started limply and, after rallying, finished badly, with Glen Murray guilty of two uncharacteristic misses. Still, there is no doubt the arrival of Rodgers has raised the mood at Leicester. He watched from the directors’ box from where he beamed and waved when given a rapturous greeting from the crowd before the kick-off. Apparently the players are similarly enthused by his appointment. “He came into the dressing room after the game and he was very positive,” said Mike Stowell, who, along with Adam Sadler, was in temporary charge for this match. “The lads were in awe listening to him,” Stowell continued. “He said: ‘I’ve only left Celtic to come here for one reason and that’s to work with this group of players.’ That speaks volumes for this young group.” Harry Maguire said: “It’s an exciting time for the club. We all know his profile and what he’s done. We’re all looking forward to working with him. Celtic are a massive club, so it shows how big Leicester are getting and our ambitions.” Leicester’s ambition before taking on Brighton was to end a series of four straight defeats. Having spoken of his desire to create a “really aggressive” side, Rodgers must have appreciated the way the hosts got stuck in. Then again, they could hardly have asked for more obliging visitors, as Brighton began with a timidity that showed why they are among the Premier League’s worst travellers, without an away win since a narrow victory at Huddersfield in early December. Scoring the opening goal, which Leicester repeatedly failed to do under Puel, was an ideal way to greet a new dawn. Vardy, one of the player’s hoping to benefit most from Puel’s departure, had a chance to land the first blow when James Maddison pulled the ball back to him in the fifth minute but Shane Duffy threw himself in front of the striker’s shot from the edge of the six-yard box. Leicester were not denied, merely delayed. Five minutes later they made the breakthrough thanks to Gray. Hughton must have been aghast at how feebly his team defended after Harvey Barnes dispossessed Anthony Knockaert near halfway. Youri Tielemans ran free from midfield before slipping a pass through to Gray, who was free to fire low into the net from 15 yards. He nearly doubled his tally four minutes later after Barnes again made gains down the left. Mat Ryan got down well to save. As Brighton pulled themselves together, Leicester became a little dishevelled. Kasper Schmeichel made two important saves, first from Pascal Gross and then an excellent one-handed stop to thwart Knockaert. Leicester should have been punished early in the second half when Maddison was caught in possession but, after a lovely move involving Knockaert and a back‑heeled pass by Gross, Murray lifted the ball over from eight yards. Worse, Gross suffered a hamstring injury when performing his nifty tee-up. Moments later Leicester eased their anxiety with a classy goal. Advancing nimbly from midfield they cut through Brighton, Vardy applying the finish by running on to a clever pass by Maddison and ramming the ball past Ryan from 10 yards. Leicester were not comfortable for long. Three minutes later Pröpper cut their lead in half, firing low into the net from edge of the box after Knockaert’s cross from the right was deflected into his path by Ben Chilwell. Barnes had a brilliant game on the left wing but missed two decent chances on the counterattack. Brighton’s best chance to equalise fell to Murray in the 87th minute but the normally trusty striker again misfired, blasting wide from seven yards. “At the moment we’re not putting away opportunities and so we have to make sure we’re not conceding,” Hughton said. “Those small margins are not going for us at the moment and it’s only us that can do something about it.” Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels