Well, it was hardly Prince playing Purple Rain in a rainstorm, as if baptised by God himself – it was Adam Levine singing Moves Like Jagger with his top off. Maroon 5’s Super Bowl half-time show is being written off as one of the worst in the event’s history: “Benign and computer-generated, smoothed to the point of incomprehensibility,” said the New Yorker, while the New York Times called it “an inessential performance by a band that might have lost some moral authority if it had any moral authority to lose”. But Maroon 5 needed to be bland. Many people didn’t want jolly pageantry, in solidarity with Colin Kaepernick and his sombre knee-taking protests; others might have hoped for a surprise punking of the ceremony with a guerrilla statement. But the Super Bowl is so essentially conservative that it warps even the slightest bit of ribaldry. Janet Jackson’s nipple, MIA’s middle finger – these mildly cheeky moments became seen as pure evil when filtered through the gauze of American values that surrounds a Super Bowl stadium. Any political message would have become garbled by the context of the event itself, and so the only solution was to deploy Maroon 5: the most radically inoffensive band in US pop history. Attacking the LA pop-rockers as “smooth” is to miss the entire point of their work. Theirs are songs to soundtrack negotiating a drive-thru Costa, or the wedding of a family that hate each other. When real life gets too real, pop the sonic painkiller of Maroon 5 and wrap yourself in stupor. In these contexts, their often well-written songs are profoundly satisfying. Moves Like Jagger is a masterpiece of synthetic anti-funk: its very naffness and lack of danger, plus that genius ringtone melody, is the core of its perverse appeal. She Will Be Loved is equally perfect: as middle of the road as a dozy pheasant, its big dumb chorus is ideal for when Coldplay feel a bit too emotionally involving. Cold, one of their recent craven attempts to court a US infatuated with rap, shows their facility for melodies to happily whistle to when shopping for duty-free booze. Levine posted a series of words on Instagram after the Super Bowl, beginning like a Matalan canvas print (“Forgive Laugh Cry Smile Share”) and climaxing with “Stand Kneel Overcome Love Listen”. The implication, that Kaepernick’s kneeling protest is morally equivalent to standing for the anthem, is offensive; the “can’t we all just get along” tone is deaf to the political and social realities of the United States. And yet there’s something guiltily soothing about his bromides: just as we need noise and beauty, we also need Maroon 5, the band for when you’re too tired to feel.