I am English by birth and British by nationality; Brexit reminded me that I am Celtic by origin. Not for emotional reasons, but because my paternal grandfather was born in Newry, County Down. And that entitles me to Irish citizenship, which I was granted last year, and an Irish passport, which is being processed at the moment. Thanks to Dublin, I have salvaged my European identity which I hold as dear as I do my Englishness and Britishness. Growing up in London, I had no sense of an Irish or Scottish identity. But inspired by my newfound Irish citizenship, I found myself last month staring at an imposing stone oblong slab at St Patrick’s church in Newry, a couple of miles from the border with the Republic of Ireland. The words, The Glennys of Newry, were engraved in large letters and behind it lay the graves of my great-, my great-great- and my great-great-great-grandfathers. By chance, I was uncovering my family’s past while working on a broader history for a Radio 4 documentary, The Invention of Britain. As I travelled the country, it became clearer that the constituent parts of the United Kingdom have a fractured vision of the past. We commemorate different dates and events. While the benefits of membership of the UK were more or less evenly spread, these dates and events were largely symbolic. The exception proving that rule was Ireland, where competing histories have had an enormous and sometimes bloody impact on political and social life. The dates etched into the minds of Irish, Welsh and Scottish children are different, but they have one constant: England and the English play a central role. It is telling that the Irish, the Scots and the Welsh still refer to the English in certain contexts as the “old enemy”. With one important exception – the relationship between the west of Scotland and the north of Ireland – there is little discussion among the Celtic lands. Wales has only a marginal place in the history of Ireland and the Welsh take little notice of what happens in Scotland. The roots of this lie in the 10th century and the emergence of an English state. A remarkable 150 years culminated in the rule of Æthelstan, who for 10 years until his death in 937 was the first king of England. This period saw the fusion of Mercia, Wessex, Kent and East Anglia into an agricultural powerhouse. There were three major consequences. First, Æthelstan channelled this economic might into military success against the Vikings in York, thus absorbing Northumbria. These lands afforded access to the North Sea and acted as a military springboard and bulwark against the Scots to the north. England sustained its primacy because it encouraged Wales, Ireland and Scotland to benefit from the riches of empire Second, London rapidly became the centre of this kingdom, one of the earliest examples of administrative and economic centralisation in Europe. Finally, an English identity overcame regional differences, although its older Celtic neighbours were defined by markers: Hadrian’s Wall, Offa’s Dyke and the Irish Sea. England then engaged with those territories: militarily, constitutionally, economically and religiously. The English used everything from conquest and colonisation to flattery, bribery, political concessions and collaboration to consolidate, control and influence. The Welsh celebrate the heroic defeat of 1282 when Edward I conquered Wales. The Scots have spent £9m on an impressive visitor centre which recreates the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314 as a virtual experience. The message is clear: Scotland was not defeated militarily by the English. Any association was entered into voluntarily. In recent times, the implication is that Scotland may also withdraw from the union voluntarily. For the loyalist community in Northern Ireland, the battle of the Boyne in 1690 when King Billy, England’s Protestant monarch, defeated the man he had deposed, James II, to all but put an end to the chance of a second Stuart (and suspected Catholic) restoration. The Irish, all British citizens until 1922, remember the rebellion of the United Irishmen of 1798, the last time in Ireland’s history when Catholic, Protestant and Presbyterian united in resistance against rule from London. Then there was the potato famine of the 1840s and the Easter Rising in 1916. No one celebrates the Act of Union from 1707 or union with Ireland in 1800. English pupils often have little or no knowledge of these events. We concentrate on the growth of English influence in Europe and the world. Even when English politics were entwined with events in Scotland and Ireland, as in the 1630s and 40s, we learn about the English civil war, not about the Wars of the Three Kingdoms as most historians now call it. From the 18th century, England was able to sustain its primacy because it encouraged Wales, Scotland and Ireland to benefit from the riches of empire (with the catastrophic exclusion of Catholics and Presbyterians in Ireland). Indeed, Scottish, Welsh and Irish historians are now examining how much of their nations’ wealth derived from slavery. As long as England was delivering prosperity, a majority of the periphery was happy to go along with it. The Scots, the Welsh and the Irish played a critical role in shaping empire and the union, ensuring that their historical dates played a symbolic, but not an active role. At the moment, when England can no longer guarantee that prosperity, those dates will add ideological fuel to a sense of separateness. Travel around our Celtic lands and you can already feel the stirrings. • The Invention of Britain is on BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds from 24 February at 1.30pm