The seven MPs who left Labour on Monday all cited irreconcilable differences with the party’s Brexit policy, and the way it has dealt with antisemitism and bullying allegations. Yet there are other clear dividing lines between the group and some of Labour’s key policies. Few of the MPs had been serial rebels under Corbyn, apart from on Brexit. Chuka Umunna in particular has been a leading figure in the People’s Vote campaign for a second referendum and led a parliamentary rebellion on an amendment to the Queen’s speech, which said the UK should remain in the single market and customs union. All of the rebel MPs have backed a second referendum, which is not yet Labour policy. On almost all other domestic issues, including welfare and the economy, MPs have voted with the party whip, though Umunna, Chris Leslie, Luciana Berger, Angela Smith, Mike Gapes and Ann Coffey all voted in favour of strikes in Syria against Islamic State, the opposite way to Corbyn, although it was a free vote. There are other differences in emphasis and principle – even if any platform for the new group could change considerably if and when more MPs join. Apart from Brexit and antisemitism, national security policy is a key difference. The group’s statement of intent says the “first duty of government must be to defend its people and do whatever it takes to safeguard Britain’s national security”. Gavin Shuker was among the MPs who cited Corbyn’s public doubts about the culpability of the Russian state in the Skripal novichok poisonings as a key reason for his departure, as well as the Labour leader’s historic anti-interventionism and Nato scepticism. “We don’t think every problem in the world is created by the west,” Shuker said. “We want to work with other countries around the world to tackle our shared challenges, not turn our face against them.” Mike Gapes, a former chair of the foreign affairs select committee who was a vocal defender of the Iraq invasion, said Corbyn was on “the wrong side on so many international issues, from Russia to Syria to Venezuela”. He said a Corbyn Labour government “would threaten our national security, and international alliances”. Chris Leslie, a former shadow chancellor, has been an outspoken critic of some of Labour’s economic policies. “They are hostile to business large and small,” he said in his resignation speech. “They make impossible promises that everyone knows, in their hearts, couldn’t be kept without putting the economy at risk. And they constantly pit one part of society against another.” During the 2015 leadership race, when Corbyn proposed a “people’s quantitive easing”, Leslie was explicitly critical and said it would raise interest rates to hit the poorest in society, though the policy has since been overtaken by other proposed measures. The Independent Group’s statement underlines “the sound stewardship of taxpayers’ money” as one of its core values, echoing some of the group’s early unease with Corbyn’s leadership bid. Angela Smith has also been highly critical of Labour’s policy of water nationalisation, saying it could lead to the UK becoming the “dirty man of Europe”. The MP is the chair of the all-party parliamentary group on water, which is partially funded by the industry. In her resignation speech, Smith cited her working-class background as a reason for her departure. “Most people are like my family,” she said. “They do not want to be patronised by leftwing intellectuals who think that being poor and working class constitutes a state of grace. What they do want is a fair crack at the whip, and opportunities to succeed.” Other aspects of the group’s statement of values also give some clues of differences with the Labour leadership. The statement highlights a belief in a “free media, the rule of law and our open, tolerant and respectful democratic society” – a coded attack on some of Corbyn’s criticisms of the media as well as the social media discourse that has evolved during his leadership and after the Brexit poll. It also implicitly criticises the Labour party membership system and the concept of MPs being accountable to party members. Many of the MPs have faced votes of no confidence by their local Labour parties. “Parliamentary democracy in which our elected representatives deliberate, decide and provide leadership, held accountable by their whole electorate, is the best system,” it says. For now, the group has no name or leader for a new party, let alone policies or a manifesto. It meets this week to decide on the next steps – and much will depend on whether more MPs join them. Some members of the Independent Group have their own policy ideas which they are likely to be keen to promote. Leslie promoted a pamphlet of his ideas for a centrist party, published last year. Among the ideas in the pamphlet are closing loopholes in inheritance tax, a harmonised rate of 30% pensions tax relief to support savings for retirement and auto-enrolment for critical illness and life insurance, and abolishing “free” masters degrees awarded by Oxford and Cambridge.