The temptation is to throw arms skywards, to pronounce the death of a once-mighty rugby nation, but the truth is this feels all too familiar. Only France among rugby’s top nations are capable of this sort of implosion, just as they can on occasion come back from the dead. France are no more dead than they ever have been. They will shrug and move on to Paris to welcome Scotland but they are no closer either to giving us a sense of who they are. We thought there might be grounds for optimism in their recent outings, intermingling some accomplished rugby with that infuriating failure to remember what it is all meant to be in aid of – the simple directive to win. Last week at home to a Wales team they once again outplayed more than the other way round, they managed to yield a 16-0 lead at half-time, the biggest such lead squandered in championship history. At least there was no danger of throwing away such an advantage this time. France wasted no time in setting themselves the opposite assignment. Five points down after 66 seconds, eight down after six minutes, 20 down after 30 – and so on up to 30-8 down at half-time, a bonus point for the English coughed up and much cause for that maddening sense of superiority of theirs. France have high hopes for the future: their juniors are the current world champions and already they are bleeding some into the senior XV. Romain Ntamack started last week, Demba Bamba here. Alas, their seniors are letting them down. Last week, it was Yoann Huget and Sébastien Vahaamahina who conspired to gift Wales that comeback. This week, Huget was complicit again in France’s horror start and was joined by Guilhem Guirado, captain no less, for so long beyond reproach in this current generation, for whom those torrid first 40 minutes were a personal nightmare. Huget began by choosing to run his first ball back into the less than welcoming embrace of the Vunipola brothers. French possession survived Huget’s subsequent indignity but then Guirado ran a switch off Camille Lopez without thinking to raise his hands and/or catch the ball. All this took place in the first minute. Jonny May had his first try six seconds into the next. The tone had been set and it was not pretty. Huget dropped his next high ball, Guirado lay all over Manu Tuilagi to concede the game’s first penalty and three more points, then he overthrew his first lineout. France’s most promising players were their wingers, both converted centres, one of them another youngster, Damian Penaud, son of Alain. The French were a shambles under Ben Youngs’s box kicks - and any time England put the ball behind, for that matter – but when they could work it into Penaud’s hands on the counter, England did not look quite so clever all of a sudden. They were fleeting hints of vulnerability. Penaud himself looked out of his depth – or at least his position – when confronted one on one by May, who made short work of him for his second try. He had his revenge, France’s one high point, five minutes from the break, when Huget at last conjured some form from nowhere to beat Henry Slade and run clean through May and Tuilagi to send Penaud to the corner beyond Chris Ashton. Indeed, if there is one question mark over Slade, May, Ashton, Eliot Daly – all of them, really – it is the not insignificant matter of defence. What an indictment on France that they could not test it at all beyond that one sortie. No doubt Wales will have a closer look in Cardiff next round. Huget was withdrawn at half‑time, by which time England had that fourth try, just in case the French were harbouring any thoughts of a dramatic comeback. Some chance. These non-contests so often deteriorate in the second half – and so here. Antoine Dupont came on a few minutes in, the latest youngster to try to breathe some life into the moribund French. Time and again, he scampered here and there, looking for some support, even if only of the moral variety. Absolutely nothing. The visitors conceded a further two tries. Both of them had a touch of the slapstick about them, but compared to France at this particular juncture in history they were exemplars of composure.