Some things never change – such as people’s gut aversion to change. A clip from the BBC’s Nationwide programme (thank God that skateboarding duck of a show is dead), that has gone viral features a string of vox pops from 1978 about Britain’s move to metric measurements. Listen to these people and you hear Brexit deep in every sentiment, all of 40 years ago. Some are funny: “You don’t get as much mileage to it [a kilometre] … you’re going to use more petrol.” Most are heart-sinkingly familiar, such as the man who says: “We’re an island on our own. Let’s face it, we once ruled the world, didn’t we? Now we’re just being part of a community. I don’t agree with it at all.” Ignorance is prized: “Rubbish! Why don’t they leave everything alone … I don’t want to know.” A man in a tweed hat praises Neville Chamberlain: “He said we’re going to fight a war to make a better land to live in. That was for me … I did 10 years in the war. Now everyone wants to change what I fought for … I want it as it is now, what I nearly sacrificed my life for.” #OnThisDay 1978: The British public were not impressed at the prospect of switching from miles to kilometres. pic.twitter.com/ubieUxCuuJ At least these people really had lived through the war, although they were already mythologising and misremembering. Now Brexit brings out the phoniest nostalgia, laden with grotesquely reimagined Dunkirk spirit. The crescendo of war movies, every great actor vying to give us their Churchill, contrast us with those cheese-eating surrender monkeys across the channel whose sorry arses we saved all by ourselves. Brexiters are already preparing to blame them over there for impending disaster. Here’s Chris Grayling in the Daily Telegraph: “If they are not willing to compromise, if they’re not willing to work with us to find common ground – it will be down to them if there is no deal.” We will stand on the Dover cliffs punching ourselves on the nose, just to show the frogs and krauts. But a deeper sentiment from 1978 resonates, now as always: stop the world! Stop pulling down familiar childhood landmarks all around us. Stop changing our neighbourhoods without asking. Stop closing our shops and pubs, leaving gap-toothed high streets. Stop putting up empty luxury flats bought off-plan in Malaysia. And, yes, stop all these foreigners talking double-dutch on the bus. As the man says in the clip: “I want it as it is now.” Who hasn’t felt this? In that moan-of-grief hymn Abide With Me come these words: “Change and decay in all around I see: O thou who changest not, abide with me!” The trouble with applying that no-change yearning to the EU is that we joined in 1973. There is no way back to those unhalcyon days. Here’s the irony: the shock of departure will be the most drastic national change of all our lifetimes.