Oh my God, they’re all at it. Or, rather, not at it. Anne Hathaway is going sober for 18 years. Ugh. Legendary boozer (and Rolling Stones guitarist) Keith Richards has given up drink because he “just got fed up with it”. Calvin Harris told the world he’d given up on the Jack Daniel’s (to be fair, he was downing two bottles a night and risking his life). And to top it all, Kate Moss, nicknamed the Tank for her ability to polish off the prosecco, is teetotal. Call me a romantic, but I’m not interested in celebrity sobriety. Yes, booze-free may be the new Botox, but I’m happy with the model’s skin as it was back in the day, when she was getting well and truly mossed. Not drinking may be a wonderful anti-ageing technique, but what’s wrong with a few wrinkly signifiers of a life well lived? More to the point, why on earth do these stars want to go on so bloody long in the first place? Surely, Kate ’n’ Keef remember what a horrible life the immortal struldbruggs had in Gulliver’s Travels. (As Moss’s former boyfriend and stimulant enthusiast extraordinaire Pete Doherty sang: “Fuck forever.”) I’m worried for them. Their reckless excess is what made such stars fascinating in the first place. The likes of Richards and Moss were what they consumed. As were generations of devil-may-care stars. What chance would there be of Jerry Lee Lewis pulling a gun on you if he was stone cold sober, or the late publisher Felix Dennis telling his interviewer Ginny Dougary he had killed a man without having first shared a glass or two with her? To be honest, I’m also worried for myself. As a celebrity interviewer, I fear for my future if Keith Richards is going to wang on about mindfulness and pilates when promoting the Stones’ centenary tour. So many of my interviews have been improved by the vast amounts of booze or spliff consumed by the interviewee. Would George Michael really have told me about his crack habit if he had been sober (actually, George probably would have). Without the lubricant of a pint or six of Guinness, I doubt Banksy would have told me that his mum and dad think he is a painter and decorator. Would Snoop Dog have told me: “You couldn’t pimp a bitch if I put you in a room with a hundred hos,” if he hadn’t been blowing his great big fatty in my face? And I’m confident that Tom Jones would not have willingly whiled away the evening with me were we not constantly being refreshed by vodka martinis. (When I transcribed the interview later, I realised I hadn’t turned the tape recorder off when I went to the loo. Jones said to his manager, Don: “You could have told me he was a pisshead.” Don replied: “Well, tell him you have to leave.” Jones, ever the gent, said: “I couldn’t do that now I’ve started. It would be such terrible manners.”) Perhaps the most depressing thing about the new sobriety is the desperation to cling on. And why now, of all times? As TS Eliot said all those years ago: “Humankind cannot bear very much reality.” He wasn’t even around for Trump and Brexit. Surely any star worth their salt should look at the state of the world, stick two diamond-encrusted fingers at anti-ageing, and get back on the sauce.