Given that we’re stuck waiting for a new series of Queer Eye, is there any decent fashion coverage on TV?Jennifer, by email Yes, and it is called the news. When it comes to fashion shows, few things beat the British news in winter. TV news producers, for reasons I have never entirely understood, love to put their presenters outdoors, even when there is nothing to see outdoors. A darkened field at 8pm? Great, no better setting for a discussion about fox hunting. Outside No 10 when nothing is happening? Perfect, gives a real sense of the forces of power at work. In my home country of the US, these outdoor segments generally end in disaster, because American weather is best described as “biblical”, or maybe these days the more appropriate word is “apocalyptic”. So pretty much every week a clip will go viral of some poor US TV news person being blown into the sea/falling into a snow drift/nearly being incinerated in a forest fire. These kinds of extreme weather events call for extreme clothing, and unless you’re one of those muppets who likes to pretend he is Bear Grylls (but actually looks like Walter in The Big Lebowski), extreme clothing isn’t very relatable. Britain’s milder weather, however, makes these outdoor segments a veritable goldmine of fashion revelations. Pretty much the only reason I watch the news now is to check out the presenters’ coats because, Lord knows, coats are a lot more interesting than the ongoing national masochistic disorder known as Brexit. Quite what it adds to have journalists standing endlessly outside on College Green or Westminster Bridge is, as I say, negligible. But what it adds in insights into this country’s coat habit is immeasurable. First, there is a very sharp divide between the sexes, with the men generally wearing parkas and anoraks with scruffy scarves, as if they are off for a hardy march through the Fens with Lucy the labrador, as opposed to presenting a two-minute segment outside a Nissan plant. The exceptions to this rule are the men on Sky News, who all seem to have smart woollen coats or trenches, but on the BBC, ITV and Channel 4, the parka reigns supreme. Make of that what you will about the difference between cable and terrestrial. The women, inevitably, offer more variety, fashion-wise. Laura Kuenssberg gets so much attention that I feel a little guilty singling her out, but the BBC’s political editor must spend more time outdoors than most British TV presenters – outside this government building, outside that politician’s home – and therefore offers the most coat-watching opportunities. And presumably because of that, she has a fascinatingly wide range of coats. During January’s endless Brexit stand-offs, which already feel about a year ago, she wore a fuchsia coat and had to spend so many nights standing outside the Houses of Parliament reporting in said fuchsia coat that I developed a kind of synaesthesia and now associate Brexit with the colour fuchsia. Since then, Kuenssberg seems to have put the fuchsia coat – if not, alas, Brexit itself – into storage and has since been spotted in alternately a smart-belted black wool coat and, occasionally, an even smarter cream one. Now, as I am the kind of person who buys a winter coat and wears it until either I or the coat die, I cannot believe that Kuenssberg just casually owns this many coats. Instead, I think she is sending us a message through her coats and the fault lies with us for not cracking her code. What is it, Laura? Does black mean: “We are all doomed” and cream: “Start stockpiling”? Get in touch and let us know! My favourite onscreen coat moments come on Newsnight, when Emily Maitlis sits on an outdoor terrace with Nicholas Watt, discussing politics against a backdrop of – well, I have no idea what the backdrop is, because it’s 11 at night and therefore in the pitch dark. Watt, being a man on the BBC, generally looks like he has just had a tussle in a field with a golden retriever. Maitlis, however, wears what is easily the most fascinating coat on TV: fitted and clearly very chic, but covered in intriguing patches. There’s “5” on her right arm and something on her back, and trying to read what is written on Maitlis’s back is the cliffhanger that keeps me coming back to Newsnight. And honestly, this is the most exciting fast-developing news story around.