The Auschwitz Memorial has voiced concern after Heather Morris announced a sequel to her bestselling novel The Tattooist of Auschwitz, which will use the real life of a woman sent to the concentration camp as a child as “inspiration”. A hit book around the world, The Tattooist of Auschwitz tells the story of the Slovakian Jew Lali Sokolov, and how he fell in love with a woman he tattooed at the camp. Sokolov, who died in 2006, told Morris his story, which she turned it into the novel that has now sold more than 400,000 copies in the UK alone. But Morris’s blend of fiction and fact has troubled some – particularly the Auschwitz Memorial Research Centre, which published a lengthy report clarifying the known facts about events in the book last December, saying the novel contained “numerous errors and information inconsistent with the facts, as well as exaggerations, misinterpretations and understatements” and described it as “an impression about Auschwitz inspired by authentic events, almost without any value as a document”. In response to the report, Morris told the Australian newspaper: “I have written a story of the Holocaust, not the story of the Holocaust. I have written Lale’s story.” On Thursday, Morris announced a sequel: Cilka’s Journey, which will be published in October, with its proposed cover proclaiming that it is “based on a true love story”. Cilka, based on the real life of Cecília Kováčová, was a character in The Tattooist of Auschwitz; in the novel, Cilka was 16 in 1942 when she entered Auschwitz, where she was forced to become the commandant’s sex slave. But responding to the announcement of the new book on Thursday, the Auschwitz Memorial said that “the story of Cilka was one of the most questionable parts” of the novel. The memorial had previously identified Cilka’s storyline as “the major point of concern” in December, saying: “The sexual relationship described in the book between the head of the camp SS-Obersturmführer Johann Schwarzhuber and the Jewish female prisoner Cilka … in practice, the possibility of maintaining such a long relationship … and, according to the book, a semi-explicit relationship between a Jewish female prisoner and high-ranking member of the SS hierarchy was nonexistent. The disclosure of such a relationship would have involved an accusation of race dishonour … and severe punishment for the SS man.” Morris told her fans on Facebook on Thursday that she had “wanted to find out more about this extraordinary young woman”, so “decided to honour Cilka by using her life as the inspiration for a novel”. According to the author, “on liberation, and still only 19, Cilka was charged by the Russians as a collaborator. Once again, Cilka found herself on a train, this time destined for the Siberian gulags. In this new prison, Cilka faced challenges both new and horribly familiar, including the unwanted attention of the guards. But Cilka also began to tend to the ill in the camp, struggling to care for them under brutal conditions. In the gulag Cilka daily confronted death and faced terror. Incredibly, she also found love.” Last year, Morris told fans on her Facebook page that it would be “obvious what parts of her story are factual” and said she had made two trips to Slovakia to meet “several people who knew Cilka and her husband”. “They have given me valuable information regarding her time in Siberia and my book will be based on this research and woven into a fictionalised telling of her story,” she wrote. She told another fan: “You won’t find anything on Google, it has taken professional researchers for me to get the details and information required to write her story, she was a closed book so to speak.” A spokesperson for Bonnier Zaffre, Morris’s publisher in the UK, said: “Like The Tattooist of Auschwitz, Cilka’s Journey is a novel. While it has been inspired by what Heather Morris has discovered about Cilka, it is fiction, not a biography or an authoritative record of historical events. However, Morris is clear that Lale Sokolov and other survivors from Auschwitz-Birkenau spoke of the relationship between Cilka and Schwarzhuber. In addition, it is worth noting that Cilka was charged by the Russians with the ‘crime’ of prostitution with an SS officer.”