Britain’s withdrawal from the EU’s common agricultural policy (CAP) provides one of the few bright spots of Brexit, and if replaced with new legislation could help to restore some of the country’s degraded natural environment, one of the government’s leading economic advisers has said. Dieter Helm, professor of energy policy at Oxford University, told the Guardian: “If there was any reason to be optimistic about Brexit, it is that it is the end of the CAP. It is hard to think how you could be anything other than better off if you had control of how you spend [the sums currently allocated in farming subsidies].” Helm, who chairs the Natural Capital Committee advising the government on its green policies, said the CAP was not providing enough incentive for farmers to protect the environment, and with 70% of the UK’s land area given over to farming, this omission was a major obstacle to environmental improvement. “Our [environmental] interests are subsumed within the CAP,” he said. “I can think of lots of reasons why Brexit is not a good idea, but if Brexit was just about the CAP, it would be good.” Under the CAP, which benefits British farmers by about £3bn a year, the UK government is forced to award most subsidies on the basis of land farmed, with only a minority of funds directed towards farmers who protect wildlife and nature. But the new agriculture bill currently passing through parliament would offer farmers “environmental land management contracts” instead, requiring them to sign up to specified measures to safeguard the natural environment, such as maintaining waterways or reducing harmful emissions. Europe does recognise the flaws in the CAP, Helm added, and is moving to fix them, but that will take time as it makes up 40% of the EU budget and member states have stark disagreements over how it should be portioned out. “The CAP is going in the same direction that we are going [with the agriculture bill] but it will be a lot slower,” he said. “But we will no longer be able to take part in the negotiations, which is a shame.” He said the UK had been a champion in the past for incorporating green goals into the farming subsidy regime. Helm wants the agriculture bill and the environment bill, also promised for later this year, to enshrine in law the pledges on environmental improvement that the government made last year as part of its 25-year environment plan. In its sixth annual report, launched on Tuesday, the Natural Capital Committee said: “[The plan] must be placed on a meaningful statutory basis in the forthcoming environment bill. Without a credible statutory underpinning, the plan may end up as yet another interesting document on the shelf. Having raised expectations, the government’s environmental credibility is on the line.” Helm also wants the government to tidy up the current fractured state of environmental oversight in the UK. At present, regulatory oversight falls to multiple bodies with overlapping remits, such as the Environment Agency, Natural England, the Joint Nature Conservation Committee, the Highways Agency, and their devolved equivalents, while much of the work also falls to local authorities, and there are smaller bodies for specific areas, including the Marine Management Organisation, the Canal and Rivers Trust and the Forestry Commission. Instead, a single body should be given responsibility for delivering the government’s 25-year environment plan, and all government bodies should be required to hold to its principles and meet detailed and enforceable milestones for improving the environment under the plan. A five-yearly environmental census could then establish whether adequate progress has been made, according to the committee’s recommendations. Helm said a new body, which could be “carved out” from the current Environment Agency, would enforce environmental laws after Brexit and offer greater transparency and accountability than the current patchwork. He added that the government had “picked up the pace” of its efforts on the environment in the past year, and made substantial progress. “There seems to be political will behind this,” he said. “You have an environment bill, an agriculture bill. The promise of that galvanises everyone – suddenly this becomes real. That is pretty exciting.”