Signs of weakness were thin on the ground in the Ireland camp on Friday. In response to Eddie Jones’s somewhat half-hearted attempt to turn the pressure up on the Six Nations champions – “praise can make you weak” – the Ireland captain, Rory Best, quipped back: “It’s maybe the lack of praise from Joe behind closed doors that protects us.” Ireland like to talk about the “bubble” that Joe Schmidt creates. It shields them from the praise Jones referred to. And in fairness there has been a certain bullishness in Dublin this week. The former head coach Eddie O’Sullivan believes only two members of England’s side would get into Ireland’s while the former captain Brian O’Driscoll thinks Saturday’s home side will have “too many smarts” for a “shaky” England team. “[The expectation] puts a little bit more pressure on in terms of it squeezes that bubble a little bit tighter but there is a massive amount of expectation that we put on ourselves in everything we do,” Best said. “If you look at Leinster and the way they are going, their expectation is to continue to get better. They’ve won four European trophies now, they’re looking to win five and that is probably the mentality of this generation of Irish rugby players. And that’s the expectation that we carry within ourselves.” In a further demonstration of Ireland’s mindset, according to Best the November internationals are, in effect, friendlies and the World Cup can wait. The first of those is some claim considering Ireland’s two victories against New Zealand in their past three meetings have come during the autumn, the most recent just a few months ago. He went a step further, insisting Ireland will have to produce their most accomplished performance since Schmidt took over in 2013 – and there have been plenty – in order to beat England. In the green corner Andy Farrell Role today Ireland defence coach (head coach after World Cup) Age 43 Born Wigan, 1975 Test caps 8 for England  (rugby union); 34 for GB, 11 for England (rugby league) Andy on Owen (when he first joined Ireland) “As a kid I never let him beat me at anything, but since he’s turned 19 he’s beaten me at everything so it’s about time I started getting my own back.”  In the white corner  Owen Farrell Role today England  fly-half, kicker and captain Age 27 Born Billinge, Lancs, 1991 Test caps 65 for England, 4 for Lions Owen on Andy “I’d grown up watching my dad at Wigan and being around a lot of people he played with – some good teams that had real good leaders in. People who wanted to win. That brought that side out of me.” “We’re going to need the best game of rugby that this group has ever played because that’s what it will take to win this weekend,” he said. “They will be physical, but they will also play with a lot of width and speed, that’s their plan. You need to get on the front foot, up front. “Six Nations rugby, it’s different to the autumn internationals. The autumn internationals is playing a team that’s a little bit unknown. Argentina and New Zealand, we study them but we don’t play against them in Europe every year. You’re not very close neighbours. England know us inside out. “And you’re into competition. None of us ever treat the autumn internationals as friendlies but, ultimately, that’s what they are. This is a competition, a championship and all of that squeezes the pressure on you and creates a different sort of atmosphere. It probably means you have to play to a higher level than we did in November.” The second of Best’s claims – that Japan 2019 is not entering their thoughts – was backed up by what he called “his worst moment in an Ireland shirt”. He said: “I remember way back to 2007 we had a really good team. We lost to France at Croke Park when we should have grand-slammed right at the very end of the game. It was almost a bit of a feeling of, ‘Oh, we’ll get them at the World Cup’, and it wasn’t. We bombed out in the groups and it was the least enjoyable time I’ve ever had in an Ireland shirt. That all came because there was an attitude of ‘it’ll be all right on the night’. That’s why you don’t look ahead.” Schmidt has all but conceded Ireland would be out of the championship race if they lose on Saturday but the bookmakers do not expect them to. There has never been a more fancied or favoured Ireland side, but Best explained the fear of failure that brings. “They will come here with a 100% belief that they can win. The public may or may not underestimate but we will not. The vicious cycle is that the better you are, the more targets [there are] on your back and the better you need to be. It’s a really exciting place but it is a challenge. Against a team like England, that little bit of fear factor drives you on. It’s not a position you want to be in. There’s a lot of history. When you get that familiarity with somebody you get intense rivalry.”