Last year I was only home for about 70 nights. I travelled a lot and, when I was away, rented my house out on Airbnb. So, during the summer, on one of my rare nights home, I decided to host a small party for my neighbours to thank them for putting my bins out, and keeping an eye on the place. But also I wanted to get to know them. It was a hot, stormy evening and we set up the party under the carport. The evening started innocuously enough – then, one bottle of prosecco down, the neighbour who lived in the house behind mine said: “I hope you don’t mind, but you had some guests recently that were a bit strange.” My heart sank. My Airbnb guests. Randoms from the internet. What had they done? “I don’t usually look out my window into your backyard,” she said, by way of caveat. “But I glanced down and something caught my eye.” My neighbour, a retired teacher, tried to be polite as possible but it was obvious what she had seen was my guests having sex, in my backyard, in the middle of the day. I looked out, past the carport, to my backyard – it was a horrible sight. There was a rusty clothes line, dried grass, weeds and thistles. It was ugly, not to mention uncomfortable. “What did they do?” I asked, appalled. “No, wait, don’t tell me what they did!” But now I knew so much more about my neighbourhood. Too much Ronald, a man in his 80s who lives around the corner, started waving his arms around. “Them! Them! I saw your backyard when I was bringing your bins in!” The whole party joined in – talking about them. “They were really going for it. In the backyard. He was really old and she was really young. I thought it was your brother,” said Ronald. My brother is not old. Also, he did not have sex in my backyard. “It wasn’t my brother,” I said. “It was my Airbnb guests. I’m so sorry!!!” My mother, who was also at the party, was doing a calculation in her head. “Was this around a month ago?” My neighbours nodded. “I came to the house on the Monday, after they had been here and had to strip the beds. And … ”– everyone leaned in at this fresh horror – “I found a pair of undies!” My neighbours squealed. Mum mimed the movement you make when you pick a dirty pair of undies up with a stick. “Eugh!” said all the neighbours. “Undies!” My mother then mimed hurling the undies into a distant field – similar to someone throwing a javelin. “I’m sorry you had to do that, Mum,” I said. My neighbours were such innocents. Why did I have to taint this piece of rural paradise with these weird, horny guests? “It’s OK,” said my neighbour, who had seen the sex acts. “Worse thing have happened here,” said Ronald. I looked around. All my neighbours were nodding. “What? What worse things?” My voice had risen an octave. Ronald pointed to where I had placed the cheeseboard. “A person who lived here was shot, by police, right where we are now.” “In the garage?” “Yes. Right there.” Ronald pointed at the cheese. “There?” “Yes! There!” “What happened?” All the neighbours were explaining it at once, but it made no sense. A previous owner who liked “staying up all night on the internet” came under police suspicion. Police came up to the house in the middle of night, and hearing a strange noise, the man came out carrying a baseball bat. He was confronted by police – who shot him. The entire scenario confused me. “That makes no sense – I am on the internet at night, it’s not suspicious … Did he die?” But the conversation had moved on. Ronald was telling my neighbours that before they had moved into their house, a murderer lived there, and had gone to jail for killing someone and shoving their body down a disused mine shaft. Then those neighbours said to me that actually they didn’t mind that I was away so much – the house was quiet, because previously the tenants were “on drugs and listened to loud music day and night”. “What sort of music?” “Heavy metal.” The police were also frequent visitors to that set of tenants. We were working our way through the cheese and a second bottle of wine. The neighbours were happy and laughing. They were having so much fun – it was so great to get to know each other. But now I knew so much more about my neighbourhood. Too much. The carport, previously a place I hadn’t given much thought to – a neutral space – was the site of great violence. In my mind’s eye I saw the glow of the computer screen (“He was up all night on the internet”) the dark shape of the baseball bat (who has a baseball bat, anyway?) and heard the shot ring out. How could I continue to live here? The storm came in properly now. There was lightning and rain sheeted into the carport. Packing up and bringing things into the house, I stood at the threshold and felt the weight of all that had come before. My house was haunted. The neighbours came in, the house had been recently renovated. It was clean and bright. “Oh it looks lovely, the new reno,” said one. “It’s like a different house!” • Brigid Delaney is a columnist for Guardian Australia