Asian football fans often moan that the international media focuses too much on the non-football aspects of the continent’s scene. When it comes to the 2019 Asian Cup however, there can be no complaints. Indeed when the captain of the one of the finalists calls for no more stupidity the day before the big game, then there is a problem. “But I would mention that if [the tournament] is broadcast all over the world, you don’t want to see any stupid things, especially after the game,” Japan’s Maya Yoshida said. “We are representing Asia under the hashtag #bringingasiatogether – so it’s important to represent Asia by playing good football and with fair play.” Yoshida had surely been expecting to lift the trophy in Abu Dhabi on Friday but it was Qatar who delivered a surprise and won the final 3-1 – deservedly so. The same can be said of the tournament overall. The Maroons scored 18 and conceded just once in seven games and the 2022 World Cup hosts have been the story of the Asian Cup in more ways than one. They were by some distance the best team in what was a mediocre field. The football was for the most part, lacking in quality, but not because of the expansion from 16 to 24 nations. The new, or newer, teams were mostly competitive. Kyrgyzstan, the Philippines, India and Vietnam had their moments and, for a while at least, provided plenty to talk about. Some of the more established powers were more disappointing. South Korea and Australia never really got going and left at the last eight stage. A poor UAE team somehow made the last four and even Japan showed little of their usual pass and move groove, preferring a new functional approach until the late stages. Attendances were an issue too. The opener between UAE and Bahrain was far from a sell out and while there is a general culture in the country of watching football in cafes and not stadiums, too much of the action on the pitch in Asia’s biggest tournament was framed by empty seats. The game between North Korea and Qatar was witnessed by a crowd in three figures. There were political reasons for that; there were political reasons for quite a bit that happened. Some of it was not too bad. There was pride in Abu Dhabi when the Yemen team, with a number of players still based in the war-torn country, lined up for their national anthem in the opening game against Iran and enjoyed the support of the locals. Palestine collected their first ever point in the tournament against Syria but soon it was Qatar who were overshadowing everything. The blockade of the 2022 World Cup hosts was established by Saudi Arabia, UAE, Bahrain and Egypt in 2017 and remains an attempt to isolate Doha. The first so-called “Blockade Derby” between Qatar and Saudi Arabia in the group stage was interesting, but nothing compared to the semi-final clash between UAE and the eventual winners. Qatar had reached the semis by winning all five games without conceding a single goal. A young team – 11 of the roster 22 or below – grew in confidence, led by little-known Spanish coach Félix Sánchez Bas, who outperformed more famous counterparts such as Sven-Göran Eriksson with the Philippines, Marcelli Lippi with China and Carlos Queiroz with Iran. The Maroons dismissed the UAE in their capital. Some local fans reacted to the 4-0 loss by throwing shoes and water bottles at the celebrating players. Those not in the stadium may not even have known. The lack of relations meant that it was hard even for journalists in official media hotels to watch games on television as broadcast rights in the region were held by Qatari channel BeIN Sports. The Asian Football Confederation invested thousands of dollars before arriving in their hotel to ensure games could be watched, but even their officials struggled. Later in the tournament however, the AFC had other things to deal with. A day before the final, the UAE made a formal complaint to the body alleging that Qatar were fielding ineligible players. The case was dismissed, as it was always going to be at such short notice, just hours before kick-off. There is more to come however. But this tournament is over. It never lived up to its slogan of “Bringing Asia together”. The Asian Cup had its moments but overall, it will be remembered more for what happened off the pitch than on it, though perhaps not, ironically in the end, in Qatar.