I once wanted to be an MP, but a kind friend warned me off. He said I was far too interested in politics, and it would end in tears. I am sure he was right. Others I knew did enter parliament, and I admired their courage in opting for a tough and vital calling. But after this week’s Commons vote, I confess I have never held MPs in lower esteem. Never in my lifetime has the profession so abandoned judgment and responsibility, in favour of personal ambition and party advantage. On Tuesday, MPs voted to send their prime minister back to Brussels on a venture that they knew doomed her to personal humiliation. The sight of Tory Brexiters cheering their cynical gesture of party unity was sickening. Even were she to secure some minor last-minute EU concession, the outcome would still be a contradiction: no customs union with the EU yet somehow no border in Ireland. When, later that night, MPs were offered their own in-house backstop, the Cooper-Boles amendment to postpone the 29 March deadline in an emergency, they said no. What did they mean? For the first time in history the House of Commons was voting for anarchy. Every financial, industrial, commercial and professional body in Britain is now pleading to retain a customs union with Europe. It amounts to the frictionless trade explicitly promised by Theresa May in 2016. Bankers, farmers, car-makers, plane-builders, supermarkets, hospitals, drug companies, scientists, employers, employees – all are screaming blue murder. They are wasting billions of pounds in defensive moves. When I ask leave politicians if they genuinely believe the entire economy is crying wolf, they shrug, look shifty, and recall idiotically that we survived the Blitz. MPs claim, rightly, that they must represent a nation that voted, narrowly, to give the British establishment a kick in the teeth. But this same nation expected MPs to interpret that decision wisely. Politicians pride themselves on not being slaves to constituency populism, on adhering to the Burkean oath of “unbiased opinion, mature judgment, enlightened conscience” – best updated as Keynes’s “when the facts change, I change my mind”. There are in parliament no more than 40 or so hard-Brexit fundamentalists. All the horsemen of the apocalypse will not drive them from their redoubt on the white cliffs of Dover. No evidence of fleeing investment and collapsing trade will persuade them that “deals with the rest of the world” are not the answer to Britain’s economic prayer. I am a lifelong sceptic of the EU, but I have never seen how impeding trade with the continent remotely adds up. Britain’s economy is wedlocked to Europe, and sensibly so. It may be to their credit that some ministers have sacrificed short-term career advantage to the cause of Brexit on a matter of principle. Such conscientious action remains rare in parliament. Few ministers ever imitate Anthony Nutting over Suez or Robin Cook over Iraq. That said, the failure of today’s dissidents to present any plausible alternative to May’s deal suggests ambition played stronger on their minds than conscience. The problem lies not with the Brexiters but with the remaining 600 or so MPs. Much is made of the fate of democracy, of its polarisation, its hollowing out and of the “silence of the rational centre”. As the clouds darkened this week over the central plains of British politics, MPs were seen scrambling for high ground, for the extremes of hard Brexit or “secret remain”. They parked their consciences in the whips’ office, or at least in the cubby hole of “my future career”. The failure to vote for Cooper-Boles was moral abdication. The overwhelming weight of British opinion on Brexit is clear. It is clear from the referendum, from votes in parliament, from a majority of MPs of all parties, from opinion polls and from the totality of commercial and industrial lobbies. It is that Britain should leave the EU but retain its close customs partnership with Europe. This keeps frictionless trade, an open border with Ireland and the least disruption to the economy. The customs union may obviate our ability to strike our own trade deals with the rest of the world, and make London a rule-taker not maker. But these are largely chimeras, as the Brexiters know well. The idea that we can “make” trading rules on food with the US is absurd, as attempts now in Washington are proving. On the other hand, a customs union could return migration control – the issue that underpinned the 2016 vote – to British sovereignty. Such a union meets the terms both explicit and implicit in the referendum. It is also the default position of the EU’s backstop proposal and of May’s original deal, which is why hard Brexiters opposed it, and why Labour would have been wise to have supported the deal for the time being. It is easy to blame May for this shambles. From the start she has sought to appease her backwoods and neglect those on whom she should now be able to rely. She failed to see that she was certain eventually to need help from Jeremy Corbyn, odious though it might be to her political soul. When her internal coalition failed, she would need an external one. This can now be resolved only by individual MPs taking it upon themselves to vote to stay in the customs union. They have heard their constituents. They have heard the arguments. May and Corbyn should put down a joint motion to take a customs union back to Brussels, and give their MPs freedom to vote with their consciences. It would be an eerie, exhilarating moment, and do something to rescue the British parliament’s plummeting reputation across the democracies of the world. • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist