Ederson 8 Retained concentration, made sharp saves when required and hit precise long balls. Kyle Walker 7 Having re-established himself after recently being dropped, the defender was again solid. John Stones 7 Still receives the odd ear-wigging from his manager for slipshod play and it happened again here. Aymeric Laporte 7 Faultless display from Guardiola’s favourite defender, now filling the Kompany-sized void with aplomb. Oleksandr Zinchenko 8 Pushed into central areas to make an extra midfielder and made the assist on Agüero’s 30-yard strike. Fernandinho 7 The midfield general was once more metronomic, giving City the balance that lets them thrive. Ilkay Gündogan 8 A fine strike for the German – preferred to David Silva – showed Guardiola made the correct selection. Raheem Sterling 9 Flying start as the winger opened the scoring, then struck City’s sixth in a rampant display. Kevin De Bruyne 7 Told off early on by Guardiola for sloppy play despite his quick free-kick leading to Sterling’s opener. Bernardo Silva 9 Hurt Chelsea with dart in behind to make Sterling’s opener, then his cross was missed by Agüero. Sergio Agüero 10 A howler of a miss before a rocket, a half-volley and a penalty for a redemptive hat‑trick. Subs Jesus (for Agüero, 65) 7; Mahrez (for De Bruyne, 68) 7; D Silva (for Fernandinho, 75) 8 Kepa Arrizabalaga 6 Could do little about the first goal. Or the second. Third. Fourth. And fifth. But a match to forget. Antonio Rüdiger 2 Part of a dismal rear-guard who did basics wrong: particularly culpable for Agüero’s first, not pressing. Marcos Alonso 2 Where was he for Sterling’s finish? Still showed willing to rove forward but this was near-pointless. César Azpilicueta 2 Captain has to take responsibility for being unable to settle side after opener and gave away penalty. David Luiz 2 Made the odd clever pass but in defence, where he was really needed, the Brazilian was awful. Jorginho 3 Failed to head off Zinchenko when he passed to Agüero for City’s second and did little to impress. N’Golo Kanté 4 Made runs forward when he could but was unable to do anything material to halt the light blue wave. Ross Barkley 1 Roasted Hazard over the opener but then set up Agüero’s second with a hapless header. Lasted six minutes of second half. Eden Hazard 3 Was asleep for City’s opener for which he rightly received a telling off; one scintillating run from near halfway was his highlight. Pedro 5 Danced in and around the area when he could but was fighting a battle lost too early by defence. Gonzalo Higuaín 6 Had next to zero service but one chest-then-volley from 25 yards illustrated his class. Subs Kovacic (for Barkley, 52) 5; Loftus-Cheek (for Pedro, 65) 5; Emerson (for Alonso, 73) 5