Liam Williams A dangerous runner from deep but made effective contributions in defence too, not least in the air. Wales’s best back. 9 George North We take a collective breath when he is on the ball but struggled to escape shackles. No weaknesses exposed by England though. 7 Jonathan Davies A classy operator. Plays a key defensive role and has so much experience – pivotal in helping Wales back into the match. 8 Hadleigh Parkes Not much gets past him and this was more like his performances of last year. His dash down the right brought crowd to its feet. 8 Josh Adams Had a quietish afternoon until he plucked Biggar’s kick at the second attempt to make the game safe. Is proving a real find. 8 Gareth Anscombe Kicked too often in first half but was more varied in the second once he stopped forcing things. No surprise Biggar came on. 6 Gareth Davies A mixed bag. Did well to charge Farrell down but some handling errors. Perhaps over-eagerness got the better of him at times. 7 Rob Evans Made more than his fair share of tackles and hit ruck after ruck. Made way on the hour mark with the tank emptied. 7 Ken Owens Culpable for Curry’s try but is not Wales’s most-capped hooker for nothing and responded well. Carried the fight all afternoon. 8 Tomas Francis Takes credit for Wales bulldozing scrum near the end of the first half. Honours even against his Exeter teammate Moon. 6 Alun Wyn Jones (capt) Produced one of his excellent performances. His leadership was the most significant reason Wales won. 9 Man of the match Cory Hill Is established as key part of this side alongside his captain and on hand to score when it looked like England might hold firm. 8 Josh Navidi Made a few handling mistakes but topped the Welsh tackle count and he did what he was there to do. Tireless. 8 Justin Tipuric Badly caught out for Curry’s try but other than that he was everywhere. Provides a valuable lineout option as well. 8 Ross Moriarty Missed a few tackles but brings an abrasive edge to back-row. Enjoyed his battle with Vunipola and came out on top. 7 REPLACEMENTS: Elliot Dee (for Owens 77) N/A, Nicky Smith (for Evans 61) 6; Dillon Lewis (for Francis 61) 7; Adam Beard (for Hill 71) N/A; Aaron Wainwright (for Moriarty 77) N/A; Aled Davies (for Gareth Davies 77) N/A; Dan Biggar (for Anscombe 61) Made a huge difference 8; Owen Watkin (for Parkes 79) N/A Elliot Daly Rare miss with a long-range penalty. Looked to counter whenever Wales kicked too long but at fault for Adams’s try. 5/10 Jack Nowell Seemed to hurt his shoulder very early on but grew into the match. Showed his usual ability to wriggle through holes that do not seem there. 7 Henry Slade Showed juggling skills again and so nearly got away after chargedown. Some pace in buildup to Curry’s try, but not as effective as in previous games. 6 Manu Tuilagi Very quiet in the first half, with just one carry, but much more to the fore in the second. His best came when England needed it on the hour. Key tackle on Parkes. 7 Jonny May No early try this week, indeed quiet for most of the first half, but celebrated chase and tackle on Parkes wildly. Went off with a head injury. 6 Owen Farrell (capt) Uncharacteristically poor start, regathered himself and started dictating play with clever kicking, but could not stem the tide. 5 Ben Youngs Scrambled well just before half-time and kicked well enough but as one of the senior figures he will be disappointed with how England let their lead slip. 6 Ben Moon England’s coalminer, says Eddie Jones, and another decent shift. Stayed on until the closing stages but Genge’s dynamism may have been more effective earlier. 6 Jamie George Made an important turnover in the first half and 22 tackles in total. Did little wrong and can consider himself unfortunate to end up on losing side. 7 Kyle Sinckler A time-bomb? Certainly explosive. Everywhere in the first half, with thundering tackles and carriers. Won a big scrum, even chased kicks but discipline lapsed after the break. Sensibly withdrawn. 7 Courtney Lawes He and Sinckler carried the fight to Wales, making thumping tackles on Moriarty, Williams and Tipuric to name three. Pinched the ball for Curry’s try. Looks an injury concern. 7 George Kruis His hits are not as eye-catching as Lawes’s but he makes a shedload of them, including a staggering 12 in the first quarter. Made a key lineout steal too and carried hard. 8 Mark Wilson Another big shift from England’s unsung hero but as Wales got on top at the breakdown he could do little to stop it. 7 Tom Curry Must have lungs the size of oil drums. Got through a huge amount of work and had the wherewithal to spot the gap for first England try. 7 Billy Vunipola Conceded a silly penalty. Had a few carriers off a long run but Wales were ready for it. Still seems to be a way off his best. 5 REPLACEMENTS: Ellis Genge (for Moon 77) N/A, Harry Williams (for Sinckler 58) Huge amount of tackles 7, Joe Launchbury (for Kruis 64) 6, Brad Shields (for Lawes 75) N/A, Joe Cokanasiga (for May 70) 5