A Donald Trump joke usually lands well in the heart of Silicon Valley. But when the mayor of Cupertino wisecracked in his state of the city address that he wanted to build a wall around the city where Apple is headquartered – and make the surrounding communities pay for it – he ignited a fury among local housing advocates, for whom the farce veered too close to reality. Mayor Steven Scharf made his speech on 30 January, but it drew little attention until it was tweeted by venture capitalist and housing advocate Kim-Mai Cutler. Leading up to remarks on traffic, Scharf pulled up a PowerPoint slide titled, “Securing Our Borders With The Cupertino Wall” that showed a map of the city with the border marked in black. “You have heard about the wall along our southern border,” Scharf said, alluding to Trump’s fight for a border wall with Mexico. “This is the wall around Cupertino. We have a big problem with all these Teslas coming through our city from Saratoga and other people from other cities, so we came up with this proposal. “San Jose will be mainly paying for it, so it’s not coming out of our own taxes. Saratoga will give a little bit too, since they are a big contributor to our traffic issue,” he joked. Under the map, the slide stated, “Santa Clara, Saratoga, Sunnyvale, Los Altos, and San Jose Will Pay For It” – a reference to the five communities that surround the city. The new NIMBY mayor of Cupertino made an entirely tasteless joke about building a wall around Cupertino and then making San Jose pay for it in his State of the City address. https://t.co/YDPLwHQupp pic.twitter.com/xOBz5blYO0 Scharf did not immediately respond to an email request for comment. But housing advocates and lawmakers in surrounding cities made clear that they did not care for his sense of humor. Congrats to Cupertino Mayor Steven Scharf for out-Trumping Trump on the night of the SOTU by declaring that Cupertino will build a wall and make San José pay for it. We are not amused. https://t.co/u68Pdp7GD9 via @Emily_DeRuy pic.twitter.com/Rfgwbs6Q0r Okay. Then let's see how many Apple employees show up for work on Monday. https://t.co/KLPey26TpP They pointed out that because of its lack of affordable housing, in a way, Cupertino – like the rest of Silicon Valley and the Bay Area – has already made surrounding communities “pay” for the wealth that has flooded the region from the tech industry. “Cupertino is a city that, for the longest time, has fought new housing construction,” said Matt Regan, senior vice-president of housing policy for the Bay Area Council Economic Institute. “They haven’t permitted a single permit for affordable housing in over three years. The city’s median home value right now is over $2.2m. Median rent value right now is $3,200 a month. They essentially already have built a wall around their city by making it so unaffordable to live in and refusing to build more housing.” Because of the lack of affordable housing in the area, more than 200,000 people a day commute into job centers like Cupertino, Regan explained. He continued: “If you’re fortunate enough to own a home in Cupertino, lucky you. But if you have to teach the children of Cupertino or work in the restaurants in Cupertino or clean the streets of Cupertino, you’re likely not owning a home in Cupertino.” “Cupertino needs to carry its share of the load,” Regan said. “Next to the Apple campus, Cupertino is refusing to build housing. This is the crux of the housing and jobs imbalance right here. It’s just one example of many, but it is probably the most egregious in our region.”