Can black Americans empower themselves by refusing to use white goods and services? Can porn teach the unemployed how to work with their hands? And could a rap supergroup comprising a Native American activist, a white supremacist and a gay Puerto Rican songwriter help to heal US society? The answer, in Netflix’s vaguely excellent political documentary Trigger Warning With Killer Mike, is pretty much no on all counts. But in Michael “Killer Mike”Render, one half of the hip-hop duo Run the Jewels and proud resident of Atlanta, Georgia, television has found a satirist – or more accurately an activist – for the times. He’s a confident, ursine screen presence, a fierce opponent of corporate hegemony and a Bernie Sanders fan. But more importantly, Killer Mike is an open, original thinker who lets his experiments breathe and grow. He comes up with a new scheme in every easily watchable, sub-30-minute episode, doing everything from trying to “buy black” for 72 hours – which culminates in him having to sleep on a park bench with a can of black beans as a pillow – to buying a farm and starting a self-governing microstate. The obvious precursors for his stunts are Morgan Spurlock and Michael Moore, but Killer Mike’s strength is that he glorifies the individual and the power of local connections. He barely mentions specific US policies or even presidents. He starts with roughly a black-nationalist perspective, but this soon widens out into solidarity with any marginalised group. His preoccupation is always what one person, or one small group of people, can do to effect change. This gives him universal appeal, despite him rarely leaving Atlanta. American topical satire is better at taking this sort of step back than its UK equivalents, which are often too concerned with politicians’ personal foibles to notice the effects of their politics on the ground. Netflix is about to start a second run of Patriot Act With Hasan Minhaj, which is to some extent a weekly news-comedy show, but also likes to take a buzzing story and dig deep into a wider, timeless issue behind it. Last Week Tonight With John Oliver, at its best, does similar. Trigger Warning takes a less specific approach: where Killer Mike is heading isn’t always clear, and often seems unknown even to him. It’s an ethos that pushes back against a polarised culture, where entrenched viewpoints are argued with feigned certainty, each side unwilling to admit even the slightest doubt. Killer Mike isn’t ashamed to float ideas and schemes and watch them crash. In the best episode, he starts by wondering why black Christians are willing to worship a white Jesus and vows to found his own church, but ends up exploring – given the show’s unpredictability, you almost want to say “spoiler warning” here – sleep-focused mindfulness, meditation and self-empowerment. Even the weaker instalments rest on a provocative thought that lingers in the mind. Or they’re just funny. It’s not obvious what is achieved by showing jobseekers specially made pornography that incorporates carpentry and plumbing tuition – ie classic porn, except the repair guy really does fix the washing machine – but the guinea pigs’ reaction to the finished video is a riot, and the contention that schooling ought to be more vocational is worthy of further thought. And in the episode where Killer Mike holds X Factor-style auditions to create a rap crew made up of minority campaigners, the decision to include a Trump supporter who refers to himself as a “white N-word” is a bad mistake, but the ensuing farce brings with it several huge, guilty laughs. Killer Mike’s comic timing enhances even the most contrived scenes, such as when he takes a gang of Crips to see a bank manager, hoping for a loan to help them monetise their brand via the sale of Crip-a-Cola fizzy pop. That episode also contains the starkest example of the show’s most pleasing theme, which is that people are much more woke than you might think. When Killer Mike meets the Bloods to tell them about Crip-a-Cola, one of the scary dudes asks: “Is it vegan?”In its eccentric way, Trigger Warning is an antidote to the gloomy powerlessness many of us have lived with, waiting for Brexit to be resolved: the feeling of everything else in politics being on hold while that one big issue that renders all others insignificant rolls on. That’s an instinct that needs to be fought, and here is a reminder both that broad, fundamental issues remain live, and that nothing can nullify the political significance of how we think, what we buy and how we interact with our fellow citizens every day. Dope-hazy and rough-edged as it is, Trigger Warning is a wake-up call.