Twelve senior members of the Catalan independence movement will stand trial in Madrid on Tuesday over their alleged roles in the region’s failed bid to secede from Spain in autumn 2017. Here are some of the key figures in the push for independence: The former Catalan vice-president and leader of the Republican Left of Catalonia (ERC) party has been in pre-trial custody since November 2017. He faces a 25-year sentence if found guilty of charges of rebellion and misuse of public funds brought by the public prosecutor, or a 12-year sentence if found guilty of the sedition charge brought by the state’s attorney. Junqueras, 49, was a history professor before going into politics and eventually rising to the top of the ERC in 2011. Since entering prison, he has taken a more considered approach to the path towards independence than the former Catalan president Carles Puigdemont, mirroring the growing divisions between the two main pro-independence Catalan parties. “You need to have the courage to speak clearly if you’re going to move ahead,” he told Catalan TV last September. “You have to admit where we are and where we’d like to be. You have to start building again from there and learning from the mistakes that have been made.” Junqueras has also alluded on more than one occasion to his decision to remain in Catalonia while his former boss fled into self-imposed exile in Belgium. “I stayed in Catalonia because of the sense of responsibility I feel towards my fellow citizens,” he said in a recent interview with Le Figaro. “Socrates, Seneca and Cicero had the opportunity to flee but didn’t take it. I find that civic and ethical responsibility very impressive.” Sànchez, a regional MP and former president of the influential grassroots Catalan National Assembly (ANC), and Cuixart, the leader of the Òmnium Cultural civil society group, are the Catalan leaders who have spent the most time in pre-trial detention. They were arrested in October 2017 as part of an investigation into alleged sedition in the run-up to the independence referendum a fortnight earlier. The pair are accused of using huge demonstrations to try to stop Spanish police officers from following a judge’s orders to halt the referendum, which had already been suspended by the country’s constitutional court. Sànchez, 54, and Cuixart, 43, face 17-year sentences if convicted of rebellion, or 12 years if found guilty of sedition. Amnesty International has called for their release and said the charges they faced were unjustified. “Although calling protests to obstruct legitimate police operations can – if proof is produced of their commission – constitute a public order offence, it does not constitute a serious crime such as sedition or rebellion,” Gauri van Gulik, Amnesty’s Europe director, said in February last year. Notably absent from the trial is Puigdemont, the architect of the region’s failed independence bid. He fled Catalonia for Belgium days after the unilateral declaration of independence. He is currently attempting to lead a government in exile – or “council of the republic” – from his new home in the Belgian municipality of Waterloo. A Spanish judge dropped a international arrest warrant issued for Puigdemont, 56, after a German court said it would only extradite him over alleged misuse of public funds rather than the more serious charge of rebellion. He faces immediate arrest on charges of sedition, rebellion and misuse of public funds should he return to Spain. A staunch and long-standing independence campaigner, Puigdemont served as Catalan president from January 2016 to October 2017, when he was sacked by the Spanish government for his independence bid. He studied Catalan philology at university before becoming a journalist on the Girona-based daily El Punt and helping to launch Catalonia Today, an English-language paper.