There is such a rich array of televisual treats before us that sometimes it is overwhelming. As soon as one dish finishes, the plate is whisked away and another tasty dish appears – Killing Eve, perhaps, while you were still patting your stomach in satisfaction after Patrick Melrose. Sometimes the palate longs for something simple to cleanse it. Diners, let me present Netflix’s latest offering: The Umbrella Academy, an adaptation of a Dark Horse Comics series by Gerard Way and Gabriel Bá. Daft name, daft concept. Here it is: 43 women become mysteriously pregnant, going full-term and into labour within a few hours (my GOD, but that’s a bad day). Seven of the resultant babies are adopted, apparently on a hunch, by an Eccentric Reclusive Billionaire (as if there’s another kind!) whom we’ll call Sir Gimlet Cruelty, because we may as well. The hunch pays off when all but one of them grow up to have superpowers. One – which was literally the name Sir Gimlet Cruelty gave him, because what did I tell you?, but who is now known as Luther – is super strong. Two (Diego) is a martial-artsy avenger. Three is Allison who is a … er … rumour-monger. Four (Klaus) can communicate with the dead. Five (no name) can teleport, and last did so to an unknown destination 15 years ago. Six could turn himself into a man-eating tentacled monster but is now dead. And Seven (Vanya) is the anomaly: no special powers at all. Or – say it with me people, you know you want to! – DOES SHE? As the seven grew up they were ruthlessly organised by Daddy into an invincible team of crime-fighters, but now they are adults they have scattered to the four winds and are only brought back to the family home/academy when Daddy carks it. Just in case you haven’t caught the mood of the thing yet, there is also a talking ape butler called Pogo. You’re welcome. Sir Gimlet’s monocle is missing, making Luther suspicious that he was murdered. Klaus can’t summon the paternal shade to clear the matter up, but they all dance to Belinda Carlisle for a bit and feel better. Then an electromagnetic storm deposits their missing brother, Five, back in the courtyard. He looks the same but is now 58 on the inside because he’s been living in the future. At this point, I would remind you: never mind the quality, feel the width! In the old days they used to measure this stuff out by the yard, and we gladly made of it what we could. I need you to feel your way back to that simple life once more. Anyway. Assassins, wouldn’t you know it, have followed Number Five back in time to the present because he has returned to save the world from its annihilation, which is due in eight days’ time. There’s always something, isn’t there? It is purest hokum: a superhero show with some potentially interesting stuff lurking underneath about family dysfunction (mostly carried by Ellen Page as the black sheep) that promises never to be developed. And I’m in. I’m inner than in. I could not be more in. I would suggest you join me under the umbrella immediately, until the endless rain of quality outside stops.