Last Saturday in Christchurch, Martin Guptill thrashed a century for New Zealand in a one-day game against Bangladesh; in Dubai, Shahid Afridi finished off Multan Sultans’ Twenty20 match against Islamabad United with back-to-back sixes; and in Chittagong a young kid called Jamie Smith made a run-a-ball hundred for England Under-19s in a Test against Bangladesh. Cricket’s always on, somewhere or other, one format or another, bat hitting ball like the background tick-tock of a wall clock, something you only really notice when you look at it, catch a fraction of the match in a gif, a clip, a stream, or tweet, or a glance at a scorecard. Amid all the rest of it, South Africa and Sri Lanka were playing in the first Test at Kingsmead in Durban. The match had meandered into a fourth day and it looked as if it was only going one way. South Africa v Sri Lanka isn’t necessarily a series you stop to watch. They have been playing each other for only 26 years and, in South Africa, the contests have been off-puttingly one-sided. Sri Lanka had played 13 Tests there before this series and won only one of them, in 2011, when Kumar Sangakkara and Thilan Samararweera made all the runs and Rangana Herath took most of the wickets. Sangakkara and Herath and Samaraweera are gone now, and this latest Sri Lanka team have been struggling to get along without them and the other men they played with, Mahela Jayawardene, Tillakaratne Dilshan and the rest. They had already been beaten three times this winter, at home by England and away by New Zealand and Australia. And they had brought a scratch team into this series with a new captain, Dimuth Karunaratne, their fifth in the past two years, a rookie No 3 and three bowlers who had 10 caps between them, but not their two senior batsmen, Angelo Mathews and Dinesh Chandimal. They had done well, then, to bowl South Africa out for 235 and 259 but, dismissed for 191 themselves, still needed an unlikely 304 to win. By Friday night the match was ready for the last rites. Sri Lanka were 83 for three, Kusal Perera 12 not out, together with the rookie Oshada Fernando on 28. Perera is 28 himself now, so he has been around a while. Back in 2013 he made a name for himself when he hit 336 off 275 balls for Colts against Saracens in Colombo, the highest score anyone had ever made in Sri Lanka’s first-class competition, but he hasn’t done that much with it since. Perera bats like his hero, Sanath Jayasuriya, left-handed with a short backlift, arms close in, and that was how they labelled him: the new Jayasuriya. For five years he scored in fits and flashes. He had a fine record in white-ball cricket – a fifty in record time against Pakistan and four one-day international centuries, too – but in Tests his breezy batting hadn’t made much of an impact. He scored twin fifties on his debut against India in 2015 but after that played only 13 Tests in the next four years, the best of them against Zimbabwe in Harare when he made his first, and only, Test century. There had been obstacles, injuries, of course, and a failed a drugs test in 2015. He spent six months arguing he was innocent and was finally cleared in 2016. Since then he has been in and out of the team. Now here he was, on Saturday morning, this flibbertigibbet batsman, a man with a mean record in T20 cricket but with no real achievements as a Test player, with 221 runs to make and his side with just seven wickets left. No, six, because Fernando was caught at slip. No, five, because Niroshan Dickwella knocked a catch back to the bowler. There was a stand now of 96 runs with Dhanajaya de Silva, before he fell lbw to Keshav Maharaj. From there, South Africa rattled on through the Sri Lanka tail. Suranga Lakmal was caught at slip off the very next ball, Lasith Embuldeniya caught at short leg off a bouncer from Duanne Olivier, Kasun Rajitha lbw to Maharaj. That all happened in the space of six overs. Perera was on 86 now and batting with the last man, Vishwa Fernando. Sri Lanka still needed 78 to win. Fernando, a 28-year-old playing his fourth Test, had a first-class batting average of seven. So it goes, just as everyone imagined it would. This South Africa attack, after all, included the best fast bowler of the last generation, Dale Steyn, and the best fast bowler of this generation, Kagiso Rabada, and in Olivier another in red-hot form who had dismantled Pakistan in January. The three were too fast and too fierce for these Sri Lankans. Olivier had already hit Perera on the helmet and in the ribcage, and Rababa had smacked him on the hand, and it looked then as though the pain was so bad that Perera would have to retire hurt. But he didn’t. Instead, he started to play even better. Perera hit Maharaj for six over long-on, pulled Olivier for six over midwicket, hauled Steyn for six over square leg once, twice, and sliced Rabada for six over fine leg. And all of a sudden he had 149 and his team needed only four runs to win. He got them with a clip past slip. Together he and Fernando had put on 78 for the last wicket in an hour and 15 minutes of cricket. Perera finished unbeaten on 153. It wasn’t just a great innings but one of the greatest innings, a performance that stopped all the clocks, that you were forced to watch, a precious and welcome reminder that cricket, always in the background, is still the best game around.