Shannon Gabriel has been suspended for the first four one-day internationals against England following the on-field altercation in St Lucia that prompted Joe Root to tell him “there’s nothing wrong with being gay”. The West Indies fast bowler accepted a charge of breaching the International Cricket Council’s code of conduct – “personal abuse of a player” – and was fined 75% of his match fee, as well as earning three demerit points. The latter triggered his suspension due to previous marks on his disciplinary record from the past two years. The ICC, on announcing the verdict of the match referee, Jeff Crowe, on Wednesday, did not detail what Gabriel said to Root. This was also absent from the footage that circulated during the third Test and Gabriel is understood to have told Cricket West Indies that his words were not of a homophobic nature; he was, in fact, misheard. Gabriel was unable to say, however, that verbal abuse had not taken place during what was a hard-fought passage of play and so did not contest the charge that was brought by the on-field umpires, Kumar Dharmasena and Rod Tucker. It meant no hearing was required and Root, who has received widespread praise for his response at the time, was not therefore asked to give evidence or a statement. Root and Gabriel shook hands after England had wrapped up the consolation 232-run win that saw the series end 2-1 to West Indies. And in keeping with the generally amicable tenor of the three Tests, the two teams then joined each other for drinks in the dressing room after play and relations are said to remain good. Gabriel’s suspension from one-day cricket did raise eyebrows, however, given he has not played the format for 14 months. On announcing their squad last week West Indies stated that the fast bowler was still part of their World Cup plans and would be called up for the final three matches after missing next week’s opening two in Barbados for a period of scheduled rest. This situation changed on the day of his spat with Root, when the seamer Keemo Paul went down injured with a torn quad muscle in the morning session. West Indies told the ICC that, with Rovman Powell, an all-rounder, also a slight injury doubt, Gabriel was to be called up early but the switch had not yet been made public. Had Gabriel been banned for two Tests – the equivalent punishment for a one-format player – he would have been out until October, with West Indies due to play only a two-Test series against India in July before then. With the incident, or at least Root’s words, picked up by the stump microphones and originally circulated online by a member of the TV audience in England, it has once again raised the subject of whether they should be turned up or down between deliveries. The ICC has been looking to crack down on behaviour following the acrimonious series between South Africa and Australia last year. The Pakistan captain, Sarfraz Ahmed, was banned for four ODIs last month under the anti-racism code after he called South Africa’s Andile Phehlukwayo the Urdu word “kaale”, meaning “black”, during a game. The evidence for this sanction came from audio picked up by the stump microphones. Speaking on Wednesday the England head coach, Trevor Bayliss, was adamant that the stump microphones should be switched off in international matches. He said: “I’ve said it once before, no, I’m not in favour of it and I’m not going to change my mind. If stump mics were around a few years ago, there would be some blokes seen as ‘holier than thou’ who would have been in trouble as well. [But] I think it should be down. “I know there are people who think the opposite and it is good for the game but sometimes, in the heat of battle, things are said when guys, given a bit of time to sit down and think about it, would give themselves a bit of a kick up the backside.” England’s preparations for the forthcoming one-day series – the start of a white-ball only schedule that leads into the summer’s World Cup in Britain – begin on Sunday with a 50-over warm-up against a University of West Indies Vice Chancellor’s XI at the Three Ws Oval near Bridgetown. Jos Buttler, England’s vice-captain, has been permitted to miss it for a period of rest but is expected to feature in the first ODI at the Kensington Oval on 20 February. "Don't use it as an insult. There's nothing wrong with being gay."Joe Root responds to sledging from Windies bowler Shannon Gabriel. Full story: https://t.co/nRfSmWU5q6 pic.twitter.com/ghoDyGxUOi