One of Britain’s most successful trainers has promised to “go ballistic” if his horses are prevented from competing when racing resumes after the flu-related shutdown. Richard Fahey, whose runners won more than £3m in prize money last year, has 180 horses at his North Yorkshire base and, by Sunday morning, only three had been tested for equine influenza, with the results pending. Fahey’s yard was among the second wave of stables placed on lockdown last week, after three horses at Rebecca Menzies’ stable showed possible symptoms of EI; Menzies had had runners at two race meetings where Fahey also had runners. But those three Menzies horses have since tested negative, leaving Fahey wondering why his yard is still restricted. “If the Rebecca Menzies horses are clear, why do I need testing?” he said. “I’m trying to get them to say: ‘You don’t need testing.’ It would be 180 swabs to take.” Fahey added that swabs had been in short supply and, rather than insist on his yard being supplied immediately, he had opted to allow the available supply to go to trainers in the first wave of locked-down yards, such as the nearby David O’Meara. Having shown that restraint, Fahey was outraged to learn it may mean his stable being closed down for longer than others. David Sykes, the director of equine health at the British Horseracing Authority, was asked on Racing TV’s Luck On Sunday about the fact that some large stables were still waiting for swabs and replied: “There may be some stables that get released if we were going to be racing. Then we might still have some stables that we’d say, you are still in lockdown but these stables over here can race.” “I would go ballistic,” Fahey said of that suggestion. “With all due respect, that’s not going to happen. I’m put on lockdown for something they’ve decided to do but, if Rebecca Menzies is clear, there’s no good reason to lock down the second batch, no good reason whatsoever. Let’s cancel those tests and save the industry a fortune. “The BHA are being praised for containing this, well, what are they containing? It’s only in Donald McCain’s yard. They’re containing nothing. If we’ve got 1,500 clear tests, let’s get back racing.” That figure of 1,500 was mentioned by Sykes as the number of samples he believed had been analysed by Sunday morning, with no new findings of EI apart from the original six horses trained by McCain. However the BHA says the official figure at Sunday lunchtimeremained at 720 tests confirmed as negative, with twice as many still to process. A BHA spokesman said there was an “element of speculation” in Sykes’s suggestion some yards could remain locked down after racing resumed. The question of how best to get back to racing remains under discussion.