A tight, tense evening in balmy Bridgetown saw West Indies level their one-day series with England thanks to an inspired spell of bowling from Jason Holder and five wickets for Sheldon Cottrell, a left-armer with a zany celebration. Eoin Morgan’s tourists had been chasing 290 to win this second fixture, a target set up by Shimron Hetmyer’s unbeaten 104 in the first innings. And after half-centuries from the England captain (70) and Ben Stokes (79) they appeared to be heading towards a 2-0 series lead when needing 62 from 61 balls with six wickets in hand. But a late burst of three for five from Holder ultimately swung the match the way of West Indies. He nicked off Ben Stokes for 79, fooled Jos Buttler with a slower ball for 34 and then trapped Tom Curran lbw first ball. The latter may have been a poor decision from the local umpire, Gregory Brathwaite, that could not be overturned due to Stokes burning England’s one review, but the West Indies captain cared little. Cottrell, who had earlier removed Jonny Bairstow, Jason Roy and Morgan – all three sent packing with a crisp military salute, a reference to his time as a private in the Jamaican Defence Force – then returned to wipe out Adil Rashid and Moeen Ali. When Liam Plunkett holed out off Carlos Brathwaite with 14 balls remaining, it completed a 26-run win for the home side and sparked wild scenes at the Kensington Oval. “We felt that 290 was well within our capabilities but we did not do good enough things for long enough,” said Morgan. “The guys who did get themselves in, including myself, did not do that for long enough. We made mistakes, it hurt us and the West Indies deserved to win.” That England faced a target not as lofty as the record 361 chased down 48 hours earlier – a match of some seven balls lost during the West Indies innings – owed much to a far trickier pitch, a fine spell of reverse swing from Mark Wood, who claimed one for 38 from his 10, and an electric display of out-fielding after Morgan won the toss. Indeed just one Kookaburra disappeared out of the ground amid some early fireworks from Chris Gayle – 50 from 63 before being bowled by Rashid’s second delivery – allowing Wood to get the ball tailing in late on to prevent another six-hitting spree. With Chris Woakes rested by England due to the quick turnaround and a recent knee issue, Tom Curran stepped up. But it was Liam Plunkett who struck first, persuading John Campbell to pick out mid-on for 23. Shai Hope once again looked glossy for 33 runs, only to pull Stokes into the tradewinds and pick out deep mid-wicket, before a stand of 76 between Hetmyer and Darren Bravo. A seemingly ominous partnership was crucially broken before the final 10-over powerplay with the first of two direct-hit run outs in 10 balls. Rashid, often England’s weakest link in the field, pinged the stumps from short third man to remove Bravo for 25, before Jason Roy, a livewire throughout, sent Holder packing from backward point with another lasered throw. The skittish passage was induced by Wood harnessing the older, unchanged ball. The right-armer, averaging 89mph throughout and hitting 93.9mph at one stage, claimed the wicket his showing merited when Carlos Brathwaite, shackled bar one mighty six off Stokes, swung at fresh air and heard his timbers rattled. It was down to Hetmyer to ensure a competitive total, the left-hander dominant in a late stand of 52 with Ashley Nurse and, though unable to break fully free, he went on to bring up his fourth ODI century from 82 balls when thrashing the penultimate delivery of the innings back past Stokes. West Indies may have lengthened their tail by drafting in an extra bowler in Cottrell. But when the left-armer struck twice in the reply, the move paid an early dividend. Bairstow was trapped lbw first ball to a delivery that nipped in before Roy, the standout player on Wednesday, chopped on to his stumps for two. The situation worsened when Joe Root flashed an uppercut behind off Oshane Thomas on 36. But when Stokes, brimming with intent and dispensing some meaty shots, put on stands of 89 with Morgan and 69 with the aggressive Buttler looked to be sending England to Grenada with a chance of wrapping up the series at the earliest possibility. But Holder, who had to marshall a fielding side that looked to be creaking, had other ideas.