Full of surprises, and a few shocks, sexy, sacred and profane, The Renaissance Nude is almost as salacious as it is scholarly. With substantial loans from all over Europe and the US, the exhibition has travelled from the J Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles, and now fills the Sackler galleries at the Royal Academy. It is a riot of bodies in these low-lit, sober grey rooms. Christian martyrs are impaled on trees. Jan Gossaert’s Christ, stripped, awaits his fate, sitting on the cold stone and wracked with palpable terror. Several Saint Sebastians stand about, pin-up boys oblivious to the arrows that pierce them. A procession of flagellants in a Netherlandish Book of Hours prepare themselves for their hooded tormentors in a scene as erotic as it is devotional. The delicacy and intimacy of the image counterpoints its impending violence. Titian’s Venus Anadyomene rises from the waters, wringing her hair, fully exposed and oblivious to the spectator. Peering to the side, she doesn’t see us looking, or pretends as much. Perhaps this is Titian’s double bluff (she knows that we know … except of course, she is only painted). Mantegna’s battling sea gods are all muscles and snarls and shouts, while Bosch-like creatures creep up on a sleeping pair of young women on a beach, a city burning on the far shore, in Marcantonio Raimondi’s 1507-8 engraving. Filled with detail, the crepuscular image is a nightmarish pastoral of fanciful architecture, the silence of slumber and the cacophony of the besieged city. The little monsters complete the over-the-top scene. I could look at this all day. Naked men hack at each other with sabres, axes, swords and daggers in a wonderful roundelay of violence in Antonio del Pollaiuolo’s 1470s engraving Battle of the Nudes. Their nakedness, it is suggested, is an association with animalistic barbarity rather than heroism, or a return to a fanciful antiquity. I was not expecting so much violence, or so much implied sex of all kinds. Saint Jerome, butt naked, tears at his skin with a stone in a polychromed wood sculpture by Donatello (though there seems to be some dispute over his authorship), which shows the saint attempting to distract himself from the temptations of the flesh. I begin to know how he feels. Baptism was a pretext for Luca Signorelli to paint male buttocks. A woman pleasures herself in Giulio Campagnola’s 1508-9 engraving. The saved walk towards heaven, decorously draped, while naked sinners tumble into hell, to be ravaged by demons in Dieric Bouts’ 1468-9 diptych. Painted in oil or tempera, engraved, etched, printed using woodcuts, drawn, carved and cast, flesh is made malleable by the pressure to dramatise and to exaggerate, to tell stories, to educate, edify and to horrify, to tickle the fancy and to appeal to the kinks in the Renaissance mind. Even without the dominance of the Catholic church, the politics of representation are as vexed today as they were in Renaissance Europe. Focusing on the period 1400-1530, and with works from France, Italy, Germany and the Netherlands, the exhibition shows us that the variety of approaches to the naked body is almost as diverse as the artists who depicted them, let alone the variety of human bodies themselves. In extremis, in flagrante, inflammatory, indecent, idealised, implausible, pagan, mythological, Christian, humanist and abject, the exhibition seems to contain far more than the space it occupies can handle. I fear that the Renaissance Nude will be almost impossible to look at, given the number of actual bodies these galleries might well contain if the exhibition is anything like as popular as it deserves to be. Modern bodies are no less unruly than their Renaissance counterparts. There is so much here to astonish, and much that deserves close looking. In Pisanello’s 1426 drawing Luxuria, a distorted naked woman with big hair lounges, displaying herself to the viewer. We read that women were hardly ever drawn from life before the 1470s, but modelled instead from male models, mannikins and other artworks. But her androgyny is more, I think, than a by-product or a matter of insufficient information. Whatever scholarship discovers, there are always ambiguities. In German artist Hans Baldung’s 1513 woodcut Aristotle and Phyllis, we see Phyllis, naked, riding side-saddle on the back of the equally naked old philosopher, as he crawls around the garden. She carries a little whip, he wears a bit. He turns to acknowledge the viewer. Phyllis’s lover Alexander watches from above. Baldung is also represented here by a naked Christ, in a state between death and resurrection, turning on the ground to look up, impeachingly, and as if he has just awoken, and with one hand between his legs, perhaps for comfort, perhaps to check that he is intact, perhaps to signal his vulnerability. You can almost sense the cramp in his legs. Baldung was Albrecht Dürer’s student, and one of the most surprising works here is Dürer’s bathhouse scene, a crowded woodcut depicting male cruising and voyeurism in an outdoor bathhouse in 1496. The ribald scene is as unexpected as it is humorous. The sacred and profane, linear time and circular time and the end of time – all are at play here, along with the devotional and the rational, the irrational and the mythological. A return to Greek and Roman myth was as much a cover for more pressing and immediate preoccupations than it was to present erudite allegories. Two handsome smooth boys hang about in Arcadia. Daphnis, Apollo’s protege, sits naked on a rock playing a sort of flute. Apollo looks on, his tresses blown by some doubtless fragrant waft of air. Some birds who don’t know how to fly pass overhead (it is as if someone has thrown them there). In the distance is a city, people crossing a bridge, a rider on horseback. Are they all naked too? It both is and isn’t 1495 in Perugino’s painting. Time has somehow lost its bearings, and so have we. Who knows what will happen next? What a great show this is, how thought-provoking, mysterious, and nearly modern. • At the Royal Academy, London, from 3 March to 2 June.