Late-night hosts confronted a barrage of reality denial and billionaires running for president. The president openly disavowed this intelligence chiefs on Thursday, repeating his assertion that their World Threat Assessment – a survey of international threat levels to the US, presented to Congress on Wednesday – is, well, fake news. No big deal, Stephen Colbert assured on Thursday’s Late Show. “So, you all disagree, but only over what the existential threats to America are – anyone’s guess on those,” he said. “That really inspires confidence. It reminds me of Lincoln’s address from Gettysburg: ‘Government of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth … possibly.’” Trump claims the officials were “misquoted” during the televised hearing, in which they contradicted nearly all the president’s major foreign policy statements. “What do you mean they were misquoted?” Colbert interjected. “There were cameras. It was live. We all watched it.” But just to be sure, Colbert returned to the tape, playing a series of clips contrasting the director of national intelligence, Dan Coats, on North Korea (still a threat), Isis (not defeated), Iran (not building nuclear weapons as far as we know) and Russian misinformation (very much a problem) with Trump claiming the exact opposite. Based on that evidence, “some would say that Donald Trump is denying reality at a level that is clinically insane,” Colbert said. “Others … would say that, too.” The north-east was gripped by a single-digit freeze on Thursday, but “the president beat the cold this morning by tweeting so much his phone began to act as a space heater,” Jimmy Kimmel said on Thursday night. “He tweeted 11 times before 10am.” Trump was making plans to declare a national emergency, though it had nothing to do with the polar vortex. “The idea is to declare an emergency” for his proposed border wall “and then take money earmarked for real emergencies, like floods and hurricanes, and then use it for a wall that won’t do anything instead,” Kimmel explained. “Sometimes I’m amazed that he only bankrupted three casinos.” Kimmel also drew attention to some of Trump’s recent fearmongering about the border – his claims that prayer rugs have been found in the desert and that women are being transported, bound by duct tape, in huge vehicles are not backed by the White House, but do closely mimic scenes from the 2018 movie Sicario: Day of the Soldado. “It’s a bad sign when even the White House is like, ‘we have no idea what he’s talking about,’” said Kimmel. “It’s a good thing the president hasn’t seen Star Wars, because he’d probably be asking for money to build a death star right now.” And on Late Night, Seth Meyers addressed a waning trend: the billionaire running for president. Starbucks CEO Howard Schultz’s potential 2020 presidential run has been met with derision and skepticism this week, including a pointed shout from the crowd (“Don’t help elect Trump, you egotistical billionaire asshole!”) at a speaking event in New York. “It is not good when people are yelling at you at your first campaign event,” Meyers said. “He’s like a standup comedian who gets heckled before he’s even told a joke.” The criticism makes sense, considering that “there is virtually no appetite for a billionaire businessman to run for president right now. I guess somebody really put a stink on that genre,” Meyers said next to an image of Donald Trump. “Running as a billionaire now is like saying: ‘We should do a music festival with Ja Rule on an island,’” he quipped. Meyers was a bit incredulous over Schultz’s bid as a “centrist independent” outside the two-party system – Schultz thinks people will vote for him just because he’s the CEO of a coffee company? “Personally, I’m more of a Dunkin’ Donuts guy, but that doesn’t mean I’m going to vote for the CEO, who I assume is just a drunk guy in a Bruins jersey chucking snowballs off a highway overpass,” Meyers said. The bigger point, though, is that if Schultz really has an issue with the current Democratic field for 2020, “he could just run against them in a Democratic primary,” said Meyers. “But he wants to bypass the process because he thinks he’s entitled to it. That’s right: the guy who ran Starbucks doesn’t want to wait in line.”