David Tennant, 47, was born David McDonald in West Lothian. Aged three, he told his parents he wanted to become an actor because of Doctor Who. He studied at the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama before a series of stage roles with the Royal Shakespeare Company. In 2005, he fulfilled his childhood dream when he was cast as the 10th Doctor, a role he played for five years. Subsequent screen credits have included Broadchurch, Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire and Marvel’s Jessica Jones. He’s married to actor Georgia Moffett and they have four children. He has just launched a new interview podcast series, David Tennant Does a Podcast With…, featuring indepth conversations with cultural figures such as Olivia Colman and Whoopi Goldberg. You’ve described your new podcast as “slightly inexplicable”. How did it come about? It happened accidentally, starting with a conversation with my agent about my predilection for podcasts. Before I knew what was happening, I was in a production meeting, postulating who might take part. The people I asked were keen, so suddenly I had to do it. It’s been interesting to have this other life. A side-hustle. You’ve joked that maybe it’s a midlife crisis. Is it?If it is, it’s less destructive than running off with a go-go dancer or buying a sports car. I’m 50 in a handful of years, which feels like a preposterous thing to say. In my head, I’m 30 at most. Was there a particular podcast that inspired yours?Alec Baldwin’s Here’s the Thing. It’s not his day job either, yet he does it incredibly well, probably because he’s so cool and fearless. I’m neither of those things, but I liked the way he sat down, often with people he knows or has a connection to, for a rambling, freeform interview that is often very revealing. What other podcasts do you listen to?The Guardian’s Politics Weekly is a favourite. So is Pod Save America. As the world descends into chaos, I find it useful to have some analysis. Also true crime ones such as Serial and The RFK Tapes. The great thing about podcasts is that you can curate your own radio station. Gordon Brown is your guest on an forthcoming episode. How come?I’m a lifelong Labour supporter and have known Gordon through that for years. I ran into him again at Kirkcaldy festival, asked him and I suspect he felt he couldn’t say no. I love talking to actors, but wanted other voices. This is someone who ran a country – experience doesn’t come more fascinating than that. What do you make of the whole Brexit shitshow?[Laughs] It can’t be described as anything else, can it? I don’t know what’s going on or what the solution is. Which would be fine if I felt like someone else did. It’s like we’re careering down a suicidal path and if you even suggest taking stock or considering other options, people scream “heretic!” and “traitor!”. Foppish clowns who we wouldn’t normally listen to for a second have suddenly become imbued with this extraordinary status and are holding the government to ransom. None of it makes sense, but that seems to be the political situation across the world right now. One only hopes it is a pendulum swing that’s about to correct itself. Is it true the only advice you gave Jodie Whittaker about playing the Doctor was about the attention it brings?To certain people, you’ll always be the Doctor, which is a wonderful, humbling thing but it does mean accepting an adjustment to your life. You have to be ready for that. It’s a unique experience and there’s a very small support group who know how that feels. One would never give advice about how to play a part. The acting bit is what you go to drama school for. All you can help with is the other stuff. Jodie was such an exciting choice. I’m hugely proud of how successful she’s been. What did you think of the backlash against the last series being too PC?Is it possible to be too politically correct? What does that even mean? Inclusivity has always been one of Doctor Who’s strengths. You’re currently in HBO’s US remake of Julia Davis comedy Camping. Were you a fan of the original?I wasn’t, shamefully, but when I was offered the part, I devoured it all in one sitting and loved it. This is Lena Dunham and Jenni Konner’s take on it. I was a huge fan of theirs from Girls, so to work with them, with a flavour of Julia Davis, was fantastic. Have you ever met Neil Tennant, whose surname you borrowed for your Equity card?Never. I’ve always been a huge Pet Shop Boys fan, so I’d love to. Although I might also be embarrassed about how my 16-year-old self stole his name. Hopefully, he wouldn’t charge me some sort of back rent on it. You had to put a little list of options down on the Equity form and my first choice was actually David Brandon, after Kirk Brandon from Spear of Destiny, which would have been much better for alphabetical cast lists. Next up is Good Omens, an Amazon series based on the novel by Terry Pratchett and Neil Gaiman. Was that a hoot to make?Absurdly good fun. It’s totally bonkers. Because Neil Gaiman adapted it and is showrunner, the oddness isn’t diluted at all. Terry charged Neil with getting it made, almost as his deathbed wish, so it’s a real labour of love. The whole thing is dedicated to Terry’s memory. His hat was at the script read-through. You play Crowley, a demon with ginger hair and snake eyes. Was that a good look for you?I quite liked the hair. I’ve got a bit of that colouring in me, so it strangely suited me. Michael Sheen plays the angel Aziraphale, the yin to my yang. We’ve agreed that in our dotage, when we do the Good Omens theatre tour, we’ll alternate parts each night.