To revive an old and unfulfilled prophecy of Gérard Houllier’s, Liverpool truly are 10 games from greatness. They have faltered recently and lost their attacking verve along the route but, far from feeling the pressure of the title race, they revelled in it against Watford on Wednesday night. The Premier League leaders were insatiable, unstoppable and clinical as they recorded the biggest victory of what Jürgen Klopp hopes will be the breakthrough season for his club. The Liverpool manager gave an Oscar-winner’s speech, eulogising all those who had made the victory possible and acknowledging he may have forgotten somebody. It was a lengthy list. Mohamed Salah was “unplayable” according to Klopp. Trent Alexander‑Arnold “brilliant” as he returned to the side with vengeance plus a hat-trick of inch-perfect assists. Fabinho appeared to run central midfield single-handedly, although that does a disservice to those around him. Sadio Mané scored twice, the second an audacious and glorious finish, as did Virgil van Dijk with two towering late headers. Divock Origi chipped in with a fine goal as he replaced Roberto Firmino. Strength in depth, a clean sheet and a rampant team brushing aside a side in “best of the rest” territory before kick-off. It was a result and performance that blew away creeping suspicions about Liverpool losing their edge and composure just as the season enters its critical phase. It was a result and performance that told Manchester City they will be difficult to dislodge. And it was needed. Three draws in the previous four league games demanded a reaction, despite Klopp’s claim it is growing expectation that afflicts Liverpool, and another heavy defeat of Watford – who have lost here 5-0, 5-0 and 6-1 on their past three visits – was timed as perfectly as it was executed. Liverpool 3 Mar Everton (a)  10 Mar Burnley (h)  17 Mar Fulham (a)  31 Mar Tottenham (h)  6 Apr Southampton (a) 13 Apr Chelsea (h) 20 Apr Cardiff (a)  27 Apr Huddersfield (h) 4 May Newcastle (a)  12 May Wolves (h) Manchester City 2 Mar Bournemouth (a) 9 Mar Watford (h) 16 Mar Man Utd (a)30 Mar Fulham (a) 6 Apr Cardiff (h) 13 Apr Crystal Palace (a) 20 Apr Tottenham (h) 27 Apr Burnley (a) 4 May Leicester (h) 12 May Brighton (a) Tottenham 2 Mar Arsenal (h)  9 Mar Southampton (a)  17 Mar Crystal Palace (h)  31 Mar Liverpool (a)  6 Apr Brighton (h)  13 Apr Huddersfield (h)  20 Apr Man City (a)  27 Apr West Ham (h)  4 May Bournemouth (a)  12 May Everton (h) Klopp sowed doubt in Watford from the start by stationing Origi on the left and handing Mané opportunity to wreak havoc through the centre. It was an invitation he devoured. Other changes from Manchester United on Sunday, James Milner returning to midfield and Alexander-Arnold recalled at right-back, were also key in extending Liverpool’s unbeaten league run here to a commanding 35 games. Milner signalled the kind of night that lay in store for the visitors when he charged down an early clearance from Ben Foster. The Watford goalkeeper escaped on that occasion, the ball looping into the air and his embrace, but was convincingly beaten when a carefully constructed attack released Mané for the first time. He was involved at the start of the move with a lay-off to Milner on the edge of the area. By the time the ball arrived in the box via an immaculate first time cross from Alexander-Arnold, the Senegal international had peeled into space between Watford’s central defenders. Foster was left waving at thin air as Mané’s powerful header flew into the top corner. Quality deliveries from Alexander-Arnold were a feature of Liverpool’s first-half dominance as the defender showed his manager what was lacking at Old Trafford. Salah’s tormenting of Adam Masina and Craig Cathcart was another. Both played their part in a second goal of impudent class from Mané. A strong run from Salah was halted inside the area but Liverpool remained in possession through Georginio Wijnaldum. He teed up Alexander-Arnold for another precision cross into Mané whose first touch shifted the ball away from goal. No bother. He simply back-heeled his second touch up and over the advancing Foster and into an empty net. The gasp that preceded the roar around the ground said everything about the finish. Fear stalked the Watford defence each time Salah received the ball in space, a lesson they failed to heed from United’s approach at Old Trafford. The paucity of the visitors’ attacking display was summed up by Javi Gracia withdrawing both of his forwards, Troy Deeney and the erratic Gerard Deulofeu, in a double substitution. Inevitably, it was Liverpool who struck again when Origi capped a promising return to the starting line-up with a fine finish. Andy Robertson found the striker lurking unmarked on the left wing with Watford defending deep and in numbers. Undeterred, the Belgium international darted into the area and away from two defenders before cutting a low and emphatic shot back inside Foster’s near post. Van Dijk made it four when he powered home a close range header from Alexander-Arnold’s free-kick. He celebrated his second goal at Anfield with a fist-pumping celebration in front of the Kop and followed that up with a glancing header past Foster from Robertson’s cross three minutes later.