In the aftermath of France’s second-half implosion against Wales, there was an explosion of a lazy stereotype with “typically French” uttered loin et large across TV, radio and social media to explain away the team’s performance. Having spent the past 18 months working in French rugby such pigeonholing sits uncomfortably. Surely no one can have been referring to an inability of French sportsmen and women to deliver when it matters? The current French football world champions, who won the most competitive tournament in the world, might disagree they bottled it for a start. It does not apply in French rugby, either. The under-20s won the most recent Junior World Cup and their under-18s won the first Youth Olympics’ Sevens gold medal. The women’s XV side, meanwhile, are the grand slam champions. So where can we find the reasons behind what happened in Paris? Before jumping straight to other over-simplified answers such as a lack of concentration or confidence, it is important to unpick this properly. A lack of control, which became apparent during the second half, was rooted in a lack of consistency in their preparation. I don’t mean the fortnight before. It started to happen in 2004 after the Kolpak ruling that French clubs pounced on and the erosion has been left unattended until recently. The success of the French age group sides has shown that when the FFR has a good level of control over its players they compete with the best consistently. Now, this may sound disingenuous but take away the Irish central contract system and the English elite player squad agreement and you may begin to show some sympathy to the current crop of players and coaches playing for France where the clubs have held sway. It is not just that more than 40% of the Top 14 have been overseas players but that the key positions such as eight, nine, 10 and 12 have been stacked full of highly paid overseas talent. The best of the French have found it hard to break into those positions and the younger players have rarely made the matchday squads. At first the influx of overseas players had no impact on Les Bleus but this could not last. The consequence has been national teams with a lack of experience, skill sets and trusted combinations as well as reduced levels of conditioning. If anything else is needed to fire up France, the vocal criticism of the team by the French media this week will have done that At one point every Top 14 team were running their own version of fantasy football and talent ID was done with a chequebook. The structures being built in England around strength and conditioning, sports science and academies were not being replicated in France. Toulon were spending millions on players but their coaches were hatching plans in temporary buildings. Some overseas players such as Jonny Wilkinson added immense value; some of the others appeared to do just enough to get their retirement plans in order. I know of world-class players who, if they had picked up a man of the match award on the Saturday, wouldn’t rock up until midweek at the club and no one seemed to care. Eventually this affected the national team. Conditioning was lamentable and by the time players got into national camp with very little preparation time – the staff at the FFR felt they could only paper over the cracks – the players collectively didn’t have the foundations to cope with the intensity of workload required. Cue Bernard Laporte. His election as the president of the FFR in late 2016 was built around making the leagues French again. The quota of French qualified players is being increased each year and league points will be deducted if teams fail to comply. Stronger relationships are being formed with clubs, and the age group sides have an even greater onus on them. The national centre just south of Paris, Marcoussis, was nicknamed Marcatraz by the players as it felt remote and isolating. They have begun to address that with more fluid cycles of training, the use of GPS to allow players to do training sessions remotely, while having their data tracked, and scrapping the residential all‑year programme they had at under-19 age group and putting youngsters back into the clubs where they get more game time at “espoirs” level and build better relationships with the clubs. Marcoussis is a brilliant facility and one they now realise they don’t have to use 24/7 to get the best out of it. They have learned from their mistakes while creating a better pathway from club to country. France have the players, the resources and the know-how. Soon they will have the results, too. Where the youthful Romain Ntamack and Demba Bamba made their Six Nations debut last weekend, others such as Jordan Joseph, Cameron Woki and Pierre Louis Barrassi will soon follow. And while this Six Nations may come too soon for this French renaissance, they do love playing at Twickenham and if anything it will be a relief to play away at a stadium that has had more than the odd majestic French victory. They could cause more than a few problems if they can get the quick attacking ball they enjoyed in the first half against Wales with Louis Picamoles and Morgan Parra pulling the strings, and if England’s kicking game is not on the money then expect counterattack – the back three will not be afraid to have a crack. If anything else is needed to fire up France then the criticism by the French media this week will have done that, too. They have a few injury concerns but again – depending on how radical they want to be – selection could tilt towards youth and the beginnings of the team of tomorrow could yet be forged this Sunday in TW1. Change is in the air for France. • Ben Ryan coached Fiji to Olympic gold in the men’s Rugby Sevens at Rio 2016. He is now consultant to leading sports organisations, including the French Rugby Federation and UK Sport.