Chris Ashton has been recalled to the England starting line-up to face France in one of two changes made by Eddie Jones. Ashton comes on to the right wing in place of Jack Nowell for his first Six Nations start in six years while Courtney Lawes replaces the injured Maro Itoje in the second row. Ashton came off the bench in the closing stages of last week’s victory over Ireland but has been promoted for only his third start under Eddie Jones. He made his first appearance for four years during the autumn and scored his 20th international try in the first minute against New Zealand the following week. Nowell excelled in his roaming role against Ireland and can consider himself unfortunate to be relegated to the bench but Ashton’s try-scoring threat has ultimately won him the nod. He is also familiar with a number of the French side, having scored a record 24 tries in 23 appearances in the Top 14 for Toulon last season. This season he has eight tries in nine matches for Sale after a suspension ruled him out of the first seven weeks of the campaign. “The French are always an interesting side to play against,” Jones said. “They are full of talent, they have a lot of unpredictability so it’s hard to prepare tactically against them so we have had a real focus on ourselves. “We have gone for Chris Ashton on the wing; we think he might sneak us a try early in the game. Jack Nowell was brilliant against Ireland and he’ll play a significant role for us off the bench.” Lawes meanwhile, is rewarded for an impressive showing off the bench in Dublin, joining George Kruis in the second row while otherwise Jones sticks with the side that delivered arguably England’s best performance to date since he took charge. Joe Launchbury, who missed out on the match-day squad against Ireland, is on the bench, along with the props Dan Cole and Ben Moon, who have replaced Harry Williams and Ellis Genge respectively. There is no place for Brad Shields in the squad with Jones preferring the added bulk Nathan Hughes provides while Dan Robson, who is still awaiting his first cap having been the only member of the England squad to remain on the bench in Dublin, is again on the bench. “It is unfortunate Maro is injured but he has been rehabbing well so we are hopeful he will be back earlier than maybe first predicted,” Jones added. “We have got great depth in the squad so Joe Launchbury and Courtney Lawes will fill his shoes very well.” E Daly (Wasps); C Ashton (Sale), H Slade (Exeter), M Tuilagi (Leicester), J May (Leicester); O Farrell (Saracens, capt), B Youngs (Leicester); M Vunipola (Saracens), J George (Saracens), K Sinckler (Harlequins), C Lawes (Northampton), G Kruis (Saracens), M Wilson (Newcastle), T Curry (Sale), B Vunipola (Saracens). Replacements: L Cowan-Dickie (Exeter), B Moon (Exeter), D Cole (Leicester), J Launchbury (Wasps), N Hughes (Wasps), D Robson (Wasps), G Ford (Leicester), J Nowell (Exeter). Y Huget (Toulouse); D Penaud (Clermont Auvergne), M Bastareaud (Toulon), G Doumayrou (La Rochelle), G Fickou (Stade Français); C Lopez (Clermont Auvergne), M Parra (Clermont Auvergne); J Poirot (Bordeaux-Begles), G Guirado (Toulon, capt), D Bamba (Brive), S Vahaamahina (Clermont Auvergme), F Lambey (Lyon), Y Camara (Montpellier), A Iturria (Clermont Auvergne), L Picamoles (Montpellier). Replacements: P Bougarit (La Rochelle), D Priso (La Rochelle), D Aldegheri (Toulouse), P Willemse (Montpellier), G Alldritt (La Rochelle), A Dupont (Toulouse), R Ntamack (Toulouse), T Ramos (Toulouse).