Police fired tear gas on Saturday after clashes broke out among Venezuelans trying to cross the border into Colombia, which has been closed by President Nicolás Maduro to block shipments of aid organised by the opposition. There were already fears of violence. The opposition leader and self-declared interim president Juan Guaidó will try to cross into the country on Saturday, with thousands of volunteers carrying food and medical supplies. Venezuelan security forces have been ordered not to let them through. In a sign of the potential for violence, on Friday a military convoy headed for the southern border with Brazil opened fire on indigenous protesters trying to block its passage. One person was killed and 16 injured. The attack was a worrying sign of pressure on soldiers sent to close the border. Local officials said it was extremely rare for the Venezuelan military to open fire on indigenous people, and it was thought to be the first time it had happened in the Gran Sabana area. Protesters took four soldiers prisoner in the village where the shooting took place. In the border town of Santa Elena de Uairén, protesters overran the airport, disarming 30 soldiers and taking them hostage too. One of the soldiers captured in the village of Kamaracupay, Grecia del Valle Roque Castillo, released a tearful video in which she begged for forgiveness and called on Maduro and his defence minister not to order soldiers to open fire on civilians. When they take away your courage, they take away your freedom. If they shoot at us we will carry on The focus of opposition operations to bring aid into the country is the border with Colombia, where many volunteers slept overnight in the open, so they would be ready to attempt an early crossing. “You smell that morning air? That is the smell of freedom,” said Nancy Barreto, an activist from Portuguesa state who crossed on Friday to help shift aid. The operation was expected to start after Guaidó addressed crowds. Violence began early on the Venezuelan side of the border, when people queuing up to cross to Colombia for work – not linked to opposition plans to ship aid – were told the border had been closed, a decision announced late on Friday. “I didn’t know about the closure and only found out when I got here,” said Aurora Albarracin, 55. “I work there and was going to pick up my pay. We are frightened that what happened yesterday at the other border is going to happen here, with people killed and injured.” As crowds gathered, the confrontation with guards turned violent. Protesters threw stones and bottles and the security forces used tear gas. Opposition volunteers preparing on the other side of the bridge to confront the same guards said they would continue even if they were met by violence. “I’m not scared, because when they take away your courage, they take away your freedom. If they shoot at us we will carry on,” said Lizmar Vergara, 22, who also arrived on Friday. In a sign that security forces may be unhappy at being asked to keep aid out, early on Saturday Colombian migration authorities said three members of the national guard deserted their posts and sought help from Colombia. A video provided by Colombian authorities showed the men wading through a crowd with assault rifles and pistols held above their heads in a sign of surrender. The young soldiers were then ordered to lie face down on the ground as migration officials urged onlookers to keep a safe distance.