Axel Rüger, the German gallery director who has been in charge of Amsterdam’s Van Gogh museum for more than a decade, has been appointed as the new head of the Royal Academy of Arts. Rüger succeeds Charles Saumarez Smith as secretary and chief executive of an organisation that last year celebrated its 250th year by unveiling a £56m redevelopment. The appointment has been approved by the RA’s council, its general assembly and the Queen. Rüger, a former curator of Dutch paintings at the National Gallery, said it was a great honour. “Following the 250th anniversary and the RA’s recent expansion it feels like the Academy is now ready to embark on a new and exhilarating chapter in its rich history. “I am excited about the opportunity to join at this critical moment and to work to tell great stories through ambitious and varied exhibitions, innovative programmes and debate and, more generally, to make the RA, its activities and collections even more accessible to audiences from around the globe.” Rüger takes on a complex job that will requires considerable diplomatic skills managing the 80 Academicians, the artists and architects who are in charge. It receives no public money so needs to stage exhibitions that draw in the crowds. The painter Christopher Le Brun, the president of the RA, said the international reputation of the RA had never been higher. “Axel is the perfect fit. His success at the Van Gogh museum is highly acclaimed, and he is widely acknowledged as one of the leading directors of his generation. “His experience, both in the UK and abroad, makes him ideally suited to work alongside our distinguished Royal Academicians and staff in guiding the RA towards a highly promising future and I am very much looking forward to working with him.” Rüger, who speaks fluent English and Dutch, was born in Dortmund and studied art history in Berlin, Cambridge and Ontario. Known for being personable and down to earth, he makes regular appearances on TV and radio and is highly regarded in the art world. While at the National Gallery his exhibitions included the highly acclaimed Vermeer and the Delft School in 2001 and Masterpieces of Seventeenth Dutch Portrait Painting in 2007. At the Van Gogh museum, Rüger oversaw major renovations and anda full redisplay of the collection. During his tenure, visitor numbers grew from 1.4 million to about 2.2 million a year. He takes up his position in June.