England have never won a Test in Antigua and their 10th attempt to do so ended rapidly and ignominiously. They were defeated inside three days by 10 wickets. Once again Joe Root’s tourists have been thoroughly outplayed from start to finish. Here was a pale imitation of the 80s and 90s except for the fact that the accepted wisdom before the series was that England were the favourites to win it. Now, with a match to go, Jason Holder’s side are already in proud possession of the Wisden Trophy and how they deserve it. West Indies’ first-innings lead of 119 was more than enough to stay in charge of the game. Where the West Indian batsmen gritted their teeth and grafted, the English ones, disconcerted by a spicy pitch and a disciplined attack, found a variety of ways to be dismissed. Most of the home batsmen had to be bowled out, most of the visitors surrendered to blameless deliveries. Half-volleys were missed, straight balls shunned and of the batsmen only Joe Root was the recipient of a devilish delivery upon dismissal. Not that the pitch was sleeping. There was still movement for the pacemen on a surface that reflected West Indies’ ambition in this series. There have been some torpid tracks in the recent past here but not on this tour. West Indies were prepared to take on England on lively pitches, confident that their batsmen and bowlers could match the tourists at their own game. And so they have, no matter that England’s opening bowlers share 1,008 wickets between them or that their batsmen are supposed to be accustomed to the moving ball. Once again those batsmen were swept away after England had dispatched the last four West Indies players for 34 runs in the morning. The last man out was Darren Bravo, the solitary West Indian to reach 50 in an innings that exemplified a determination to grind out precious, ugly runs in a manner that was beyond this England lineup. When stumped off Moeen Ali, Bravo had been at the crease for 331 minutes and had recorded the slowest ever half-century by a West Indian and the slowest by any Test cricketer since Mahela Jayawardene against New Zealand in 1998. Here was an example of how an innings of purposeful defence could have a major influence on the outcome of a Test match. England’s response was typically harum-scarum. Joe Denly thought his innings was all over before he had scored. And so did everyone else. He tried to pull a short delivery from Shannon Gabriel but he was never in control of the shot. The mis-hit sent the ball slowly in the direction of Kraigg Brathwaite at long leg, the most reliable batsman in the West Indian team, but maybe not the most reliable fielder. Denly was aghast and stopped in the middle of the pitch, preparing for his doleful return to the pavilion. But the wind has been swirling all game; Brathwaite now found himself in a poor position; suddenly he had to dive and the ball escaped his grasp. Denly had been watching and before scurrying down the pitch to register his first run he collided with the bowler, who was now the man aghast. The supreme English optimist might have been tempted to see this aberration as the trigger for a long-awaited turning of the tide. But that would have been wishful thinking. The wickets soon tumbled anyway. After his reprieve Denly delivered a princely square cut and cover drive but it was not long before he watched three batsmen head off disconsolately towards the pavilion. Both Rory Burns and Jonny Bairstow fell to Jason Holder, the slowest of the West Indian quartet but the canniest. Burns had been busy, clipping the ball off his legs adeptly but he offered insufficient respect to Holder’s first delivery. It possessed no demons but it was too close to the body for the cut shot. So he ended up guiding the ball, rather like Trevor Bayliss does in those early morning catching routines, straight into the hands of John Campbell at third slip. It was another cheap dismissal, which had not been a characteristic of the West Indies innings. Out came Bairstow, bristling. He struck two boundaries but there was no air of permanence. His dismissal mirrored that of his first innings. A full-length delivery invited the drive, but aiming to the leg side Bairstow played around the ball and the stumps were disturbed. Now England were 49 for two and the climb back into the game was ever steeper. Root’s first scoring shot, a leg-glance, just eluded the gloves of Shane Dowrich before speeding to the boundary. Then came another masterstroke from Holder in the form of a review. He spotted an inside edge on to the thigh better than the umpire Christopher Gaffaney and the England captain was gone, caught by the keeper, off Alzarri Joseph. The bowler had not bothered to appeal, which was hardly surprising since he was still reeling from the death of his mother, Sharon, overnight. Yet he had chosen to seek solace in the warmth of the West Indies’ dressing room. Then Denly’s second Test innings adventure was over. Once again Joseph was the bowler but the batsman was the culprit. Denly shouldered arms and the ball clattered into his off-stump – 59 for four and the ship was sinking. Ben Stokes and Moeen Ali were bowled driving at Kemar Roach without due care and attention and the tail could not wag. Jos Buttler’s 24 was the highest score, which was more than Keaton Jennings’ 17 in the first innings in Barbados. However, no other improvements have been discernible here in Antigua.