Labour has suspended the MP Chris Williamson after he was filmed saying the party had been “too apologetic” about antisemitism. The decision by the general secretary, Jenny Formby, overturned an earlier announcement that Williamson would be allowed to keep the party whip while a “pattern of behaviour” was investigated. A Labour spokesperson said: “Chris Williamson is suspended from the party, and therefore the whip, pending investigation.” Formby and Jeremy Corbyn came under intense pressure throughout Wednesday to take tougher action than allowing him to remain a Labour member while a series of complaints against him were considered. The suspension came after 38 Labour MPs from the soft left Tribune group, including several frontbenchers, signed a letter to Formby calling for his immediate suspension. We must set the highest standards for ourselves on issues of racism, sexism and bullying if we are to be seen as a party that can lead on behalf of all sections of our communities. pic.twitter.com/zGMINqSqE3 Corbyn’s deputy, Tom Watson, had earlier criticised Williamson’s “long-winded and heavily caveated” apology, and said “if it was in my gift” the whip would already have been removed. Williamson issued a statement on Wednesday morning after he was filmed saying Labour had been “too apologetic” about complaints of antisemitism. In the footage, first revealed by the Yorkshire Post, Williamson was cheered by activists in Sheffield as he said: “I’ve got to say, I think our party’s response has been partly responsible … Because, in my opinion, we’ve backed off far too much, we’ve given too much ground, we’ve been too apologetic.” Williamson was also facing complaints about having booked a room in parliament to screen a controversial film about Jackie Walker, an activist suspended from the party. In his statement, Williamson said, it “pains me greatly … that anyone should believe that it is my intention to minimise the cancerous and pernicious nature of antisemitism … I deeply regret, and apologise for, my recent choice of words when speaking about how the Labour party has responded to the ongoing fight against antisemitism inside of our party. I was trying to stress how much the party has done to tackle antisemitism.”