The reigning Super League Man of Steel, Ben Barba, has been sacked by North Queensland for a breach of his NRL playing contract without playing a single game for the club. The 29-year-old was involved in an incident at a Townsville casino, according to a report on Nine news aired on Friday evening. North Queensland informed the NRL of the situation on Friday, and promptly tore up Barba‘s contract before the end of the day. “When a player joins the North Queensland Cowboys he agrees to abide by the terms of the contract,” said club chairman Laurence Lancini. “After an internal investigation, it has been determined that this player has acted in contradiction to both the terms and the spirit of that agreement. Accordingly, the club has terminated his contract and has informed the NRL’s integrity unit.” The development comes on the same day Australia league legend Laurie Daley backed Barba to make the most of his lifeline after his Indigenous All Stars selection. He was meant to mark his return in the All Stars game in two weeks, however the career of the former Dally M medallist looks dead in the water. Barely a month after helping Cronulla to their maiden premiership in 2016, Barba left the NRL in disgrace after being suspended for testing positive for cocaine. But, after failing in a rugby union stint in France, he found a new lease of life in the Super League, where the claimed the Man of Steel award at St Helens. And his reformation looked to have resulted in an anticipated return in the NRL, only to again find himself in trouble without playing a single minute. Speaking before Barba’s sacking on Friday, Daley backed Barba‘s NRL comeback. “He’s played well over there in the English Super League and, by all reports, he’s training the house down up there in North Queensland,” Daley said. “It’s a big game for a lot of people and also Benny because he can come back and put the stuff that happened to him behind him and pull on the shirt and represent his family and his culture. ‘And show that if you do make a mistake, there’s always a chance to bounce back.” Meanwhile, the Newcastle Knights coach Scott Dureau is undergoing chemotherapy for the return of his cancer. Dureau, now 32, had surgery during his time with Catlalans Dragons in 2014 to remove a brain tumour but has revealed it has now returned. “I had surgery and was given the all-clear but, unfortunately, it has spread to my liver which is why I’m having chemotherapy at the moment,” said Dureau in a statement posted on the Newcastle Knights website.