Twenty years after Sir William Macpherson was picked to lead the public inquiry into Stephen Lawrence’s murder and the allegedly corrupt police investigation that followed, Grenfell Tower went up in flames. In his final report, published in February 1999, Macpherson would go on to label the police response to the teenager’s killing “institutionally racist”, a term that captured so well the unwitting prejudice and plain racial stereotyping afflicting parts of British society. The phrase became a lodestar for anti-racism and equality reforms launched in an effort to move the country on from sporadic race riots, racist violence and everyday prejudice of the “no blacks, no dogs, no Irish” variety. There were murmurs Britain was becoming a post-racial society. Then last September came a discordant clang. A lawyer for some Grenfell families said the public inquiry must ask if the 72 deaths were “a product of institutional racism”. At least 34 victims were nationals of African, Middle Eastern or Asian countries. Imran Khan, who represented the Lawrence family to Macpherson, now wanted to know if, 20 years on, unwitting actions had delivered a racist outcome and if institutional racism had affected the way firefighters behaved. The phrase, once described as “incendiary” by Trevor Philips, the former chair of the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC), was back. It was an offensive slur, said firefighters, who had shown bravery, saved lives and witnessed horrors. But it had to be asked because the demise of institutional racism cannot be assumed even though it has fallen out of favour in preference to the softer language of “unconscious bias”. It was clear when the former Labour MP, Angela Smith, this week described ethnicity as “a funny tinge”, even people you would expect to show confidence on the matter still struggle to talk about race. Macpherson defined institutional racism as “the collective failure of an organisation to provide an appropriate and professional service to people because of their colour, culture or ethnic origin”. It is seen in “processes, attitudes and behaviour which amount to discrimination through unwitting prejudice, ignorance, thoughtlessness and racist stereotyping which disadvantages minority ethnic people”. Two decades on, statistics collated in the government’s race disparity audit – one sign of progress itself perhaps – tell part of the story. The number of black and Caribbean pupils achieving 5 A*-C GCSE grades including maths and English increased from 34% in 2006 to nearly 49% in 2012, a larger rise than for white British pupils. The number of minority ethnic students at top universities rose from 9% in 1995 to 18% in 2017. But gulfs remain. In 2016-17, 3.6% of black Caribbean A-level students got three top grades or better compared with 11.2% of whites. Only one black British student was admitted to Corpus Christi College, Oxford in 2015, 2016 and 2017 collectively. More mixed race people than white people were victims of crime last year; white offenders were given the shortest custodial sentences from 2009 to 2017 and black people are detained under the Mental Health Act four times more often than white people. All ethnic groups have a higher proportion of people living in overcrowded homes than white British people (2%), with the most overcrowded being among Bangladeshis (30%). Home ownership remains far higher for whites than ethnic minorities, who are also twice as likely to be unemployed. There are some upsides. Black people are more likely to have cancer diagnosed earlier, are more likely to be involved in local decision-making and ethnic minorities are more likely to use the internet. The first minority ethnic mayors have been elected in London and Bristol and Sajid Javid has become the first minority ethnic home secretary. Nevertheless, Stephen Lawrence’s mother, Doreen, said this month progress reforming institutions was “stagnant”. “As time moved on, it’s as though they changed the word from ‘racism’ to diversity, and then ‘diversity doesn’t exist any more’,” Lady Lawrence told MPs. On the 10th anniversary of the Macpherson report, Philips had said it was no longer true to describe the police as institutionally racist – citing Merseyside police’s handling of the investigation into the racist murder of another black teenager Anthony Walker in 2005. But last month, Lawrence said some police officers still were. What is certainly true is that none of the forces operating in England and Wales reflect the population they serve. Fourteen percent of the population is non-white, compared with 6.6% of the police forces. In London, where the minority population is 40%, only 14% of officers are from that group. Dr Pete Jones, a psychologist who has run more than 2,000 implicit bias tests for police forces, found almost a fifth of officers and police staff tested since 2009 have an ethnicity bias strong enough to impact their behaviour. So perhaps it is no surprise that last week the EH RC warned of “persistent racial inequalities” in stop and search, traffic stops, use of force and deaths during and after police contact. Twelve percent of incidents when police use force against people involve black people, despite them only making up 3.3% of the population and race hate crimes were up 14% in the year to 2017/18 (though police reporting improvements are likely to be a factor). Omar Khan, the director of the Runnymede Trust, a race equality thinktank, also highlights the recently emboldened far right, Labour’s response to antisemitism in the party and the disproportionate effect of welfare cuts on minorities as evidence of continued problems. “There has been a lack of recognition over the last 20 years about how far behind we have been,” he said. “We still tiptoe around racism. It makes most people uncomfortable talking about it today.” Nevertheless, Matthew Ryder QC, until recently London’s deputy mayor for integration, believes the change Macpherson has wrought on society is “so significant we have almost forgotten what it was like before”. “The notion that there was a structural component to racism that is more impactful than personal animus or hostility is now well established,” he said. “That was almost a completely alien concept before the Stephen Lawrence inquiry happened. “The current settlement between ethnic minorities and society as a whole in modern Britain, and the way we articulate and understand the nature of racism, has been largely set by the Stephen Lawrence inquiry.” He said it empowered black people to hold institutions to account for racism but said there were signs of backsliding in some “stubborn” areas, for example in the calls for more stop and search to tackle knife crime. Some black youth do believe it is a suitable deterrent, it happens less frequently than at any time since the turn of the millennium and is more likely to result in arrest. But black people are more than eight times more likely to be stopped than whites, and the disparity is rising, increasing criticism that it is a tool of racial discrimination and may even be counter-productive. Kalwant Bhopal, a Birmingham University professor of education and social justice and author of White privilege: the myth of a post-racial society, said that since Macpherson the race equality agenda has been “pushed into insignificance”. “If the Race Relations Amendment Act (2000) and Macpherson were effective why is it that if you are a black student you are less likely to leave university with a 2:1 or a first, less likely to attend an elite university and are more likely to be unemployed six months after graduation?” she said. In 2019, Bhopal believes “white privilege” still dominates society with policy makers, employers and others in power only advancing racial justice if it supports their own interests. They create “a smokescreen of conformity” with race equality agendas, she said, concluding: “We seem to be going round in circles”.