It will not be easy for Millwall to balance their priorities after reaching yet another FA Cup quarter‑final. Neil Harris always treats the competition with maximum respect and Millwall’s manager was a proud man after watching his team cruise to a professional 1-0 win over AFC Wimbledon at Kingsmeadow – but the south London side cannot afford to let their impressive Cup run affect their league form. Millwall are two points above the Championship’s bottom three and the challenge for Harris will be making sure his players are in the right frame of mind for Wednesday’s league game at Derby. That said, these are exciting times and Harris did grant himself the indulgence of thinking about the quarter-final draw. “We will avoid Man City if we can,” he said. “To be at the Den, 20,000 of our fans to see a Cup quarter, is what I want.” Jacob Steinberg With every match the £14m or thereabouts that Brighton spent last summer on Yves Bissouma looks shrewder. The 22-year-old Mali midfielder, signed from Lille, was the best player on the pitch as he helped Chris Hughton’s team dispose of Derby on Saturday and advance to the FA Cup quarter‑finals. His delicate touches and strong, skilful running gives Brighton a dimension that should also help them climb out of trouble in the Premier League. “He brings something different to our midfield,” said Hughton. “It’s about developing him in the system we want to play – whether with two in midfield or three – but he’s learning all the time. For somebody of that type and ability it will always be about consistency but he’s learning all the time. He’s got the makings of a very talented player for us.” Paul Doyle He won’t admit it in public but Frank Lampard probably won’t cry himself to sleep over Derby’s FA Cup defeat. Thanks to their progression in the EFL Cup and a replay in the last round of this competition, they have already played more games than any of their Championship rivals. Their tally is now up to 39 and will be at least 54 by the end of the season – and that’s without factoring in the possibility of play-offs. Another cup tie would have only increased stress on a squad containing just two centre-backs to tide them over until the summer. Lampard’s priority is promotion and, given their most likely path to that is through the play-offs, he needs his squad as fresh as they can be for the physically and emotionally draining trials ahead. Nick Miller While Dan James was illuminating the Liberty Stadium with his exhilarating performance against Brentford, it was tempting to wonder what was going through the mind of Marcelo Bielsa, the Leeds manager, and everyone else at Elland Road. James, after all, had been on the verge of joining Leeds on deadline day, when Swansea initially agreed to allow the 21‑year‑old to move on loan with a view to a permanent deal. Swansea, with not everyone at the club singing from the same hymn sheet, pulled the plug on that transfer at the last minute, after realising the terms were stacked heavily – some would say ridiculously – in favour of Leeds. Realistically James is unlikely to be at Swansea next season but it is no longer a foregone conclusion he ends up at Leeds, with plenty of other clubs sure to be joining the race to sign him. Stuart James Doncaster Rovers are in the final League One play-off berth, only a point above Peterborough in seventh, but their showing against Crystal Palace should encourage them to believe they can finish in the top six. In James Coppinger’s experience out wide, John Marquis’s muscular presence up front – 22 goals in all competitions so far – a drilled midfield and defence, and Grant McCann’s managerial smarts, Rovers have a package that impressed against Roy Hodgson’s battle-hardened side. “We like to get about teams, that’s how we approach it, but we were not going to leave anything in the changing room and we gave it a go,” said McCann. “We’ll quickly forget about this game – it was a bonus. We’re trying to build something for the future, trying to get out of this league.” Before Sunday Rovers had lost only once since late December. “We’ve been on a very good run,” McCann added. “The league’s most important for us.” It will be some surprise if Rovers are not contesting a promotion place by the end of the season. Jamie Jackson Who says the FA Cup is dead? Anyone who has spent a bit of time in and around Newport recently will tell you that the competition is alive and kicking. Newport’s fairytale is over but the memories of their terrific run to the fifth round – the first time they have reached that stage in 70 years – will last a lifetime. Pádraig Amond, whose goal against Manchester City maintained his record of scoring in every round, talked afterwards about inspiring a new generation of supporters – “You have kids wanting to play for Newport County and maybe before that they wanted to play for Cardiff, Bristol [City or Rovers], Swansea” – while Michael Flynn, the League Two side’s manager, said the financial benefits would be huge for a club that has an annual turnover of just £2.2m. Maybe the Premier League is not the be-all and end‑all, after all. SJ Pep Guardiola is frantically searching for a player to relieve the burden on Fernandinho, as the Brazilian is the only member of the Manchester City squad who can operate in defensive midfield with any consistency. Fernandinho’s fitness, intelligence and willingness to commit a foul when required allow his teammates to roam about the pitch, knowing they can rely on the former Shakhtar Donetsk man to mop up danger. His importance is regularly made clear in the Premier League and Champions League but on the mud of Rodney Parade it was equally crucial against a physical Newport County team desperately wanting to unsettle their illustrious opponents. Fernandinho was key in ensuring that did not happen but City need to split his workload if they are to compete on all four fronts. Will Unwin Are there two more improved players in the country than Conor Coady and Matt Doherty? The pair were instrumental in Wolves’ win at Bristol City, a trademark Coady diagonal to his teammate Doherty starting the move that brought the winner, and they embody the care Nuno Espírito Santo has taken in moulding a team that can do both the dirty and more glamorous stuff with relish. “Credit to them, they have the most years at the club,” the Wolves manager said. “They know what Wolves have been through and are now in a good moment. Seventy percent of our squad is the same [as the one that went up]. I truly believe good teams are built around the same people.” Not every manager has taken that approach with less-celebrated professionals when handed a Premier League chequebook but centre-back Coady and right wing-back Doherty have been given the platform to develop rapidly; Nuno’s emphasis on continuity, which has seen both commit their futures until 2023, is serving Wolves superbly. Nick Ames Bristol City showed in last season’s EFL Cup that they are an enterprising and talented team, beating Watford, Stoke, Crystal Palace and Manchester United before losing narrowly to Manchester City. But in the Championship they fell from second at Christmas to 11th at the end of the season. This time around, Lee Johnson’s side lie sixth with a game or two in hand on all the teams above them. So automatic promotion remains in reach. Against Wolves, City played nicely before the break and properly after it; if they can replicate that intensity of that second period over the next three months, they have an excellent chance of promotion to the Premier League. Daniel Harris Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Queens Park Rangers had the chances to beat Watford on Friday night. Instead, they missed them and lost. “We were so close but not close enough,” said Steve McClaren. “That sums us up of late.” A long‑suffering Rs fan put it more strongly. “That sums up my QPR‑supporting lifetime,” he said. QPR were in the position to fail because of Luke Freeman, the 26-year-old midfielder who created a clutch of first-half openings. His touch and vision were eye‑catching. In 2007 at 15 years and 223 days old, Freeman became the youngest player to appear in the FA Cup – coming on for Gillingham against Barnet – and it led to a move to Arsenal, although that ended in frustration. The suitors circled last summer, with Middlesbrough particularly keen. Many more performances like this and he will be in demand again. David Hytner