Jofra Archer will qualify to play for England on 17 March but Mark Wood, while acknowledging the Barbados-born fast bowler represents a threat to his own World Cup spot, claims not to be losing any sleep over it at present. Wood was the pick of England’s attack on Friday as they suffered their first one-day international defeat to West Indies in four years, a thrilling 26-run win for the hosts at a teeming Kensington Oval that left the five-match series locked at 1-1 heading to Grenada. Figures of one for 38 from 10 overs scarcely did justice to the 29-year-old’s performance, following up a hostile opening burst that hit 93.9mph on the speedgun with a skilful display of reverse swing with the old ball that kept West Indies to 289 for six. That no England batsman could see the chase through to the end, as the stylish Shimron Hetmyer had done earlier for West Indies with an unbeaten 104 from 83 balls, was chiefly to blame; in the field, Eoin Morgan’s side were impressive. Wood may have shone here but is mindful his wickets column is too sparse. His 37 one-day caps have returned 35 victims and, with England having made contact with the much-hyped Archer in advance of his qualification, the Durham man wants more. “I am clear on my role but at the same time I don’t think I have fulfilled it as I would like to,” Wood said. “My wickets-to-game ratio is still down so I’d like to improve that. “Joe Root keeps saying little things to us, like: ‘Don’t worry the wickets will come, right now you’re getting wickets for other people.’ I think trying to help people at the other end and creating pressure for others is what I’ve done well over the past couple of games.” On Archer, whose star has risen in Twenty20 cricket but remains relatively untested in the 50-over format, Wood added: “I am one of the guys under threat but I wouldn’t say that night and day I’m up worried about Archer’s role. It is not really talked about in the dressing room. I’d be stupid to think that if I didn’t put in the hard yards that my place wouldn’t be up for grabs, because he bowls quick as well.” Morgan was asked after the defeat whether Wood’s performance had cemented his place but the captain appears to be keen on some creative tension, simply insisting “there is a lot of cricket to be played” before the provisional World Cup squad is submitted on 23 April, even if, in reality, this is the remaining three one‑dayers of this tour. Chris Woakes, though too modest to call himself England’s one-day attack leader, is a proven wicket-taker at both ends of the innings but sat out Friday’s match as he continues to manage a chronic knee problem. This need for this immediate rest after playing 48 hours earlier could raise alarm bells going into a World Cup that features nine group games. But Morgan said: “He could have played but his risk of being injured would have been high. We’re not pushing him to play two games in three days because down the line we won’t be playing two in three days – the World Cup is a different kettle of fish.” A similar quick turnaround takes place next week with matches on Monday and Wednesday at the coastal national stadium in Grenada, before which Morgan has ordered his players to come up with solutions for the threat of Sheldon Cottrell. The left-arm quick, a private in the Jamaican defence force who celebrates his victims with a military salute, broke into the West Indies squad after Shannon Gabriel’s ban and a back injury to Kemar Roach, but dismissed five batsmen on Friday. Morgan, removed by Cottrell for 70, said: “It was my first time facing him and the same for others. We spoke about him before the game, hopefully we’ll get better as the series progresses. Left-arm swing bowlers don’t come along too often. It’s good prep for us.”