People make the journey to Maidenhead for different reasons. Fiction offers contrasting examples. George Harvey Bone, the tortured soul at the heart of Patrick Hamilton’s novel Hangover Square, reached the town just after war broke out in 1939, after walking all the way from Earl’s Court and the bodies of the couple he’d killed the previous morning. To him, the word Maidenhead meant past innocence and future salvation. He imagined he would find “peace, the river, an inn, a quiet glass of beer, and safety, utter safety …” Ascoyne d’Ascoyne in the film Kind Hearts and Coronets, on the other hand, went there for something livelier: to spend a weekend with his mistress at a Thames-side hotel, which was the fashion among the louche and wealthy in the Edwardian days when Maidenhead’s reputation came second only to Brighton’s as the raciest town in England. Both men promptly died there – Bone by sticking his head over a gas ring, D’Ascoyne when his punt tipped over a weir (no accident). The visitor to Maidenhead can walk down to the riverside and see the spot where the episode in that most perfect of Ealing comedies was shot. In life, it was the old Guards Club, where the officers from the brigade’s barracks at Pirbright and Windsor would come to dance, swim and row, and befriend the chorus girls who lived across the river in the so-called Gaiety houses that took their name from the London music hall. In the film, the club grounds become a hotel garden where Alec Guinness as the arrogant D’Ascoyne is solicitously pouring champagne for his lover – unaware that life, like a weekend, is short. I sat on a bench there on Wednesday and looked at the rowers slicing through the current. This was the pleasant side of Maidenhead: black-and-white, neo-Jacobean villas with cupolas and turrets; boathouses; willows. Upstream lay Cookham and Marlow and downstream Bray and Windsor – placenames associated with monarchs, Michelin-starred restaurants and popular entertainers who are variously dead or alive or released on licence: Diana Dors, Ernie Wise, Michael Parkinson, Rolf Harris. The comic novelist John O’Farrell, who grew up in Maidenhead (and in 2001 stood as the constituency’s Labour candidate), once characterised this stretch of the Thames Valley as “Tory since the Bronze Age”, a corner of Middle England with inhabitants who “somehow give the impression of having been nouveau riche for 10 successive generations”. That may be accurate so far as it goes, but it misses Maidenhead’s position at the centre of English life. From a riverside bench in Maidenhead you can see plane after plane climb into the air from Heathrow, and new Japanese trains whiz to and from Paddington over Brunel’s bridge – the same bridge that Turner painted in Rain, Steam and Speed. And since 2016, to complete this overcrowded picture of England in miniature, past and present, Maidenhead’s MP has also been the UK’s prime minister. The town, as opposed to its almost-suburb on the riverbank, is rather ugly. It grew up around the railway station in the 19th century and has been badly knocked about by property developers over the past 60 years, so that its centre holds chastening examples of every architectural fashion since the 1950s. A few remnants of an earlier time persist. A plaque at the little stadium of Maidenhead United FC, for example, records that it first saw a football match on 16 February 1871, making it the world’s “oldest senior football ground continuously used by the same club”. An isolated terrace of tall houses in brown Victorian brick awaits demolition nearby, its corner pub closed and every window boarded. These were homes for a working class in the small towns of southern England that popular history tends to forget. Theresa May’s parents came from this class. According to Rosa Prince’s biography of May, both of her grandmothers were domestic servants; a great-grandfather was a butler; other ancestors included carpenters, dressmakers and soldiers of no rank higher than sergeant major. By the early years of the last century, most of them had left rural cottages in Surrey and Devon for workaday homes near London. Her mother grew up in a terrace house in Reading with an outside lavatory at the back and a view of tram tracks from the front. It was her father’s occupation as vicar that gave the family a different view of themselves or who they might become. May won Maidenhead for the first time in 1997 and since then has increased her share of the vote from roughly half to roughly two-thirds. She seems well liked. People speak admiringly of the time she gives to her constituency “when she has all this other stuff to worry about”. They like her sense of duty, but then she likes that about herself too: “I grew up the daughter of a local vicar and the granddaughter of a regimental sergeant major. Public service has been part of who I am for as long as I can remember.” The chair of the town’s Conservative Association, Councillor Richard Kellaway, voted remain partly for the interesting reason that in his work as an oil industry consultant he had always found Brussels easier to deal with than Whitehall. When I asked him if Brexit had caused divisions in the local party, he said that “by and large” it stood right behind her: there had been “no ferment”. He was a friendly, steady kind of man; as was Pat McDonald, parish councillor and Labour candidate at the last general election. Maidenhead has problems. McDonald in particular stressed the damage that has been caused by the Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead sacking two-thirds of its staff. But mainly they are problems caused by prosperity: the difficulty of finding room to build new houses when 83% of local land is defined as green belt and another 7%as floodplain; the worry that the new trains for Crossrail won’t have lavatories, although Maidenhead to Tottenham Court Road might take an hour; the fear that trains to London every 10 minutes will finally abolish any claim Maidenhead has to a separate identity. The fact is that nothing very bad has happened in Maidenhead, outside the exercise of personal appetites. The place to satisfy them used to be Skindles, a riverside hotel that began life as a coaching inn and later became notorious as a leading home counties venue for adultery. It was demolished in 2015 and replaced by expensive houses and a brasserie, Roux at Skindles – where for lunch, in a vague attempt to revive the Edwardian spirit, I decided to have a bowl of fish soup and a glass of the house champagne. They came. I ate. “If we don’t like the chablis we’ll just throw it away,” said an animated, silver-haired man to a waiter at an adjacent table, sounding as if he owned the place, which he did. Reviving the Edwardian spirit even further, I had my card delivered to his table with a note. “Dear M Roux, I wonder if you could spare two minutes for …” He came over, which was good of him. I wanted to ask where he stood on Brexit. “My opinion changes every five minutes,” he said, “but whatever we do, deal or no deal, in five years we’ll be laughing.” It was reassuring. Look out in 2024 for those Roux branches opening in Sunderland and Stoke. • Ian Jack is a Guardian columnist