Shannon Gabriel has been charged under the International Cricket Council’s code of conduct following the verbal exchange with Joe Root that prompted the England captain to tell him: “There’s nothing wrong with being gay.” Root’s rebuke was picked up by the stump microphones during a heated exchange between the pair on day three of the third Test between West Indies and England, although audio of what Gabriel said to prompt this has not surfaced. Following 24 hours of deliberation, the umpires Kumar Dharmasena and Rod Tucker have charged Gabriel under article 2.13 of the code of conduct that covers “language of a personal, insulting, obscene and/or offensive nature”. The 30-year-old will discover on Wednesday if any sanction will follow following a hearing with Jeff Crowe, the ICC match referee on duty. Gabriel already has three demerit points on his record and, if found guilty, could face a suspension of up to two Tests or four one-day internationals, as well as a fine. Dharmasena and Tucker had warned Gabriel about his language on the field after the incident. Speaking after play that evening, Root suggested Gabriel had said something he “might regret” but declined to elaborate on the details. The issue originally came to light via footage that circulated on social media. Sky, who take the world feed from host broadcasters Sony, then published a fresh clip of the incident the following morning without the commentators speaking over the top, thus making the audio from the middle much clearer. In this Root is heard saying: “Don’t use it as an insult,” to which Gabriel replies: “What was that?” Root then says: “Don’t use it as an insult. There’s nothing wrong with being gay.” With the original flashpoint for this exchange again absent, it will come down to what the umpires heard in the middle. Root, who has been widely praised for his response on the field, had not wanted the issue to go further, with the series – one which the hosts won 2-1 following a consolation victory for the tourists in St Lucia – played out in a tough but amicable spirit. The pair shook hands at the end of play. However Dave Richardson, the ICC chief executive, has looked to increase the policing of on-field behaviour of late following the acrimonious South Africa versus Australia Test series last March that eventually erupted in Cape Town when the tourists were caught ball-tampering. Sarfraz Ahmed, the Pakistan captain, was given with a four-match ban under the ICC’s anti-racism code last month after stump microphones picked up a racist remark to South Africa’s Andile Phehlukwayo during a one-day international in Pretoria.