When Richard Freeman, the former Team Sky and British Cycling doctor, walks into the St James’s Building in Manchester to face a medical tribunal on Wednesday he knows his career will be on the line. And so, in a way, will be the reputations of the organisations he worked for. For Freeman’s case, brought by the General Medical Council, centres on claims he ordered banned testosterone for an unnamed rider in 2011 – and then tried to cover his tracks. The 57-year-old, who denies any wrongdoing, is also alleged to have lied to the UK Anti-Doping Agency, provided inappropriate treatment to non-riding staff and kept haphazard records. Freeman worked for Team Sky and British Cycling between 2009 and 2017. The stakes are high and, with several former members of Team Sky and British Cycling expected to give evidence, there is hope some light will be shone on one of the more curious incidents in British sport in recent years. Freeman is alleged to have ordered 30 sachets of Testogel, which is on the World Anti-Doping Agency’s prohibited list, in May 2011 to be sent to the Manchester velodrome to “administer to an athlete to improve their athletic performance” – and then lied about it. Freeman is accused of first lying to other members of British Cycling about ordering the drug, saying it was a mistake by the Oldham-based supplier Fit4Sport. Then, five months later in October 2011, he is alleged to have asked Fit4Sport “for written confirmation the testosterone had been sent in error, returned and would be destroyed, knowing this had not taken place”. It is claimed he then showed the email he sent to others knowing it to be “untrue”. Yes. When questioned by UK Anti-Doping in February 2017 Freeman said he had ordered Testogel for a non-athlete member of staff but returned it. However it is alleged he “made untrue statements” to Ukad when he made these claims and that his conduct was “dishonest”. No, reportedly because of doctor-patient confidentiality. Yes. In March 2017 Dr Steve Peters, who was then Team Sky’s medical director, told the Sunday Times he had been with a colleague when the order arrived and it was “immediately brought to our attention”. He added: “Dr Freeman, who was responsible for ordering medical supplies, explained the order had never been placed and so must have been sent in error. He contacted the supplier by phone the same day and they confirmed this. I asked Dr Freeman to repack and return it to the supplier, and to make sure they provided written confirmation that it was sent in error and had been received. That confirmation arrived and was shown to me by Dr Freeman. I was satisfied this was simply an administrative error and it wasn’t necessary to escalate it further, and so Dave Brailsford [BC performance director] was not made aware.” Freeman is also accused of having acted inappropriately by treating medical staff who were not riders. Brailsford, now the head of Team Sky, has confirmed he was injected with the corticosteroid triamcinolone by Freeman to treat acute swelling in his knee. Keith Lambert, a British Cycling academy coach, has also said he was injected with triamcinolone by Freeman to treat arthritis in his hand. Yes. Freeman’s haphazard medical record-keeping, which was criticised by Ukad when it looked into a separate case regarding a bag delivered to Bradley Wiggins at the Critérium du Dauphiné in 2011, will also be investigated. The tribunal will also look into allegations Freeman failed to ensure records stored on a laptop stolen in 2014 could be retrieved. Freeman’s case, which could run until 6 March, will be heard by three tribunal members. It will begin with the case against Freeman being set out by the GMC either on Wednesday afternoon or Thursday morning, while Freeman will start his defence after the GMC has finished interviewing all their witnesses. A list of witnesses has not yet been released but Peters and British Cycling’s former technical director Shane Sutton are among those expected to give evidence. Freeman is also expected to testify, although there are concerns he may not attend given he cited a stress-related illness for not giving evidence to a parliamentary select committee that tried to ascertain the contents of the bag delivered to Wiggins. If the charges against Freeman are upheld he is likely to be struck off. If fresh evidence emerges about who received the testosterone it could also lead to UK Anti-Doping, who will attend the tribunal as keen observers, beginning a fresh investigation.