Judging by its wiry, dun-coloured fur, its ears and snout, the dog was perhaps an airedale, lying side-on and close up to the camera. But identification was difficult because most of its body had been skinned and it seemed in the process of being barbecued whole. The arresting image was the title-screen still from a video about the protest methods of animal rights activists. Readers reacted quickly. “Please get this off our screens without delay. It is horrible that the Guardian would stoop so low and call it journalism.” One person complained that “the title and content of the article gives no clue that a close-up image of the face and body of a butchered animal will appear, and it is not directly related to the content, either”. In the context of serious video journalism exploring a strand of contemporary political activism, there was clear editorial justification for reporting, signposted, the mock barbecue staged by protesters in a shopping precinct in Sydney. (Their sign on the barbecue read: “If you wouldn’t eat a dog, why eat a lamb? Go vegan!”) But that was not the context in which some Guardian readers encountered the image. The video was embedded in a news article about environmentalists offering Pope Francis £1m for a charity of his choice if he would go vegan for Lent. The campaigners wanted people to eat less meat and dairy to help fight climate change. As readers scrolled down the text they came across the close-up of the fake but rather realistic-looking dog. “As a vegan, animal lover and dog owner, I found this very disturbing on an article about saving animal lives, and was not expecting it,” wrote one reader. “If there had been a warning I would never have chosen to see that upsetting image.” Once alerted, the production editors readily agreed there was a problem and quickly changed the video’s title-screen image to a shopfront daubed with graffiti. The video stayed embedded in the pope story, and the dog appears from the outset of the video. The audiovisual editors told me they did not think that the pope story and that video should have been combined because they did not really complement each other. But they did not believe that the video itself needed a warning up front: “We decided not to put a graphic warning on because we felt it diluted the power of when a warning should be used – for example, in front of content to do with stabbings, shootings etc. We felt that the title warned people that the dog was fake as we used quotation marks [the title reads: Graffiti and ‘barbecued dogs’ – have vegan protests gone too far?]. Also, we felt the dog did indeed look fake.” Clear warnings are one way journalists navigate the difficult choices between minimising harm and yet conveying the impact of ideas or events that are shocking, or that disturb for justifiable reasons. Ensuring impact is the essence of much public interest journalism. In some cases, especially in war, professionals take big risks to obtain the images. A readers’ editor becomes aware of how many people are affected – themselves or on behalf of children – by journalism about animals in distress or seemingly so. I can recall feedback about: treatment of racehorses; conditions for farmed animals; how an elephant was induced to pose; the realities of dolphin hunting; pros and cons of culls; who or what was killing urban cats and whether fish feel pain. Judiciously used, I believe there is value in warning that an item contains content about animal welfare and may distress some viewers. But warnings present an unusual dilemma for animal lovers. Campaigns on behalf of animals often rely on shock. Warnings, to the extent they cause avoidance or a steeled audience, reduce the impact that advocates for animals may be seeking. • Paul Chadwick is the Guardian’s readers’ editor