In a world where nothing - not milk, not gender, not even facts – is quite as it seems, perhaps Heinz tomato ketchup caviar is the logical end game. One of the world’s most high-end foods colliding with the most basic to produce a strange, shape-shifting vision of fluidity in food form. It’s so on trend. And with its breaking down of barriers, its radical invention and its kicking down of the door to a whole new universe of possibilities, it quite possibly offers us a chance to taste the infinite. Either that or it’s just a marketing gimmick from Heinz (it’s celebrating 150 years of its inimitable red sauce). One way or another, I had to find out. Thanks to the Guardian’s deadlines, the only night available for me to sample ketchup caviar was on my birthday. And so instead of eating a favourite meal, I got to eat a favourite meal that featured tomato ketchup in a starring role. That slightly limited the options, it has to be said, especially as I’m not one of those Trumpian monster who eats their fillet steak with lashings of Tommy K (although ketchup caviar is the kind of thing you would expect a Trump establishment to serve … in fact you can already hear him calling it “a very elegant food”). In the end I plumped for fish fingers, chips and peas. Spooning the tiny red balls on to my breadcrumbed fish certainly added a jolly interactive element to what was already quite clearly a pre-school meal. The finished plate looked ridiculous, but at the same time you could definitely imagine Heston Blumenthal sticking it on a £600 tasting menu, serving it with a children’s bedtime story printed on rice paper and watching as diners weep uncontrollably with childhood nostalgia. Of course there are other caviars on the market that don’t contain any caviar (cavi-nahs?). Ikea sells seaweed pearls made largely of kelp, while Holland and Barrett stocks a similarly vegan caviar. Condiment caviars, however, don’t seem to be available elsewhere and if Heinz ketchup caviar is anything to go by, there may be a reason for this: it doesn’t taste very nice. Yes, the balls keep their shape (although maybe a little too well – making it hard to coat anything in the sauce until it’s in your mouth). But the ketchup caviar is sadly thinner and more acidic than regular Heinz, and tastes more like an own brand sauce rather than the deep, rich delights of proper glass-bottled Heinz. To get the full effect of its globular nature you have to eat it on its own, and who eats ketchup on its own? (Maybe don’t answer that.) It’s a game attempt to reinvent the food landscape. But if you really want to enjoy a truly luxurious meal, then stick to eating fish fingers and chips with some proper tomato ketchup instead.