Russia will rejoin the Paralympics community next month after the International Paralympic Committee decide to lift a suspension imposed in 2016 for widespread doping. The IPC acted after saying Russia had met 69 of its 70 reinstatement criteria and made significant reform. The one exemption was the country’s lack of an official response to the McLaren report, which revealed that more than 1,000 Russian athletes were involved in a massive state-sponsored doping programme. Explaining the decision, which will come into effect on 15 March, the IPC president, Andrew Parsons, said: “It is the IPC governing board’s firm belief that keeping the RPC suspended is no longer necessary and proportionate to the situation we now face in Russia. Russian para athletes are amongst, and will continue to be, the most tested athletes in the Paralympic movement. “With these factors in mind, maintaining the RPC’s suspension on the grounds of Russia’s continuing refusal to not accept the McLaren report does not seem right. We need to move things forward and find a solution that protects the integrity of para sport, acknowledges the significant reforms made by the RPC and enables the RPC to comply with its membership obligations.” Chelsey Gotell, the IPC athletes’ council chairperson, admitted not every athlete would approve. “I acknowledge that some para athletes may disagree with this decision or disapprove of the IPC governing board’s change of position on the original criteria,” she said. “Although I can certainly appreciate this perspective, I also think it is vital for para athletes to consider and appreciate just how far the RPC has come since August 2016 and that this decision has been made with further protections put in place. “If at any point over the next quadrennial these conditions are not fully met, I am confident that, just as we did in August 2016, the IPC governing board will act swiftly to ensure appropriate action is taken.” The IPC’s decision means that the IAAF, athletics’ governing body, is the only major sports organisation still to have its suspension of Russia in place.