Four years ago, Tim Paine was behind the stumps for Banbury Cricket Club. He wasn’t the overseas player in the county championship, but rather, the Home Counties Premier League – and living with the club chairman in North Oxfordshire. He was 30, had averaged 18 in his previous Sheffield Shield season and his most important finger had been operated on seven times. Brad Haddin was about to pass the Australian wicketkeeping baton to Peter Nevill. During one of Australia’s tour games before that Ashes series, the question was asked where Paine had got to. There was always an interest in him after he made his Test debut at Lord’s in 2010 against Pakistan (alongside Steve Smith), a year after making his one and only century in the canary yellow against England opening the batting in an ODI. He was nowhere, it was assumed on the basis of all this. But that was wrong. It was in this humble setting where Paine learned to love cricket again. “It really rekindled the fire,” he said last year when looking back at the experience. “It couldn’t have come at a better time.” Now? He’s the man wearing the armband in one of the least likely of Ashes captaincies. The Tasmanian would be as mindful as anybody that this is a one-time chance to do something no Australian skipper has since 2001. Little wonder, then, he is determined to make it count. Whilst not formally a selector, Paine may as well be with the faith stored in him by coach Justin Langer. Together, they have taken a pragmatic approach to picking a team that sits outside the conventions of recent years. There is no better evidence of this than in how the fast bowling jigsaw is being put together this time around. Speaking ahead of the opening Test, Paine reiterated the argument of the coach that conditions will dictate decisions. More instructively, he explained why this was the right time for the cartel to be broken up. “The last two or three years, we’ve been way too reliant on Pat Cummins, Mitchell Starc and Josh Hazlewood,” Paine said. “They’ve played a lot of Tests and subsequently picked up lots of niggly injuries along the way. It’s a positive for all those guys. We’ve said to the fast bowlers, it’s actually a great thing for them as well because we can now prolong their careers for a few years. Another one is Peter Siddle – he can get another 12 months of Test cricket if we keep picking guys for the conditions. That’s the way we’ve sold it to them.” Of course, they won’t like it. Specifically, if Starc is asked to wear the bib instead of his baggy green on a pitch like that of Edgbaston – which has a “thick covering” of grass, according to Paine – he’ll be filthy. But this won’t be enough to alter the strategic thinking that has been applied to make sure they efficiently allocate their best resources. That James Pattinson is fit and available for his first Test since he was a 25-year-old in early 2016 changes the dynamic as well. “We are looking at them in a similar role and we want to make sure we get that combination right and the bowlers we pick are complimenting each other.” Matthew Wade’s return to the Test side as a specialist No 6 also has a neat link back to Paine’s career act. On the evidence of what has been observed at training – batting in sequence with other senior players while Marnus Labuschagne and Mitch Marsh did not – there is little doubt that he will be given the first crack. When picked for the squad, Paine’s fellow Tasmanian spoke of the “crossover” the pair had experienced since they were boys. The difference is that they are no longer competing for the gloves at state or national level. But more important than any of that was a decision Wade took just before he was jettisoned as Test wicketkeeper for Paine ahead of the last home Ashes in November 2017. Then, he moved home to Tasmania from Victoria, where he had been skipper. Systematically tougher batting conditions forced him to tighten up his game to survive, and then thrive. “It’s a bowler-friendly wicket at times in Bellerive and you have to find a way to score runs,” he said of moving away from the MCG freeway to the green tops of the Apple Isle. “I chased the ball out in front, now I let the ball come to me and let the ball do the work. Playing with the Dukes ball as well in Australia has probably helped that as well, it swings a lot more.” Who better to have in Paine’s side to combat the very problem that has undone Australian teams here since 2001? “The moving ball is difficult for everyone,” Paine acknowledged. “It’s about being really clear on what you’re actually trying to achieve and the plan you’ve got as a batter. And it’s having the courage to walk out into the middle, under pressure in a Test match, and stick to that or execute it.” In Wade, he has just that man with a plan. As for the presence of the sandpaper trio, Paine knows what is coming. But instead of dreading what is in store from a Birmingham crowd that know little other than England winning – they haven’t lost a Test here for 11 years – he wants it to fuel them. Of course, that sideshow will be a reminder of the circumstances in which he inherited this job, taken with the broader remit to earn back the respect and pride of the Australian public. If he can make this work over the next six weeks and pull this off, there will be plenty of that. Four years after seemingly being finished, Paine would instead be an Ashes hero forever. That’s quite the incentive.