Virgin Galactic, Sir Richard Branson’s space tourism venture, is to go public in a $1.3bn deal, as it prepares to take the first paying passengers into space. The British firm has agreed to sell a 49% stake to a shell company that is listed on the New York Stock Exchange, and will become the world’s first listed space tourism venture. A special-purpose acquisition firm, Social Capital Hedosophia Holdings, set up by the former Facebook executive Chamath Palihapitiya, will pay $1.3bn for the stake – $1bn of shares valued at $10 apiece and up to $300m of cash. This includes a $100m investment pledged by Palihapitiya when the deal is completed later this year. He said: “We are confident that Virgin Galactic is light years ahead of the competition. It is backed by an exciting business model and an uncompromising commitment to safety and customer satisfaction. I cannot wait to take my first trip to space and become an astronaut.” George Whitesides will remain chief executive of Virgin Galactic while a new seven-director board will be chaired by Palihapitiya. Adam Bain, a former Twitter executive, will also sit on the board. The main contenders in the space tourism race are three rocket companies run by tech billionaires – Sir Richard Branson’s Virgin Galactic, Jeff Bezos’ Blue Origin and Elon Musk’s SpaceX. Virgin Galactic plans to start taking people to space on its SpaceShipTwo next year. The 90-minute flights cost $250,000 and passengers will experience a few minutes of weightlessness and be able to see the earth from space. The latest version of SpaceShipTwo, named Unity, carried its first passenger in February – Beth Moses, the company’s chief astronaut instructor, who previously worked at Nasa. Blue Origin, the company owned by the Amazon chief executive, wants to take people to the moon by 2024. In May 2019 it unveiled its Blue Moon lander, an unmanned spacecraft that can carry up to 6.5 tonnes of cargo. The first flights into space with humans are planned later this year atop its rocket-and-capsule New Shepard, named after Alan Shepard, the first American to reach space. Musk, the boss of the electric carmaker Tesla, has set his sights on Mars. SpaceX’s first cargo mission is planned for 2022 and the first crewed mission for 2024. Google co-founder Sergey Brin invested in a US space tourism company, Space Adventures, in 2008. It does not have its own rockets but has sent tourists into space on Russian Soyuz flights. Harald McPike, a billionaire adventurer, paid the US firm $7m as a deposit on a $150m space voyage that would take him to the moon. When the moon mission did not materialise, he tried to get his deposit back and reached an out-of-court settlement with the company. Branson said: “We can open space to more investors and in doing so, open space to thousands of new astronauts. We are at the dawn of a new space age, with huge potential to improve and sustain life on Earth. Saudi Arabia had planned to plough $1bn into Virgin Galactic in 2017, but Branson suspended the talks a year later after the murder of Jamal Khashoggi, a dissident journalist, at the Saudi consulate in Turkey. This means Branson’s firm will avoid an initial public offering with a costly investor roadshow, five years after an explosion during a test flight killed one pilot and seriously injured another. Virgin Galactic believes the investment will provide enough capital to fund the business until its spaceships can operate commercially and generate a profit. It has already raised more than $1bn, mostly from Branson, since it was created in 2004. About 600 people in 60 countries have paid $80m in deposits to secure seats on the first flights, the firm said. During the 90-minute flight, which costs $250,000, passengers will experience a few minutes of weightlessness and see the Earth’s curvature. Branson’s firm is racing to become the first commercial venture to take passengers into space next year. It is initially selling 700 tickets for flights lasting about six minutes. In December, Virgin Galactic launched a rocket plane into space for the first time. In February, a test flight carried a passenger for the first time in addition to the two pilots: Beth Moses, the chief astronaut instructor at Virgin Galactic, who previously worked for Nasa. Branson is expected to board his ship himself soon. Moses told Aviation Week she had been weightless for several minutes during the flight and had left her seat to float twice but had felt “squished” into it when the ship re-entered the Earth’s atmosphere. Branson’s firm is competing with those of other tech billionaires in the race to take people to the moon – Jeff Bezos’s Blue Origin and Elon Musk’s rocket company, SpaceX. Blue Origin, the company owned by the Amazon chief executive, wants to transport people to the moon by 2024, it announced in May, when it unveiled its Blue Moon lander, an unmanned spacecraft that can carry up to 6.5 tonnes of cargo. Musk, the chief executive of the electric carmaker Tesla, is working to bring passengers to Mars with SpaceX. The first cargo mission is planned for 2022 and the first crewed mission for 2024.