Tempers rose with the heat in New York on Friday as a Central Park festival and a Times Square moon landing commemoration were cancelled because of the dangerous weather. Things reached boiling point in the evening rush hour, when seven subway lines were suspended for more than an hour. A computer system failure stranded some passengers underground, led to dangerous crowding on platforms and sent riders searching for alternate ways home. The stoppage affected the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 trains that serve swaths of Manhattan, the Bronx and Brooklyn. It also halted the S shuttle that links Grand Central Terminal and Times Square, two of the city’s busiest stations. In a tweet, Mayor Bill de Blasio said: “This kind of meltdown during a heat wave is UNACCEPTABLE. The [Metropolitan Transit Authority] owes every single New Yorker an explanation for this. We’ve known about this dangerous weather for DAYS. There’s no excuse for why they aren’t prepared.” The MTA blamed the suspension on a failure in the computer system that powers the signals on those lines. Spokesman Tim Minton said there was no indication the stoppage was related to a loss of power or to the heat. Nonetheless, the temperature above ground was still above 90F (32C) when trains stopped at around 6pm. Meteorologists estimated that it felt like 100F. Minton said it did not appear that trains lost power. But on one line that was running, passengers packed into a car that did not appear to have air conditioning. Sweat glistened on riders’ skin as they sought relief, fanning themselves and one another. “This is dangerous,” one woman said. Temperatures in the high 90s are forecast in New York for Saturday and Sunday with a heat index well over 100F. Much of the nation is also dealing with high heat. De Blasio has directed owners of office buildings over 100ft (30m) tall to set thermostats to 78F (26C) through Sunday to conserve energy. The mayor also canceled OZY Fest, an outdoor festival featuring soccer star Megan Rapinoe, musician John Legend and Daily Show host Trevor Noah, because of the heat. OZY Fest had been scheduled for Saturday and Sunday in Central Park. A de Blasio spokeswoman said a Times Square commemoration of the 1969 moon landing had been canceled as well. Officials earlier announced the cancellation of the New York City Triathlon, scheduled for Sunday. The subway breakdown generally did not result in chaos. Passengers were directed to other subway lines and the bus system. The president of the New York City Transit Authority, Briton Andy Byford, told reporters the signal failure meant “we did not know exactly where our trains were, so for safety reasons, we had to ask all trains, to instruct all trains to stop where they were, to maintain their positions while we ascertained what exactly was going on such that we could safely move trains out”. It was the second time in a week that New York subway riders got stuck underground. Last Saturday, a power outage that stretched across 30 Manhattan blocks from the Upper West Side to Times Square left passengers stranded till trains were manually moved into stations and doors opened. The outage was blamed on a system that failed to isolate a faulty distribution cable.