Most people in cricket know the Pat Cummins story. The teen prodigy, man of the match in his first Test aged 18, bowling like the wind to smash through South Africa before his vital runs sealed an absurd victory chase. Six years in purgatory, injury after injury limiting him to the odd white-ball match and the physio room. Then the comeback that has made him the No 1 Test bowler in the world and winner of the Allan Border medal for Australia’s male cricketer of the year. Cummins the person is as compelling. A bowler who seethes with pace but also shows a mastery of seam movement and aggressive lines. A refusal to give in, the kind who forces a wicket when batsmen are on top. A hard striker of the ball with a classical technique and patience for days. A dash of matinee idol: tall, straight, with a high-beam smile. A courteous manner with everyone he meets. None of the nuggety, sunburned grumpiness of Australian cricket cliche. What is also clear from Cummins is his sense of perspective: more deliberate and relaxed than some of his forebears. After the lost World Cup semi-final? “I went and lay by the beach in France,” he tells the Guardian. “I deliberately chose that when I was looking for places. Somewhere no one speaks English and no one knows what cricket is. I try and grab every chance I can to switch off, especially on a long tour. A couple of days away feels like a week.” He was philosophical about that game: disappointed to fall so close, proud of progress from the shambles of a few months earlier. Not that he was shrugging at the silverware. Plenty of people forget Cummins played in Australia’s winning 2015 campaign, though he never will. “Just about my career highlight,” he says. “It was a tournament where I felt lucky to be in that 15, I was there and thereabouts in the ODI team the entire time but never felt like I’d cemented a spot. It’s a once-in-a-career opportunity to play a World Cup at home, I was 21 and right in the mixer.” But it’s the Ashes that really have his attention, where he thinks Australia have a better chance to compete. And it was another 2015 tour, when he reprised his fringe role in that year’s Ashes, that he thinks can help him. “I don’t think I’d ever bowled with a Dukes ball before,” he says. “It’s a great environment to learn, and to see guys like Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad in their home conditions go about their work, see how Aussie guys deal with the pressure of an away series, being right there in the middle of it without having the stresses of playing. I feel like I’m better equipped for this time around.” On that tour and in this year’s World Cup, English conditions agreed with him. “There always seems to be sideways movement and the Dukes ball, even if it goes soft, still has a bit of swing. It’s not 40 degrees so you can run in all day. It feels like if you put into the wicket you’re going to get something out of it. It levels the contest sometimes as opposed to a flat day-three or day-four wicket in Australia or a flat ODI wicket, sometimes you go into defence mode. Over here you can always sense a wicket coming.” Cummins had more injury delays after 2015 and it was a flat wicket when he first returned to Tests for Australia’s 2017 draw in Ranchi. But he immediately showed what cricket had been missing by whistling down bouncers at the helmets of India’s batsmen, bowling with proper pace on the somnolent track. “I’d played one [Sheffield] Shield game, a few ODIs, and suddenly I was on the flight,” he says. “I got over there really excited, I was bowling well and I couldn’t believe I was back in the Test side quicker than I’d hoped to be. I played a lot of grade cricket or time in the nets where I was managing my body, but all that goes out the window. You’re playing for Australia in a Test match, doing anything you can to win it. Maybe it was handbrake off. Maybe that gives more clarity.” For the rest of that year each Cummins spell was heart in mouth. When would he break down again? But he played twice in India, then all five Ashes Tests, then four in South Africa. “The physios and doctors always told me this is normal, once you get a couple more years of cricket you’ll get a good run. It’s hard to believe until you get there.” His body has been repaying those lost years since. There was no sterner test than Johannesburg 2018, Cummins flying the flag all but alone while Australia were demolished after the sandpaper storm. One impressed observer was the South Africa captain, Faf du Plessis. “We would sit on the side of the field and just admire what he does. We’d say, ‘Look at the guy, he’s still running in and bowling quick.’ Diving at balls when he’s just finished an eight-over spell, runs in the series. As a batter I definitely felt he was the biggest challenge. He’s a nice guy, Pat. You enjoy it when nice guys do well, even opposition, the good people of the game.” Even England supporters may have to like him. His cricket wins respect, his conduct wins regard. In Johannesburg last year he was one of the first to speak plainly of Australia’s sledging: “If we talk about abuse it’s certainly over the line and that’s not pure emotion, that’s pre-planned bullying sometimes, and we’ve all been guilty of that.” Now he says that “sport’s quite emotional and there will definitely be times on the field when those emotions show through, but it’s about trying to manage how we show them”. Perhaps his years on the sidelines have helped Cummins be a bit more objective, in the same way that emergency captain Tim Paine’s own years in the injury wilderness made him enough of an outsider to be a credible reformer of team and culture. “It’s probably the first time where we’ve really had to sit back and think about how we wanted to play,” Cummins says of the start of Paine’s tenure. “For me personally, going to university or having a few pre-seasons trying to recover from injury, it’s just knowing that you can’t judge yourself on purely cricket, because if you do then you’re forever riding this rollercoaster. Definitely taking a step back gives you time to actually think.” Do not mistake any of that for going easy, though. “The way I’ve always played is to get into the fight,” he says. “This is a side that’s really hungry, many of them in their first Ashes, their first away Test. For me it’s about remembering what I did well last time against England, try to adjust to English conditions, but I just want to really make a mark. It doesn’t get much bigger for a Test player than an Ashes, and you never know if it’s going to be your last. So make the most of it.”