Eoin Morgan and his England team do not appear to be running scared. The provocative, attention-seeking observation of Kevin Pietersen about Morgan at the crease in England’s first match against Australia does not seem so apposite now. But it made a few headlines at the time. England’s semi-final victory at Edgbaston was a preposterous affair that morphed from a taut confrontation of the oldest cricketing rivals on the planet to a riotous celebration with the sound of Neil Diamond and Jeff Beck belting out their old numbers in the background and a chorus of support from the stands. By the end England were dancing their way to their first World Cup final in 27 years. Had they forgotten what a serious business this was? Ostensibly Morgan played a relatively minor role in all this. Earlier in the day Jofra Archer and Chris Woakes tormented the upper order, where Australia’s three major batsmen can be found, of which only Steve Smith could last for long. Adil Rashid delivered his leg-breaks competently and his googlies rather brilliantly. And then Jason Roy and Joe Root batted sublimely in their contrasting styles. Morgan’s contribution was an unbeaten 45 at the end. It was not a beautiful innings, nor an especially significant one given that England were well on the way to winning the game by the time he came to the crease. But it was strangely compelling. There were reminders why Morgan never became a Test regular (he played 16 matches, the last of which was in 2012). Technically Test cricket is not his game. On Thursday he was a wee bit jumpy against the short ball and he was inevitably peppered by Mitchell Starc and Pat Cummins upon arrival. He shunned the hook shot which had produced easy top-edged catches earlier in the tournament. He ducked and swayed. He was uncomfortable but certainly not scared. Then he slapped a short ball from Starc over cover and the runs began to flow again; upon the reintroduction of Nathan Lyon he reverse swept to the boundary; he began to advance down the pitch to Jason Behrendorff and he swung – often to no great effect. His timing was awry for most of that innings. But he kept attacking in what became a tangible sign that his England side was going to stay true to their aggressive instincts whatever the situation. That batting display against Sri Lanka at Headingley, tentative at one moment, frenetic the next, had been exorcised. England were back on track. Even the winning runs from Morgan’s bat came from another ugly slap over mid-on. No matter; England had won at a romp. It was time to head for Lord’s and New Zealand. His team was rolling again and Morgan had released the handbrake. The mid-tournament blip had been banished, for which the captain was entitled to take most of the credit. Morgan is the most influential England captain in decades, no matter that he is in charge exclusively in white-ball cricket. He has the absolute confidence of his team; he always remains calm – at least he always looks calm – and he enhances cricketers in his team (Rashid is the obvious example but there are others): he is like Mike Brearley – plus some runs. In any other sport the captain would not be the only one receiving the plaudits. What of the coach or the manager? Just in case you have forgotten the England coach – for the next two months only – is Trevor Bayliss. You might be excused for not knowing this since he seldom makes an appearance except when things are going wrong and even then he does not say much. He has no ego; he would probably be a terrible pundit. The cynics often ask: “What does he do?” At practice he can sometimes be spotted sitting on the roller staring into the middle distance for minutes on end. Yet he is among the best of England coaches. Who knows? If England end up winning the World Cup and the Ashes he might be regarded as the best. So what does he do? He gives freedom and responsibility – to his captain and his players. He does not want any credit and he does not like to intervene too often – even though he has a deep reservoir of cricketing knowledge. He manages to take the pressure off; he trusts his men and he supports them. He talks to them a bit, but not too much. It sounds simple but it isn’t. He will take some replacing. When England’s “retiring manager” was quizzed by the Today programme after the victory over Australia Bayliss was typically phlegmatic. “We had a good chat after the game. You can listen too much to the outside noise, whether it’s good or bad.” There would be no new cunning strategy for the final. For him cricket has never been a game of chess orchestrated by the coaches. Of course, England do not have a monopoly in sound leadership as the 12th World Cup final approaches. New Zealand’s Kane Williamson is the polar opposite to Morgan as a batsman. He provides the ballast when his side is batting; it is a burden he bears lightly; he looks so calm at the crease. And so he does in the field, which is where there are parallels with his opposite number at Lord’s on Sunday. His team is probably in awe of him as a batsman; they also trust him as a captain. New Zealand’s coach played five more Tests than Bayliss – he represented his country five times in 1999 – but Gary Stead would struggle to be recognised outside Christchurch. I assume he is a fine coach. But I don’t know that. One of the features of this World Cup, which applies to most good cricket teams, is that the captain remains the man in charge. And the best coaches understand that. We will do well to spot either Bayliss or Stead as the final ceremonies are conducted on Sunday night. Either Morgan or Williamson will be raising the trophy. Both are deserving of that honour.