Even Cobham’s shareholders probably wouldn’t describe their company, founded 85 years ago by aviation pioneer Sir Alan Cobham, as the jewel in the crown of the UK defence and aerospace industry. The Dorset-based firm had to tap investors for cash in 2016 and 2017, each time for about £500m, to repair a balance sheet bruised by profits warnings. Yet the end of independence feels miserable. Cobham is submitting to a £4bn takeover by a US private equity giant, Advent, that will seek to flog its new acquisition, in whole or in pieces, within five years. The strategy is standard practice for private equity outfits so there’s no point being surprised. Nor should we be shocked that Cobham’s board rolled over. Chairman Jamie Pike has been in post for less than a month but knows he would be fired by investors if he didn’t back an offer at 165p, or a 34% premium to Wednesday’s share price. Fund managers will celebrate a quick boost to their quarterly scorecards, but, from a wider perspective, there’s little to cheer here. For the past three years, Cobham has performed a decent self-help act. It’s paid down debt, sold mistaken purchases and settled a long-running dispute with major customer Boeing. In a rational world, its recovery would be given longer to run. Cobham’s owns excellent kit – hoses and conical drogues for refuelling jet fighters mid-flight; equipment for Nasa’s Mars space laboratory mission; validation tools for mobile networks and so on. Over the long-term, they all have value. What does Advent bring? At a push, one might argue it could add businesses to Cobham and invest more quickly. At heart, though, this is merely a leveraged buyout in which as much as 60% of the purchase price will be funded with debt. And the eventual outcome is most likely to be Cobham’s corporate dismemberment. It’s not remotely ambitious or up-lifting. In theory, the UK government could step in on security grounds but, beyond seeking a few assurances over the 2,000 jobs in the UK, do not expect a protest. First, Cobham is only a small supplier to the Ministry of Defence. Second, a Boris Johnson-led government is unlikely to make a fuss about a takeover from the US while it is seeking a free trade deal with Washington. Prepare for more of the same, though, and not just in the industrial sector. The world of private equity – which, at the top end, is predominately a US world – is awash with record sums of cash. Advent alone raised $17.5bn (£14bn) for a new fund recently. This money needs a home and the UK, clouded by Brexit but with an open-doors approach to takeovers, is an obvious place to hunt. Big multinationals can look after themselves. The likes of Cobham, sadly, may be easy prey. One UK multinational that did look after its own interests was AstraZeneca. Five years ago, the pharmaceutical firm was being besieged by US rival Pfizer, which was waving a £55-a-share offer and expecting to win. AstraZeneca’s board resisted and independence was secured. A good thing too, and not only for the UK life sciences industry. Thursday’s bumper first-half numbers demonstrated that chief executive Pascal Soriot was right to be so optimistic about long-term revenues in 2014. Half a decade later, the promise is being fulfilled by drugs such as Tagrisso, Imfinzi and Lynparza for cancer, Brilinta for heart disease and Farxiga for diabetes. The share price rose 8% to £68.79 as AstraZeneca upgraded its sales forecast for this year. There’s still a question about Soriot’s pay, always a touchy subject with the man himself. Two years ago, he got £13m at a moment when the progress from the labs looked less secure than it does now. Heaven knows what he’ll collect now he can claim vindication. So farewell, then, Vernon Hill, idiosyncratic chairman of beleaguered Metro Bank, who is departing to spend more time with his Yorkshire terrier. Hold on, that’s not quite right. Hill will merely stand down as chairman, at a time yet to be established, but intends to stay on the board as a non-executive director with the over-blown title of “founder and president”. The share price showed what investors thought of this plan – it fell 19%. After Metro’s woes in the past year, shareholders deserved a properly independent chair. Good luck to the headhunters: it’s hard to imagine any self-respecting big-name banker accepting this gig if President Hill is still in the boardroom.