And breathe! This Super League relegation battle is getting ridiculous. Defeats for Leeds, Wakefield and Hull KR, coupled with victories for Huddersfield and London means the bottom five are now separated by just two points, with six games to go. Thank goodness we have next weekend off to settle the nerves. The bottom of the table Broncos’ 32-12 victory over table-topping Saints may have seemed a shock to those not following things too closely, but for the 2,087 inside Ealing Trailfinders it was anything but. Edging a tight first half 14-6, the Broncos clung on when Saints – and in particular half-back Danny Richardson – started to sparkle after half-time, closing the gap to two points, only to pull away towards the close with two late tries. London deserved it and the reaction at the end was more satisfaction than stunned jubilation. After all, that’s the second time they have beaten Saints on the 4G in six weeks, adding them to a list of victims that includes play-off chasers Wigan and Catalans. Despite this being just the eighth time a London side has beaten Saints in 55 meetings, I suggested to Broncos coach Danny Ward these wins are no longer a surprise. “It’s only you lot that are shocked,” he told the press. “There’s no shock factor for us – we celebrate every game we win the same. The atmosphere in there is fantastic. They’re a very tight bunch and we are there for the ups and downs together.” London play four of their last five games away but finish against three clubs with them in the mire: Leeds, Hull KR and Wakefield. “It would be nice to take it to the final three because our fate will be in our own hands, playing the teams around us,” Ward admitted. “There will be more twists and turns but every game is must-win now. There was a Grand Final feeling among the boys beforehand.” Supporters of other clubs in the basement battle have moaned about Saints fielding half a team. Coach Justin Holbrook left out nine internationals, retained just four of the starting XIII that stuffed Wigan the previous week, had 10 players with less than a dozen Super League appearances, and included three debutants. And yet the leaders’ squad is so deep they still fielded a side with more Super League appearances between them than the Broncos, and included seven internationals. Among them was Ireland forward Kyle Amor: “We acknowledged it was a weakened side but we were all excited by the challenge and that we’d been written off. For an hour we had a good crack at it. The effort was there but the little, minute details on plays – which the fans might not see – cost us in the end. “It was a big day for the club, having 13 or so homegrown players in the squad. It’s a tough, tricky place down here, against a team of guys who’ve played together for three years, a very fit team who are fighting for their lives. So our young kids will learn from it and be better for the experience.” Amor was adamant that the Saints XIII was strong enough for a top-flight game. “I do not mean to sound arrogant but you don’t get to pull on a Saints jersey unless you are good enough to play Super League. I train every day with these players and know that they’re all capable of playing Super League. We’ve been working with them now for nearly two years and I have complete trust in them. Our club produces world-class players, very good players, and some players who aren’t quite good enough for Saints but have a good career elsewhere in Super League. I have no doubt that these young lads will have Super League careers.” Rows over weakened teams soon blow over. Few fans will remember how strong their opponents were during a long and winding season. Sometimes you are up against a full-strength team, other weeks you face a second string. Who knows who Huddersfield, Hull KR, Leeds and Wakefield will face in the run-in? As Holbrook said, it was a case of “if not now, when?”. “It felt the right time to play them as I’ve asked a lot of the senior players of late. They are great young players who deserve an opportunity, but it’s a big jump from the academy to the first team. We gave them a go and they did really well.” There was something of a brouhaha in certain circles when the eight teams were confirmed for the 2021 Women’s World Cup. Brazil, who now have 13 clubs playing in five states, are in. Fiji, who hammered Papua New Guinea recently in their first ever game, are not. League is hugely popular in so many developing countries that the Rugby League International Federation are now targeting more G20 nations, five of the eight teams making the cut for the Women’s World Cup being G20, including Canada, the surprise package at the 2017 World Cup. There will also be a Women’s Emerging Nations tournament, which could include G20 members USA, Turkey, Italy and Wales. Meanwhile, G20 giant India, with (male) players based in Auckland, Queensland and the States, beat Colombia (who were nearly all born and bred there) 30-16, in Brisbane last week with a hat-trick from Sukhpal Malhi. Floored by having most of its RFL funding withdrawn in 2013, domestic Scottish rugby league is peeling itself off the canvas. Previously dormant clubs Fife Lions and Glasgow are back in business, former dominant force Aberdeen Warriors are returning, too, and before next Saturday’s North-East League play-off against Cramlington Rockets, Edinburgh Eagles beat Strathmore Silverbacks 30-22 in the Scottish Cup final last Saturday. When those two clubs met in an under-16s fixture earlier this month, Edinburgh fielded a whole team of players with Fijian heritage. Eagles chairman Barry McGuffog explained: “They are all from Fijian military families. Two brothers were in a session our under-16s coach delivered at a school and it’s just grown from there. The boys go to four or five schools but the Fijian community is very close. Six players of Fijian descent have played for the Eagles open age team this season, including the Basalas, a father and son!” Joining Edinburgh at the second London 9s on 25 August – the day after the Challenge Cup final – will be teams from all over the world. The organisers have confirmed that Balkan Super League champions Red Star Belgrade, two teams from the USA and Wales, Africa United Lions and one each from Lithuania, Nigeria and Ghana have all entered. Fans can buy tickets for the London League Weekend – Friday Nights Lights at London Skolars, Saturday’s Challenge Cup final at Wembley and the London 9s on Sunday – for just £39. Every London9s game will be streamed live by Sportsflickglobal. It was fun watching Broncos v Saints with the presenters of the Progressive Rugby League podcast. Sydneysiders Big Al and Johnno had flown in from Toulouse that morning, having spent a week touring French rugby league towns and taking in TOXIII’s hammering of Sheffield Eagles on Saturday (and almost emptying the club shop). Lifelong Eels and Tigers fans, the have adopted Toulouse, the Broncos and Toronto as their “Progressive rugby league babies”. They had a dream weekend: after watching the first two win in the flesh they were able to watch the latter clinch the Championship League Leaders’ Shield on TV in the Trailfinders Pavilion with victory at Widnes. Congratulations to the Wolfpack, surely the first team to win three titles in their first three seasons? • Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook