The temperature of plates and bowls is a habitual discussion in our family. It is usually started by Dad because the plates are not hot enough (so the food goes cold). The discussion then treads a familiar path. Dad’s fixation with hot plates is put down to his Lancashire childhood – my grandma was extremely keen on heating plates, and believed that piping hot food and hot plates was evidence that it was freshly cooked (ie, not sitting around). The irony of this was that when faced with Grandma’s food, everyone spent a great deal of time puffing in and out, saying: “Hot, hot!”, then blowing on the food to cool it down. The opposite pole of the discussion is still that the plates, and subsequently food, are too hot. This is usually started by me, and it boils down to the fact I live in Italy, but that’s for another column. There was also polarity when it came to soup – hot and cold. At least, that was how I used to think about it: there are soups that warm when it is cold, and soups that cool when it is hot. What is becoming more and more apparent is that many of the soups I enjoy most, regardless of the season, inhabit the space in between the extremes – a just-warm to room-temperature spectrum. I have been thinking about this a lot this summer, for as much as I like an icy gazpacho, Vichyssoise, almond or cucumber soup, I think I most enjoy the flavours that come with a soup that is served just-warm. I am thinking about Jane Grigson’s mint and pea, or one that is made with a floppy-leaved Sicilian green called tenerumi, and one made from a pap of bread and tomato, or borlotti beans and pasta – all soups that benefit from moderation rather than extremes. Marcella Hazan has a lovely description of Milanese minestrone with rice in her book The Essentials of Classic Italian Cooking, describing how, in the hotter months, restaurants would make it in the morning, then leave it sitting to settle to room temperature in readiness for lunch. In the summer I, too, make this Sicilian minestra di patate e peperoni – red pepper, tomato and potato soup – in the morning so it is ready for lunch. I thought it was an odd-sounding soup when I first read about it, but it is surprisingly good, the soft sweetness of the pepper, red onion and ripe tomatoes given starchy substance by the potato. The “recipe” I first followed was a sketch, with no real quantities, from a friend, which I found quite liberating, but I include one below. I haven’t been adding spinach or chard because I didn’t fancy them. The advice of another recipe is to add a spoonful of red-wine vinegar at the end. It is a lovely addition, especially if you have a good vinegar, the soft acidity sharpening the edges and contrasting nicely with the mellow sweetness of the red peppers. For a smoother texture, half the soup can be blended, then added back in at the end. If you are particularly averse to pepper skins, you could cook them separately, roasting, resting and peeling, then adding them towards the end of simmering. You will be skin-free, but it also means the soup won’t have the same depth of flavour or rosy-red colour. Resting the soup once you have made it isn’t just about temperature, but flavour, which develops while it sits. I love this soup when it is just warmer than room temperature, with bread and cheese on the side. “Minestra” comes from the word, ministrare – to administer or share out. The beauty of soup is not just the sharing, but that it is given the shape of the dish it is put in – and the dishes can be any temperature you like. Prep 15 minCook (including resting) 1 hr 25 min Serves 4 6-8 tbsp olive oil1 red onion, peeled and slicedSalt and black pepper1 large potato (about 400g), peeled and diced2 large red peppers, deseeded and diced2 large tomatoes, peeled, deseeded and roughly chopped1 handful spinach or chardRed-wine vinegar (optional) Put the olive oil, onion and a pinch of salt in a large, heavy-based pan over a medium-low heat. Cook, stirring for five minutes. Add the potato, peppers and tomatoes, and cook for a few minutes more, stirring so all the ingredients are coated with oil. Add 1.2 litres of water, bring to a boil, then reduce to a simmer for an hour, adding the spinach or chard in the last 10 minutes if you are including it. Add salt and pepper to taste, and a little red-wine vinegar if you wish. Let the soup sit for 15 minutes before serving warm.