Leading names from women’s and men’s football have joined forces to back a campaign to end abuse, harassment and exploitation of female players, following allegations published by the Guardian last year of serious sexual abuse suffered by members of the women’s national team in Afghanistan. The Association Football Development Programme (AFDP) Global launched the #FearlessFootball campaign with support from more than 75 figures from within the game. These include the Afghanistan women’s team’s manager, Kelly Lindsey; the Chelsea women’s manager, Emma Hayes; the former England forward Eni Aluko, who is also a Guardian columnist; several former USA women’s internationals including Heather O’Reilly; the former internationals Jamie Carragher, Robbie Fowler and Robert Pires; and Uefa’s president, Aleksander Ceferin. They have signed a petition as part of a campaign which urges “anyone who believes that women and girls should be able to express themselves through sport, in freedom and without fear” to follow suit. Prince Ali bin al-Hussein of Jordan Eni Aluko Former England international Yael Averbuch West Former USA International Katie Chapman Former England international Emma Hayes Chelsea Women manager Kelly Lindsey Afghanistan Women manager Lori Lindsey Former USA international Shabnam Mobarez Afghanistan captain Heather O’Reilly Former USAInternational Khalida Popal Former Afghanistan international Rebecca Sauerbrunn USA international Kelly Smith Former England international Rachel Yankey Former England international Jonas Baer-Hoffman Secretary general Fifpro Europe Jamie Carragher Former England international Aleksander Ceferin Uefa president Landon Donovan Former USA international Mathieu Flamini Former France international Robbie Fowler Former England international Gérard Houllier Football manager Dato Windsor John General secretary AFC Harry Kewell Former Australia international Mike Penrose Executive director Unicef UK Robert Pires Former France international Louis Saha Former France International Rob Williams CEO War Child- The AFDP, launched by Prince Ali bin al-Hussein of Jordan in 2018, is calling on football’s governing bodies to adopt clear safeguarding codes, improve reporting mechanisms and provide appropriate support. “The lifetime ban and fine issued by Fifa on 8 June 2019 against the president of the Afghanistan Football Federation is a first step,” Prince Ali said. “However, much more needs to be done to address widespread, systemic abuse and harassment in women’s football. Everyone who cares deeply about the integrity and standing of the women’s game needs to work together. “The era in world football governance which has allowed coaches, staff and officials to misuse their power in the treatment of women and girls must end now. The launch of the #FearlessFootball campaign is a landmark moment for the integrity of the game, as we look forward to a brighter future where every girl and woman can play football in safety and with dignity.”