Would you like to be the world’s most expensive defender? Course you would! So would Harry Maguire, and he’s getting quite the hump with Leicester City for standing in his way if this morning’s stories are to be believed. Manchester United are ready to top the £75m fee paid by Liverpool for Virgil van Dijk – which seems a touch strong to the Mill but then who are we to stand in the way of market forces – but Leicester are holding out for at least £85m and Maguire thinks it’s time they honoured a gentleman’s agreement to let him go for the right price. If they eventually do, James Tarkowski and Lewis Dunk, neither of whom looks like considerable downgrades and would be far cheaper, are among those in the fashion parade for his replacement. United might find it easier to make up that extra £10m if they can move on Romelu Lukaku, with Juventus moving ahead of Internazionale in the queue for his signature. There’s never really been any great indication Inter can afford him but Juve, who are having quite the summer, look deadly serious and would include Paulo Dybala as a very tempting sweetener. And might another United star be heading off to a global superpower? Brace yourselves Red Devils fans … because Matteo Darmian is on Barcelona’s list as cover for Jordi Alba, according to a Spanish report. Arsenal are about to tie up the signing of Nicolas Pépé, and there’s a chance their transfer window might be about to get even better. We jest, of course, but Monaco are said to be sniffing around Shkodran Mustafi and a princely £27m sounds a reasonable deal in anyone’s money. With this and the Darmian news, we promise you it’s not 1 April. Sami Khedira has also been linked with an inwards move after choosing, as you do, to take in the Emirates Cup on Sunday, but Unai Emery reckons it was merely coincidence. Pépé, of course, arrived after Arsenal tried and failed to get hold of Wilfried Zaha but Everton may not be giving up their own chase for the Crystal Palace winger. They were reported to have stuck £55m under Palace’s nose, but not only that! Cenk Tosun and James McCarthy were supposedly ready to jump in a private car to Selhurst Park as makeweights, if the south London club said yay, although the Toffees have categorically denied that was the case. Marco Silva has enough to bother him at the moment with Idrissa Gueye’s departure for Paris Saint-Germain and the latest name tipped to replace the all-action midfielder is Celta Vigo’s Stanislav Lobotka. In the Football League, Birmingham are in for Las Palmas winger Mateo García while Ipswich want to hijack Blackpool’s move for Joe Nuttall of Blackburn, perhaps offering Bartosz Bialkowski in exchange.