The fall in the number of pupils studying modern foreign languages (MFL) is concerning and continues a trend started when the government of the day removed the compulsion for our young people to study a language to age 16 back in the 90s (Learn a language? No need for them once we quit the EU, parents tell schools, 3 May). Languages are an essential part of a broad, balanced curriculum. Not only do they provide an opportunity to communicate more effectively with others – something that will be even more vital in a post-Brexit world – they also help pupils to understand what it is to be a global citizen, including the importance of tolerance and understanding. And they explicitly celebrate difference and highlight that which we all have in common. This is crucial knowledge in today’s world. As the country’s inspectorate, we at Ofsted expect schools to give all children the opportunity to study a broad range of subjects, including MFL, so that they gain the knowledge and skills that will broaden their horizons and set them up for later life. Our new inspection framework will make sure schools focus on doing just that – regardless of pupils’ background and circumstances. Through the Ebacc, the Department for Education wants to increase the number of pupils studying MFL to 90% by 2025. At inspection, our inspectors ask heads if they know about this national ambition and what they are doing to contribute to it. We are playing our part in reversing this downturn. But it can only be achieved through the concerted efforts of school leaders, backed by government, to make sure it’s not just the privileged few who gain the advantage of being able to speak a foreign language.Sean Harford HMINational director, education, Ofsted • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition