It’s changed my (male) partner’s view of women’s football. He didn’t know much about it before and assumed the women’s game must be somehow “less exciting” because it’s not as popular, but he’s really enjoyed watching the World Cup with me – even if I get a bit vocal sometimes! He’s also become a big proponent of equality for the Lionesses and thinks women’s football should be put on level standing with the men’s game. He’s even taken to social media to call for more coverage of the women’s leagues, fair pay and more funding for the sport. I’m so proud of him! I’m hoping the success of our amazing Lionesses will mean they are given the respect they deserve. It means a lot to a girl who was told at school in the early 1980s that she couldn’t play football because it was a ‘boys sport’. Jen, South Yorkshire We usually get together in a boozer to watch the England men’s team, but this is the first time we’ve watched a women’s match together. The whole tournament has been an opportunity to be with friends and send mild abuse to my American in-laws! I’ll be over in California with them for the final on Sunday so, against my natural instincts, I’ll be supporting USA. Andy Bartlett, London The tournament has changed my perception of the women’s game completely. Prior to the tournament I’d have struggled to name more than a few of the England squad, but now some of them are among my sporting heroes. We travelled to Nice to watch England’s opener against Scotland and for the last month I have arranged my social life around watching the games. My levels of excitement and nerves have reached a level not far off those experienced during last summer’s World Cup. I’m already making plans to attend some Women’s Super League games next season – something I had never previously considered.Before long, this World Cup will be seen as a significant turning point in women’s sport and the fight for gender equality in football. I’m thrilled to have experienced it so closely along the way. Grant, 29, London The tournament hasn’t been a massive change for me. I’ve been a fan since the 1970s, when I played in a competitive league as a young girl. But I’ve finally gotten a few male friends to take it seriously. They’ve appreciated the lack of theatrics as a whole (some still happen, but not to the degree of the men’s game). I’m hoping USA win so my team can thumb their noses at our ridiculous president! Julie B, Minneapolis Watching the World Cup has without a doubt changed how I see women’s football. The game is better than the men’s game! Although a little slower, accuracy of passing is better, there are fewer fouls and fewer histrionics. This season I’ll definitely attempt to watch more Manchester United women’s games. They’ve only had one season and have been promoted to the same league as Manchester City, so it’ll be interesting to see how they compare with the men. I’m a season ticket holder at Old Trafford and will now make more of an effort to support the women. Harry Bloom, Glossop This World Cup has changed how I view football, let alone the women’s game! I used to follow Liverpool as a kid, but went off football as I grew up. The games are so stop-start and and the players are spoilt and are paid obscene amounts of money. I started watching the Women’s World Cup to encourage my kids and now I’m hooked. It’s all so easy to watch and so relatable. Most of all I love seeing what bodies like mine can do – it’s amazing to see a female body used for strength and power instead of boring old sexiness. It feels like real, interesting people out there playing the game. And every player has an inspirational story to tell about overcoming difficulties and prejudice. How can I pick one team to support when they’re all so engaging? For the first time, I finally understand the attraction of football. These teams have shown me what a fantastic game it is – the skill, passion, strategy and endurance. It means my daughters can see what their female bodies can do. The World Cup has given them dozens of strong, tough role models who can show them the way forward. Sarah Hames-Clarke, Bolton-by-Bowland I’ve always loved the Women’s World Cup. This year, however, there’s something more in it for me as it feels like the most diverse tournament I’ve ever seen. That matters to me because I walked away from football because I didn’t feel like I belonged. Basketball was practically shoved down my throat when I was a kid but when I discovered “soccer” – thanks largely to the Mia Hamm craze of the late 1990s – I was in love and convinced I’d found my sport. But then I enrolled in an elite private high school and was the only black girl on the field. I left tryouts full of shame, convinced I had no business being there. No one made fun of me, but there was an embarrassment and loneliness that was unbearable and I was already anxious about being a black girl from the wrong side of town in the predominantly white, upper-class environment. I never returned to the game and it’s something I’ll regret for the rest of my life. I am thrilled at how many black women and women of colour are at this World Cup. From the powerful story of the Reggae Girlz, to Wendie Renard and, of course, Crystal Dunn. The feeling of joy I get seeing this representation is indescribable. There are very few occasions when women are celebrated at an equal or comparable level as men. As a 29-year-old from US, I’ve seen women fight to be taken as seriously as men in music, business, the culinary field, writing, film and, of course, sports for nearly 30 years. But in that time I’ve also witnessed my country celebrate our women’s national team with genuine fervour and respect. This tournament has given us the chance to see women become national heroes and to be taken seriously not for their appearance, but for their grit and talent. Regardless of who wins, I think it’s been a tremendous success for the women’s game and a great moment in the march towards gender parity. Elisa, 29, New York