Tony Adams said his role as the Rugby Football League’s president will not involve him offering advice to those already working in the sport. He will focus on promoting the game rather than attempting to have a hands-on role like Clive Woodward did when he took up a position in another sport. The 52-year-old former Arsenal and England defender took over on Wednesday as Andy Burnham’s successor, having been approached to take up the one-year role as president. Adams has forged a strong relationship with rugby league in recent years owing to the sport’s links with the Sporting Chance clinic but said he would not overstep the mark. Woodward, the former England rugby union coach, had an ill-fated 13-month spell as Southampton’s technical director in 2005-06 and Adams said: “I don’t want to get involved in the technical side of the game. I’m not sitting here like Woodward did when he went in at Southampton: I don’t claim to be an expert when it comes to this sport, it’s just not what I’m about. “I’m here for the game’s profile, and if I can shed some extra light on this great sport, then I’m definitely here to do that. I’m not a technical director, or anything like that – I’m the president, and this is all about cementing and promoting relationships.” Adams will call on the expertise of his former England teammate and keen league fan Stuart Pearce to ensure his tenure as president is as successful as possible. “Stuart loves the game,” Adams said. “I bumped into him last week at a game. He loves it to bits and I’m going to use him in my team to spread the word that it’s a fantastic sport. I love the honest, open approach and the physical side of the game. I’ve been bored out of my brains at some recent football games with all the sideways passing. I’m not trying to say I hate football and I’m now all about rugby league, but it is a great sport.” Adams admitted that while he is not familiar with the finer details, he has been impressed by the work done in local communities and the promotion of player welfare. “They’ve got players going into prisons and mentoring young offenders, which is great stuff. You don’t see top international footballers doing that. Anything I can do to help, I will. Sporting Chance wouldn’t just get into bed with anyone, and I won’t take this role lightly. The governing body has confirmed it is still to finalise Ottawa’s entry into the professional structure next year. Speculation is mounting that the backers behind the bid – led by the Toronto Wolfpack founder, Eric Perez – have been unable to convince the RFL they will be ready to enter in 2020. “We’re not ready to confirm it,” Simon Johnson, the RFL’s chairman, said. “Discussions are well-advanced, but there’s a board meeting in August when it’s again on the agenda.”