Fiction, like religion, asks us to believe in things we cannot see. Claire McGlasson’s debut novel tells a story so strange and improbable that it might have tested the faith of some readers – if not for the fact that it is firmly grounded in historical events. A TV reporter by trade, McGlasson has uncovered the little-known tale of the Panacea Society, a group of genteel single ladies who gathered in Bedford in the years after the first world war to await the second coming while surrounded by tasteful upholstery. If this all sounds benignly dotty, we soon learn that behind the Society’s viburnum hedges and lace curtains lurks a dangerous personality cult. Octavia, the self-anointed “Daughter of God”, teaches her followers that the secrets of salvation were sealed in a box 100 years ago by a mysterious English prophetess. Her followers must pray for it to be opened while purging themselves of sin, doubt and bad table manners. “Jesus will not return until we make ourselves colourless, faultless, zero,” she tells them, pointing out that the Almighty takes an especially dim view of “unnecessary noises, high voices” and putting “your knife and fork at right angles to the plate”. Octavia is a wonderfully original character: prim, dowdy and genuinely sinister, as though Hyacinth Bucket had been written into Rosemary’s Baby. But the novel’s beating heart is the story of 25-year-old Dilys. In an attempt to win Octavia’s favour, Dilys makes a new recruit of another young woman, Grace, a legal secretary with burning auburn hair. Grace’s smile makes Dilys feel as though “God Himself has finally noticed I am here”, and she soon finds herself torn between the spirit and the flesh, afflicted by “visions that rise in my breath while I sleep … dreams trapped in the fringing on the pink lampshade or clinging to the mirror like a smear of grease”. The Rapture is perceptive about the ways in which earthly longing can be refracted into religious excitement, as a magnifying glass focuses sunlight. The Society helps channel and tame its members’ sexual passion, their grief over husbands and brothers lost in the war, and their unarticulated political frustration (first-wave feminism has barely made a splash in their lives). McGlasson weaves these threads together skilfully, creating a wise and entertaining novel about the way we break open the boxes sealed inside ourselves. • The Rapture is published by Faber (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.