There’s a rack of ribs in the oven. Glistening with date and pomegranate syrup, one sweet, the other sour, they are slowly browning to a mirror glaze. The ribs are on a wire rack resting over a roasting tin that I have lined with foil so that any drips of syrup don’t burn on the tin. It’s a bugger to scrape off. There have been so many ribs in this oven over the years: ribs with molasses, ribs with chilli paste, ribs with aniseed and honey, and ribs with maple syrup and mustard. I steam them first, in the piece to keep them juicy, the whole length of bone, flesh and fat covered with foil and left in a slow oven for a good couple of hours. The meat cooks in its own steam and becomes so tender you can pull the ribs apart with two forks. They get a second shot in the oven, thickly brushed with their sweet-and-sour dressing, the heat turned up high. The sugars caramelise. The edges blacken and blister, and the meat will stay succulent within its polished mahogany crust. I let them sit for 10 minutes before separating into lumps of two or three ribs, then pile them on top of a mound of rust-red, kickass kimchi into which I have tossed some ice-cold cucumber. There’s a cherry tart for pudding: a sort of bakewell but more seasonal, made with the generosity of pistachios and ripe cherries. We will eat in the garden and everyone can throw their bones and stones in the bushes. Bake the tart case first to ensure it is crisp. Place a baking sheet in the oven to get hot before you start baking.Serves 6 For the pastry:plain flour 200gbutter 100gegg yolk 1water about 2 tbsp For the frangipane:butter 100gcaster sugar 125gpistachios 60geggs 2flour 60gground almonds 60g For the filling:cherries 250gmorello cherry jam 250gflaked almonds 3 tbsp Put the flour and butter into a food processor and reduce to soft crumbs, then add the egg yolk followed by enough water to make a firm but slightly sticky dough. If you prefer, cut the butter into dice, rub into the flour with fingertips then mix in the egg and water. Transfer to a lightly floured board or work surface, pat into a thick disc, wrap in kitchen paper and refrigerate for 30 minutes. Heat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Roll the pastry out and use to line a 23cm loose-bottomed tart tin. Fill with baking parchment or foil and baking beans then bake for 20 minutes. Remove the paper or foil and beans and return to the oven for a few minutes until the pastry is dry. While the pastry is baking, make the frangipane. Cream together the butter and sugar until light and fluffy. (This is easiest done with a food mixer fitted with a beater attachment.) While the mixture is creaming, grind the pistachios to a fine powder in a food processor. Break the eggs into a bowl, beat lightly with a fork, then add to the butter and sugar. If the mixture shows any sign of curdling or becomes grainy, introduce a little flour. Finally, mix in all the flour, all the ground nuts and set aside. Stone the cherries. Remove the pastry case from the oven and turn the oven down to 160C/gas mark 3. Spread the base of the pastry case with the jam. Scatter the stoned cherries over then spoon in the frangipane and smooth the surface. Scatter the flaked almonds over the tart and bake for 40 minutes until the filling feels lightly firm. Remove from the oven and allow to cool before attempting to remove the case and slicing. Serves 4 a rack of pork ribs, skin removed 1 kgfennel seeds 1 tbspbay leaves 3black peppercorns 12date syrup 2 tbsppomegranate molasses 2 tbsp For the kimchi slaw:cucumber 150gradishes 250gkimchi 250g Put the kettle on. Turn the oven to 160C/gas mark 3. Lightly crush the fennel seeds with a pestle and mortar and put them in a roasting tin with the bay leaves and peppercorns. Pour freshly boiled water into the tin and place a metal rack for the pork to sit on over the roasting tin. Season the ribs with salt, then place on the rack and cover the tin and pork tightly with tinfoil. Place in the oven and bake for 2½ hours until the meat is tender (it should pull easily from its bones). Mix the date syrup and pomegranate molasses. Remove the roasting tin from the oven, take off the foil, lift off the rack and pour away the water. Turn the oven up to 220C/gas mark 8. Line the roasting tin with foil then replace the rack and pork on the tin and brush the meat generously with the syrup. Return the meat to the oven, uncovered, and bake for about 10 minutes, then brush it with more of the syrup. Return to the oven for a further 10 minutes or until the meat is dark, sticky and glossy. Remove the meat from the tin and leave to rest for 10 minutes before cutting into ribs and serving with the slaw below. For the kimchi slaw, peel the cucumber and cut into slim matchstick-sized pieces. Slice the radishes into thin rounds then add both to the kimchi and set aside for a good hour. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater 