In 80 minutes of high emotion, high action and huge momentum shifts, a final-minute try by James Tedesco saw New South Wales beat Queensland 26-20 and take out the 2019 State of Origin series. In a typically compelling and physical fixture, a capacity crowd of 82,565 at Sydney’s ANZ Stadium had to wait until 20 seconds were left on the clock to know it was the Blues’ game and series. Pre-match the accepted wisdom was that it was the Blues’ to lose and at half-time – 8-all – and with two minutes to go – 20-all – it looked like they easily could. In the face of swarming, physical, never-say-die defence and adventurous ball-play by Queensland, NSW had the look of deer in the headlights. But they snapped out of it. Tedesco scorched the earth. Damien Cook scooted from dummy-half as the Rabbitohs’ rake can. He and Tedesco scored fine tries in the 50th and 60th minutes respectively to take the lead by 12 with 10 minutes to play. But the Queenslanders came again and Josh Maguire scored. With five minutes to go and both teams’ lungs on fire, Josh Papalii strode over and Ethan Lowe – who had earlier charged down James Maloney’s kick – smashed a high-pressure conversion straight through the sticks to square it up with two minutes to play. Then the Blues threw it about. A 60-metre effort saw Blake Ferguson do brilliantly to stay inside the right hand touch line before picking up Tedesco inside who won the match, the series, and man of the series. Earlier, from the New South Wales’ centre of excellence, the Blues strode through a blue tunnel on a blue carpet and burst out onto ANZ Stadium all blue steel. Bookmakers had opened with the Blues 2/1-on. They were smashed in half a point. Then smashed again, running out 7/2-on, the shortest-priced favourite in memory. Yet when the teams kicked off it was 13 v 13 and the events of Perth were two weeks ago. Queensland showed intent early – intent to “play”. They were positive. Papalii, out of form, made two runs and an offload within the first minute. Moses Mbye began in the centres with Michael Morgan on the bench. The Blues bombed Cameron Munster, who held firm. Munster ran dangerously all match. Daly Cherry-Evans kicked dangerously. Foundations were laid by forwards hard-charging before Corey Norman’s grubber was seized upon by Felise Kaufusi who scored. Slightly dewy, slightly breezy, the surface was firm. In Perth the Blues had throw passes in torrential rain yet in NSW both teams revelled in the mild Sydney “winter”. After five minutes Queensland had conceded two penalties, and NSW had two points with a penalty goal to Maloney. Queensland won piggy-back penalties. The Blues defended while Tedesco ran with alacrity. Mitchell Pearce passed to Cook who passed to Pearce who passed to Maloney. Dane Gagai was rustled into the in-goal. Queensland won a penalty. Queensland were winning the little moments. Papalii was Samoan steel. And the penalties continued to come, 10 in the first 28 minutes, several of them contentious. Lowe kicked a penalty goal and the Maroons led 8-2. Queensland flew off the defensive line with swarming intent and the first 30 minutes were Maroon. Tedesco and Cook were well marked while Tom Trbojevic was barely sighted. The Blues were in a scrap; the Maroons had come to play. Then Tedesco began to run. And run. Queensland conceded a penalty. The Blues chose to run. Then another penalty. “No more here!” commanded referee Gerard Sutton who should have been talking to himself. He and Ashley Klein blew 12 in the first half alone. Paul Vaughan hit a short ball of Cook and grounded the ball through a maelstrom before Maloney converted. The Blues were back but only the board. It was Queensland’s half. But, ultimately, after so many swings and roundabouts, it was New South Wales’ match and series.