Liverpool have been quiet in the transfer market this summer so their fans will be happy to hear they have been scurrying away behind the scenes to snap up English football’s next big thing. Harvey Elliott made the world sit up and notice in May when he became the youngest player ever to appear in the Premier League aged 16 years and 30 days. Barcelona, Real Madrid, PSG and Leipzig quickly joined the race for the England Under-17 international midfielder but reports today suggest Liverpool have won the race for his signature. The Reds will have to pay the Championship side a significant compensation package for a player Tom Cairney says has the ‘wow’ factor. “His attitude and his belief in himself at such a young age is frightening,” said Fulham’s captain after Elliott’s Premier League debut as a late substitute against Wolves. “He’s got a great football brain, an eye for goal and is a very entertaining player.” Reports in Portugal suggest Bruno Fernandes has his heart set on joining Manchester United and will put the finishing touches on a £53m move to Old Trafford this week. The 24-year-old, who contributed 28 goals and 14 assists from midfield for Sporting last season, has instructed his agent to fly to Manchester on Wednesday to thrash out personal terms. He might have to wait outside Ed Woodward’s office for a bit though as Italian media reckon the Lazio sporting director, Igli Tare, has flown to England to hold talks about the sale of Sergej Milinkovic-Savic. The 24-year-old midfielder, a Mill staple last summer, has apparently seen his value plummet from €120m to €80m after a poor season, although you won’t hear Tare saying that. Rafael Benítez may have finally escaped to China but he has taken his love of Salómón Rondon with him. Flush with cash after taking over at Dalian Yifang, Benítez wants to see the big Venezuelan hitman putting himself about all over the Chines Super League an is willing to pay £25m for the privilege. Newcastle fans console themselves with the news their club has joined Burnley in the race for Norwich City’s teenage goalkeeper Jon McCracken. Having agreed a deal to sign Tyrone Mings from Bournemouth, Aston Villa seem intent on sprinkling some fabled ‘Premier League experience’ across their newly-promoted squad. Gary Cahill is close to rejoining his boyhood club on a free transfer from Chelsea while Villa have also made inquiries about snapping up Fabio Borini from Milan. Crystal Palace are also interested in the striker who flopped at Liverpool. Tottenham have seen off interest from Arsenal to agree a deal for Real Madrid’s Dani Ceballos. The Gunners have reignited their interest in Ryan Fraser and Malcom after their £40m approach for Wilfried Zaha was laughed out of town by Crystal Palace. And Neal Maupay is set to become Sheffield United’s £15m record buy after Brentford slashed the asking price for their French striker.