Your reporting on racism in British universities (Revealed: the scale of racism at universities, 6 July) is disturbing and demands action from everyone working and studying in higher education, most importantly those of us leading institutions. Your report mentions the ongoing student protest at Goldsmiths, which has raised important questions of the university and higher education more widely. We are acutely aware that those involved have not undertaken their protest lightly. Goldsmiths is responding comprehensively, including planning mandatory staff training on race equality and launching a review of how we handle complaints of racism. We have committed more than £500,000 in additional spend over the next year to help address the concerns. Our challenge is how best to move forward in a context where the protesters have refused to negotiate on their demands, while their action has prevented use of key teaching spaces for more than four months. We are hopeful of a resolution soon, while aware that we cannot expect a small group of protesters to represent all BME perspectives. Your coverage is a wake-up call for universities to listen to the full breadth of BME voices if we are to live up to the sector’s identity as a space for liberal and critical reflection – discourse that typically precedes change in wider society.Professor Elisabeth HillActing warden, Goldsmiths, University of London • Thank you for your exposé of racism experienced by staff and students in universities. This is a deeply shocking report. For many of us working in education, this confirms our own experiences in recent years. It also shows how little has really changed in the two decades that have passed since the publication of the Macpherson report. The University and College Union (UCU) has been campaigning with Stand Up to Racism to try to break the wall of silence about racism on campus. That is why a second campus tour is planned for this autumn to support staff and students fighting back against racism on campus and continuing to document institutional racism. Higher education is the gift that every generation bequeaths to the next. Our black and ethnic minority students and staff have as much right to that gift as everyone else. When we talk about access, when we talk about participation, the fact that universities are refusing to even consider that racism might exist in their own practices is an outrage.Nita Sanghera UCU president-electDave Muritu UCU past chair of black members standing committeeJo McNeill UCU national executive committee Mesar Hameed Bath University councilSue Abbott UCU chair of national equalities committeeJulia Roberts UCU NECNaina Kent UCU black members standing committeeVida Greaux UCU NECRhiannon Lockley UCU women members standing committeeSean Wallis UCU NECCecily Blyther UCU NECLinda Cronin Roehampton University UCU equality officerPura Ariza UCU NECMandy Brown UCU London regional secretaryAbdullah Yusuf Dundee University UCU equality officerAnne Alexander Cambridge University UCUChristina Paine UCU NECTom Pike, Roddy Slorach, Vijay Tymms, Dave Mooney, Chris Jackson, Colin Cotter, Dan Nucinkis, Anita Hill, Peter Woodward, Janette Shiel, Fay Dowker, Jo Chaffin Imperial College UCUGrant Buttars Edinburgh University UCU presidentUmit Yidiz Edge Hill University UCUMike Orr Edinburgh University UCUBruce Heil Open University UCUAnne Marie Piso Leeds Beckett University UCU joint branch secretaryBernadette Driscoll College of North West London UCUMegan Povey, Lesley McGorrigan Leeds University UCUStacy Gillis, David Stewart, Geoff Abbott Newcastle University UCUPeter Dwyer, Lee Humber, Des McDermott, Ed Rooksby, Monica Mottin, Gerard Ward, Ruskin College UCURichard Bradbury Open University UCU vice-presidentMichael Szapakowski Writtle UCL UCU branch chairSara Weiner UCU NECJulie Hearn UCU NECSunil Banga, Nils Markusson, Shuruq Naguib Lancaster University UCUMark Abel UCU NECCarlo Morelli UCU NEC and UCU Scotland NECIoanna Ioannou UCU NECMargot Hill UCU NECAllister Mactaggart Chesterfield College UCU branch chairTony Sullivan London College of Fashion UCU branch secretaryJoão Nunes de Almeida Lancaster University UCU anti-casualisation officerJames Cussens York University UCU branch executiveAnnie Jones Sheffield Hallam University UCUCraig Brandist Sheffield University UCU senior vice-president • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition 