Wednesday’s news that William Hill will close about 700 betting shops over the next few months, around a third of its retail estate, puts the jobs of 4,500 company staff at risk (and up to 12,000 in the industry) and will also mean a cut of around £21m in media rights payments to Britain’s racecourses, on top of an unexpected £17m drop in the money collected by the Levy Board in 2018-19, which was revealed in May. Only the staff who are going to lose their jobs can be seen as unfortunate or blameless, however, as the 15-year story of the disastrous decision to allow high-speed, high-stakes roulette into Britain’s betting shops draws towards what was always likely to be a painful conclusion. William Hill, along with the other major chains, was allowed to suck billions of pounds from what were already deprived areas the length and breadth of Britain, when Labour’s 2005 Gambling Act legitimised the gaming machines which they had been quietly introducing to their shops for some time. Opposition to FOBTs and their malign consequences for individuals and communities was widespread and also cut across party lines. The eventual cut in the maximum stake from £100 to £2 was, if anything, long overdue. So it is the executives who continued to open shops and take on staff as if the good times would roll forever, who used the cash bonanza from FOBTs to maximise dividends for shareholders and their own bonuses with it, who are the ones who should be fearing for their jobs now. Unfortunately, of course, the world does not work like that. Racing, meanwhile, is also facing up to the imminent loss of annual media rights payments of £30,000 per shop, not only from the 700 shops that William Hill expects to close but also from hundreds more of their competitor’s shops that are likely to go the same way. The BHA’s estimate is that the annual loss will be around £50-£60m once the FOBT saga finally reaches a conclusion. Wednesday’s announcement suggests that it may prove to be a conservative one. With Levy income also in a sudden, sharp decline, the pressure on prize money will be brutal. We had a hint of what may lie ahead a few months ago, when Arena Racecourse Company (ARC) announced its intention to cut £3m from its prize fund in 2019 in anticipation of a big drop in media rights income later in the year. After fierce opposition from owners, trainers and jockeys, including actual and threatened boycotts of races at its courses, ARC eventually backed down. But it may prove to have been only a temporary ceasefire, and possibly the precursor to a much more serious conflict because it is not just the ARC tracks that will feel the pain. Every racecourse in the country has enjoyed its share of the FOBT-fuelled boom in media rights payments. The executives who signed off on the deals on a “per-shop” basis were fully aware of the controversy surrounding the gaming machines and the long-running campaign to see the maximum stake cut to £2. But they held their noses, crossed their fingers and signed on the dotted line. Owners and trainers were delighted to compete for the pumped-up prize-funds that were created as a result. The extra money, though, was ultimately generated by gaming, not betting. It was not money that racing had earned or deserved, but they were also too busy making hay while they could to worry about what might happen if the bookies’ FOBT money tap was ever switched off. The current mood among owners was summed up at this week’s AGM of the Racehorse Owner’s Association by a leading figure in the organisation who muttered that “if they think we’re going to go back to racing for three grand at Lingfield, they’re wrong”. In the end, though, it may be a choice between three grand at Lingfield or nothing. If or when Ladbrokes, Coral and BetFred follow suit and announce shop closures of their own, prize money will come under pressure as never before. The battle lines will then have been drawn for a struggle which was always coming, and in which everyone can expect to end up on the losing side. Three of the five horses which have reappeared so far this month after running at Royal Ascot a few weeks ago have won, and Liberty Beach (2.20) is worth backing to be the fourth when she lines up for the Listed Chasemore Farm Dragon Stakes at Sandown. In all, six of the 10 runners were in action at the Royal meeting, but Liberty Beach put up the most eye-catching performance when finishing fourth in the Queen Mary Stakes. She was less than two-and-a-half lengths behind the winner but perhaps more significantly, Liberty Beach was the first horse home from a low-numbered stall, having raced apart from the other placed horses, which came down the stands’ side. Elarqam (3.25) has been slowly working his way back to something within sight of his form as a juvenile and in the early part of last season, when he finished fourth in the 2,000 Guineas. He too ran well at Royal Ascot, finishing third in the Wolferton Stakes, and a return to slightly less demanding company should be enough to get him back into the winner’s enclosure. Jazeel (4.00) also looks fairly priced on the Sandown card at around 3-1, while Arctic Ocean (4.10) and Certain Lad (8.30), who has a big chance on his form over track and trip in May, should go well at Doncaster and Haydock, respectively. Newton Abbot: 1.40 Parody, 2.10 Sizing Granite, 2.40 Court Duty, 3.15 Hot Ryan, 3.45 Musical Stardust, 4.20 River Of Intrigue, 4.55 Belfast Banter. Sandown: 1.50 Beyond Equal, 2.20 Liberty Beach (nb), 2.55 Riot, 3.25 Elarqam, 4.00 Jazeel, 4.35 Ship Of The Fen, 5.05 Lunar Deity. Doncaster: 2.00 Enchanted Linda, 2.30 Baadirr, 3.05 Bint Soghaan, 3.35 Key Player, 4.10 Arctic Ocean, 4.45 Promissory, 5.15 Gas Monkey Haydock: 5.50 Gennaro, 6.20 Magical Spirit, 6.55 Vee Man Ten, 7.25 Lola Paige, 8.00 Jem Scuttle, 8.30 Certain Lad (nap), 9.00 Vitralite Chelmsford City: 5.25 Subjectivist, 6.00 Tarseekh, 6.30 Soft Cover, 7.05 Nahaarr, 7.35 Jadeerah, 8.10 Dapper Man, 8.40 Shovel It On Beverley: 6.10 Ajrar, 6.40 Mighty Spirit, 7.15 Muraadef, 7.45 Anna Bunina, 8.20 Pearl Noir, 8.50 Agravain