What’s going for it? Hardcore, the Cardigans. They take no nonsense. Owain Gwynedd, Cadwaladr ap Gruffydd and Gruffydd ap Rhys kicked out the Normans, razing the castle and building their own, thank you very much, which stands there to this day. The relative remoteness of Ceredigion, and, of course, the doughty character of its inhabitants, has long made this stretch of coast a bastion of Welsh culture and language. The nearby coast has everything from rugged cliffs and sandy beaches to secret coves – not to mention dolphin sightings. Today, the castle, where the first eisteddfod was held, back in the misty reaches of time, is freshly renovated and revived, as a home to Welsh poetry jams and whatnot. And the rest of the town? I’ve rarely seen a place in better spirits. The high street is all bushy-tailed with Specsavers, nail bars, butchers, greengrocers beside sans-serif bakers and kool koffee spots with hashtags. There’s culture aplenty: a great cinema, Theatr Mwldan, a film society, and an “alternative” theatre venue, the Small World Theatre. This is one of those corners of Wales that has long attracted outcasts and hippies, rat-race escapees, such as the brains behind the Meghan-sported Hiut jeans, and those who have frankly had enough of everything (who can blame them right now?). The case against Precious little. Unless you can’t live without motorways and skyscrapers. Probably harder to find work unless you are Welsh-speaking. Well connected? On the edge of the country, obviously. Trains: no, the nearest stations are Carmarthen and Aberystwyth. Driving: 30 minutes to Aberaeron or Fishguard, 50 minutes to Carmarthen, one hour to Aberystwyth; excellent coves and beaches such as Cilborth up the road. Decent local buses to destinations including Aberaeron (hourly, one hour) and Aberystwyth (hourly, one hour and 45 minutes). Schools Primaries: Gynradd Aberteifi has no inspection report, says Estyn, the education inspectorate for Wales. Secondaries: Uwchradd Aberteifi is “adequate” with prospects for improvement “good”. Hang out at… Lots to choose from: Fforest’s Pizzatipi and Tafarn Smwglin. The Ferry Inn is lovely, or there’s 1176 for fancy. The addictive sourdough at Bara Menyn (Welsh for “bread and butter”) and newbie Crwst, a former hardware shop turned cafe. Where to buy Two choices. The Old Town, huddled round the castle and quayside, with lanes of brightly painted or grey-stone cottages and townhouses. Or the New Town, up the hill, for Victorians to moderns, townhouses to suburbans. Detacheds and townhouses, £200,000-£500,000. Semis, £100,000-£350,000. Terraced houses and cottages, £100,000-£175,000. Very little in the way of rentals. Bargain of the week Three-bedroom period terrace house in the Old Town, needs a bit of work, £95,000, with jjmorris.com. Vicky Wade “Everywhere is within walking distance.” Kate Rhys “Don’t even think of moving here unless you plan to learn and speak Welsh.” • Live in Cardigan? Join the debate below Do you live in West Kirby? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, email lets.move@theguardian.com by Tuesday 30 July.