Phoebe Waller-Bridge has responded to criticism that her TV comedy-drama Fleabag is “for posh girls”, arguing that judging work based on how privileged the author is “undermines the story”. “It’s not like my privilege created Fleabag,” she told the podcast How to Fail with Elizabeth Day. “I created Fleabag, but from a point of place in my life where I was able to sit and write.” This being Britain, her comments have inevitably sparked a debate about class, with some social media users rightly pointing out that Waller-Bridge, who was educated at private schools and descends from titled nobility, would likely have had a different career trajectory if she had been born in a council flat and had to work two jobs to pay the rent. As the writer Chardine Taylor Stone succinctly put it: “Your privilege didn’t create Fleabag - but it helped Fleabag get made!” This isn’t about singling out Waller-Bridge for criticism. Not least because, too often, there appears to be a law that once a woman becomes “too successful”, she must be picked over and pulled down for the slightest behavioural infraction. Besides, Waller-Bridge herself partly conceded it was “absolutely probably true” that many other people don’t have the opportunities that she was afforded growing up. But the row does speak to something worth pausing on: not only the persistence of class inequality in certain industries in this country, but the very human reluctance to acknowledge the role of luck and circumstance in all our lives. It’s comforting to believe that our success is down to our own talent and hard work, rather than a complex mix of education, wealth and family. As Waller-Bridge said: “I like to think that whatever life I’d lived, wherever I’d been born or brought up, I would still have written it if I had been given the encouragement.” But anyone from a working-class background who has tried to break into a closed industry knows the picture can be very different for us, from having no social networks to the way a lack of financial security makes it harder to take risks. Even the capacity to imagine writing for a living when you grow up can be a privilege if you see no one around you in these jobs. This isn’t to say that low-income families don’t produce great writers; indeed, to assume so is itself a symptom of how quickly working-class talent is routinely marginalised. But the stats show such success is too often an uphill battle: one survey of 2,000-odd writers found just 25% identified as working class, while two in five (42%) of British Bafta winners went to private school. Accepting this reality doesn’t diminish the incredible work of Waller-Bridge, or anyone from an upper-middle-class background. But it does enable a conversation to open up about just why this section of society is still disproportionately represented in the arts, and what can be done to elevate other voices. When Anna Burns thanked her local food bank, charities and the benefits system in accepting the 2018 Man Booker prize for her novel Milkman, it was refreshing because of its honesty about what it takes for someone who is poor to survive in creative industries. Burns didn’t pretend that talent alone got her to that stage; she acknowledged the far-from-glamorous practical support that was needed to go alongside it. This type of frankness is all the more important at a time when an MPs inquiry recently warned that support for low-income writers is under threat due to changes to benefits. The richest of cultures is produced when it is made up of socially diverse talent, which means that talking openly about what is needed to make that happen is in all our interests. As Waller-Bridge suggests, with the right life chances in place, many more working-class writers will be able to find their own “Fleabag” in them.