New Zealand, six matches into their World Cup campaign, were undefeated. A washout with India may have helped their cause somewhat but a coveted semi‑final place seemed assured. How quickly prospects have dimmed. Successive defeats by Pakistan and Australia leave New Zealand facing what could prove a sudden-death showdown with England on Wednesday. Grasp your Pimm’s tightly, the finals have come early. England arrive in Durham buoyed by their morale-reviving, potentially tournament-saving, 31-run win over India at Edgbaston but still require victory to guarantee progression to the knockouts. New Zealand, for all their emerging cracks and tail-spinning form, sit a point ahead in a slightly more favourable position. A third defeat running would, however, consign them to an anxious wait, with Pakistan able to draw level and possibly knock Kane Williamson’s men out on superior net run rate. Bangladesh cannot be discounted either, although they would need to defeat India and Pakistan and hope New Zealand fall to England. How did New Zealand end up here? To this point their World Cup can best be described as flattering to deceive. There have been bright moments, sure, but conservative tactics and a lack of conviction cast doubts over their credentials among the tournament’s true contenders. After a dream start of dominant victories against Sri Lanka and Afghanistan nervy wins against Bangladesh, South Africa and West Indies all had dramatic climaxes that could easily have swung the other way. Much tougher tests were always slated for the back end. Four years ago when New Zealand were World Cup bridesmaids at the Melbourne Cricket Ground they got there by embracing a fearless attacking approach, led at the top by Brendon McCullum and the steadfast belief that nothing was beyond them. This time around they have been largely risk averse. Bowling has carried them. With an intimidating blend of short-pitch fireballs and lethal toe missiles, Lockie Ferguson has fast become their World Cup tormentor. At Lord’s last Saturday Ferguson removed David Warner and Steve Smith in seven deliveries to boost his tournament haul to 17 wickets, second only to Mitchell Starc. Trent Boult also claimed New Zealand’s first World Cup hat-trick, with three pitch-perfect yorkers. The batsmen, though, have consistently crumbled. With McCullum swapping the bat for the microphone New Zealand have been much less swashbuckling and forced to play it safe because their openers have, on the whole, failed to lay platforms. Martin Guptill sent West Indies to all parts of Wellington on his way to a record 237 from 163 balls in the 2015 World Cup quarter-final. His average at this World Cup is 26.3, skewed by 73 not out in the opening match against Sri Lanka, illustrating New Zealand’s crippling reliance on Williamson and Ross Taylor to dig in and bail them out. After a string of unconvincing dismissals Colin Munro, Guptill’s opening partner, was dropped for the last match but Henry Nicholls, in his first one-day international since February, could not survive Australia’s formidable attack. Successive centuries from classy and composed captain Williamson twice saved New Zealand but he and Taylor can’t be expected to do it alone. The wicketkeeper Tom Latham, batting at five, also has a best score of 14 from his last five attempts. The all-rounders Jimmy Neesham and Colin de Grandhomme have offered valuable knocks but, unless the openers front up against England, New Zealand will be in a familiar flummox. Chasing 244, New Zealand used 172 dot balls – of their total 262 faced – to crumble for 157 on a worn wicket against Australia. Asked afterwards what went wrong, Williamson suggested we could be there a while, having reduced Australia to 92 for five, only to let such a dominant position slip. With new opposition in England, on a new surface, New Zealand will quickly move on. “The challenge is you have lost a couple and there is perhaps a dent in momentum but then it is coming back to the cricket we want to play,” Williamson said. “Smart cricket throughout has been the most important thing – even more than freedom which everyone wants to achieve day in, day out. Anyone can beat anyone at this tournament.” Depending on the pitch, New Zealand may be tempted to include the experienced seamer Tim Southee for the first time this tournament – if for no other reason than he could evoke memories of his seven for 33 against England in their last World Cup group match in Wellington. Joe Root, Eoin Morgan, Jos Buttler, Moeen Ali and Chris Woakes all featured that day. In the end, though, New Zealand’s shaky batting will determine their fate. • Liam Napier is a freelance cricket writer and part of the Guardian’s Experts’ Network for the Cricket World Cup