Born in California in 1986, journalist and author Elaine Welteroth was named editor of Teen Vogue in 2016. The magazine’s first African American editor and the youngest in Condé Nast’s history, Welteroth became known for her efforts to increase its coverage of politics and championing of diversity. After Teen Vogue’s final print issue in 2017, she became a judge on the television show Project Runway. Her memoir More Than Enough (Ebury Press) is out now. Little Woods (dir Nia DaCosta)I spent a lot of time on planes recently for my book tour, so I’ve been able to catch up on movies. This was captivating; it still haunts me. It stars Tessa Thompson and Lily James as estranged sisters living in poverty in middle America. Thompson’s character was adopted and there’s an unspoken racial barrier between them, but it’s not discussed openly. The big theme it forces you to contemplate is that people’s decisions are only as good as their options. If you carry any preconception around such issues as abortion or the opioid crisis, I think you walk away less judgmental. Finding My Voice by Valerie JarrettI really enjoyed reading this memoir that trails Jarrett’s journey into the White House and beyond. It humanises one of the most powerful female figures of our time in the political sphere – she remains the most trusted adviser to the Obamas. And she has such an interesting background: she was born in Iran, because her father, a black doctor, could not find any opportunities to practise medicine in America during the civil rights era. For much of her career she kept a relatively low profile, so it was wonderful to have her open up about where she came from. Heard It in a Past Life by Maggie RogersI’ve been listening to this album on repeat every single day, annoying everyone around me. It’s a freeing, uplifting album, and the strength of story in her lyrics is so profound for a woman of her age. I find myself dancing all around the house every time I turn it on: it just puts me in a good mood. I’m one of her biggest fans – I’ve just purchased tickets to take my fiance to go see her in concert in New York in October. So I’m excited about that. Brother VelliesAurora James is the designer behind this shoe and handbag accessories line. She’s so inspiring – she has a very sustainable approach to fashion. Her whole ethos is about elevating local artisans from all over the world, specifically Africa, who are paid a livable wage. Everything is colourful and kind of “more is more”: it reminds me of the sort of woman I wanted to be when I was a little girl – like Blanche from The Golden Girls – women who love luxurious fabrics and prints and feathers, but done through an artisanal lens. Still ProcessingIt’s my go-to podcast while I’m in the shower – I love to use that time to think. It’s produced by two New York Times culture writers, Jenna Wortham and Wesley Morris. It’s like listening in on a phone call between two of your smartest friends about everything you’re listening to, thinking about, talking about – such as the Michael Jackson documentary or social justice issues. In one episode they talk about the culture of aunties, thinking about all of the most iconic aunties in film history. Their perspective is always enlightening, well-researched and really funny. When They See Us (Netflix)This is Ava DuVernay’s new project, about the Central Park Five. It was a story that rocked America in the late 80s of five black teenage boys who were accused of crimes they did not commit. It shows how they became victims of the criminal justice system, and it’s really eye-opening and heart-wrenching. I don’t recommend binge-watching this series: it’s best enjoyed like an IV drip, one drop at a time, and then you need to walk away to process what you’ve just seen. But it’s incredible: even though it’s hard to watch, it’s too important to miss.