It is technically possible to make a programme about porn without showing any porn. It’s a startling thought, but true. We know what the word means. Most of us will know what quite a few of the more detailed terms mean if people are discussing them without visual aids. And I am guessing that even the most sheltered of us can probably work out what they are with a little imagination and a recalibration of how elastic various orifices can be given the right circumstances/payment. It never happens, of course. The chance to fill a background with heaving T and A is too alluring to pass up. It is so consistently done that we accept it as natural. It took me half of the opening episode of Channel 4’s Generation Porn to realise that it had shown me more on-screen action in 30 minutes than crosses my laptop screen in a year. This, of course, is because I am 108 years old in digital years and therefore not of the generation purportedly under discussion. I say purportedly because so little was said, let alone argued or interrogated, in this first of three hour-long programmes claiming to investigate the effects of the free porn revolution on the people who have grown up surrounded by a shoreless sea of the stuff. We followed two young women – Gia, 19, and Gianna, 21 – who had arrived in the US’s cradle of pornography, the San Fernando valley in Los Angeles, a few months ago to run free of the constraints applied by white-bread Ohio and Bible belt Alabama respectively and embark on their careers as porn stars. Their stories begged more questions than they answered. (I particularly wanted to know how true the glamour of life in the huge, beautiful house they apparently shared was, and how representative that might be – this centenarian is sceptical.) Their accounts of their lives before and their lives now – all bubbly enthusiasm at the thought of graduating to anal and/or DP, and the chance to live the dream one said she had had since seventh grade (that is, since she was 12 or 13) – were accepted at face value. I am not saying it’s not true; I am saying that a programme making any claim to investigation needs to … investigate occasionally. But we did get to see a lot of them and their colleagues naked and semi-naked. That, I guess, is the important thing. And we still have two weeks to go. Surfaces as well as itches may still be scratched. It would be nice to see someone with distance and perspective – maybe even expertise in whatever sociocultural fields we need to step through – unpack Gianna’s comment that after she lost her virginity and discovered she liked sex (or “became a major whore”, as she puts it), everybody in school turned against her and started “chatting shit. I felt guilty for enjoying sex. That’s why I love porn. I can be myself.” Their stories were interspersed with fractionally more edifying input from UK families – parents flanking their teen offspring on the sofa – about the difference between their sexually formative years. Travis’s mum, Becki, started flinching at the thumbnails thrown up by her very first Google search. Travis gently informed her that it was all very much at the “normal” end of the spectrum. Sixteen-year-old Olivia’s dad wondered what happened to the notion of “going out with someone for three months before you could feel someone’s boobs over their clothes and build up to something consensual … Do kids miss out on that now?” A question that should have been central was skipped over. There were also some bracing contributions from the porn director Mike Quasar (who ends one of Gia’s scenes by saying: “I’d like to offer you a tissue and an apology”), that at least draw attention to the interrogative void at the heart of the show so far. He notes that the normalisation of porn over the past 10 years has made it a career option for many who wouldn’t previously have considered it. But “I would jump in front of a train if my daughter said she wanted to do porn in any aspect. I am aware that this makes me a massive hypocrite because I’m certainly willing to film other people’s daughters doing terrible things.” I hope the next fortnight considers whether porn was/is/should always be considered a terrible thing or not. Should apologies be made? And to whom, exactly? Can we disaggregate the effects on young women versus young men? Can we come back to Gia and Gianna when they have been in the business three years instead of three months, or talk to those who already have? Are we really all blasé about children growing up two clicks away from the kind of images that … well, click twice and see. They are young, and we are so stupid.