Q My wife is buying a property with her own money and has never owned property before. However, I bought and sold a property 20 years ago which she never lived in. I have two quotes from conveyancing firms. One gives my wife the benefit of no stamp duty for first-time buyers but the other doesn’t. This is because they interpret the rules differently. As far as I can tell she should not be penalised due to the fact that she is married. Who is right?RE A You are classed as a first-time buyer for the purposes of relief from stamp duty land tax (SDLT) – in England and Northern Ireland - if you are an individual who has never owned a residential property in the UK or anywhere else in the world. In addition, to qualify for the relief, you must be intending to live in the property as your main residence and it must not cost more than £500,000 (with the relief being limited to the first £300,000). So if your wife is purchasing a buy-to-let property, she doesn’t qualify for the relief even though she’s never owned property before. However, if she’s buying a home to live in (presumably for both of you) she can qualify for the relief even though she is married. According to John Shallcross, an experienced property solicitor and expert in SDLT at law firm, Blake Morgan, it all hinges on whether the rules for higher-rate SDLT would apply to your wife’s property purchase because the higher-rate rules trump the rules for first-time buyer relief. So the fact that you’ve owned property in the past doesn’t stop your wife from qualifying for first-time buyer’s relief provided you don’t currently own property. But if you do – and you don’t sell it before your wife acquires her property – the higher-rates of SDLT for a second property come into play even though she is buying in her own name. So if you are property free, the conveyancer who gives your wife the benefit of no SDLT is right. However, if you do own property, the other one has read the rules correctly and should apply the higher rate of SDLT – which is the standard rate plus three - to your wife’s purchase. Muddled about mortgages? Concerned about conveyancing? Email your homebuying and borrowing worries to Virginia Wallis at virginia.wallis.freelance@theguardian.com 