A man’s frozen body lies in the mountain pass, one half in Germany, the other in Austria. Which police force will investigate the murder? “One of us gets the head, the other the ass,” says the Austrian detective Gedeon Winter, Falstaffian of girth if darker of mirth. Winter speaks not so much with the wisdom of Solomon as with a complete lack of professional interest. He’s a 21st-century Bartleby: when tasked with work or socialising, he would rather not – both get in the way of boozing and sucking illicitly medicated sugar cubes. Despite his terrible tailor (“You dress like a pimp,” says one colleague) and a BMI unsuited to alpine police work – he resembles Wallander; not Branagh nor Krister Henriksson but Rolf Lassgård, the sweaty one with diabetes – Winter (Nicholas Ofczarek) is far and away the most diverting presence in Der Pass. His German opposite, Ellie Stocker (Julia Jentsch), all smiles and sensible parka, glares at Winter, silently reproving him for his coarseness and wondering what is this guy’s major malfunction. We already have an inkling: most likely it’s to do with That Thing That Happened in Vienna, which means (as always) that Winter has been exiled to a place where crime is negligible. How, though, could Winter not be intrigued by this very stiff stiff? After all, the body has been posed on the border after being stabbed in woods near an abandoned Mercedes. The corpse’s passport is Syrian, but its DNA is that of a Bulgarian with previous for people-trafficking. And what’s the deal with the horse’s tail the corpse is clutching? Simulated pagan rite? Gnomic cross-border critique of German-Austro immigration policies? Frankly, like Winter, I find it hard to care. Why? I’ve been waylaid at these TV borderlands before. First there was The Bridge, where a body was found lying between Sweden and Denmark. Then there was The Tunnel, in which a body was halfway between French and British jurisdictions, unacceptably spoiling London lovers’ chances of necking on the Passerelle des Arts. Now there’s this German-language drama featuring a dead Bulgarian people-trafficker, most likely thwarting smug Bavarians in Audi estates heading to the pistes (so there’s some good news). Of all the borders in all the world, why did this dead Bulgarian have to pitch up on the least interesting one? Bored at the milieu and by-numbers script, I spent this opening episode dreaming up alternatives. The 38th Parallel, a thriller in which Pyongyang and Seoul’s finest come together like a Trump-Kim handshake to find out who offed an inter-Korean corpse. The Very Hard Border, a silent movie set in a post-Brexit dystopia in which the Gardai and the PSNI aren’t talking any more, so solve Boris Johnson’s murder using hand gestures. Carry on Up the Punjab, a Bollywood musical set on the Kashmiri frontier, featuring a showstopping dance number with dressy Indian and Pakistani border guards and the Imran Khan singalong It’s Just Not Cricket. Back to Mitteleuropa. In Munich, a jaded hack gets a flash drive in the mail. Say what you want about German news gathering, at least the München Zeitung correspondent has his own sumptuous office, rather than hot-desking in journalism’s equivalent of The Hunger Games as happens at most papers. It contains what purports (I love a good purport, me) to be the last words of the Bulgarian corpse, a forced confession that goes something like this: “I smuggled people … Yadda yadda … My punishment will be your salvation. Blah de blah … The red time of year is coming.” Corbyn at No 10? Serial slaying? I’m no expert in enigmatic threats, but probably the latter. I liked one scene. The odd cop couple interview the corpse’s jailed cousin, who turns out to be unrepentant, misogynistic and sociopathic – the ideal skillset for the kind profession of leaving refugees to die in an abandoned truck. The cousin tells them the family motto: “You send 20 men, we send back 40 balls.” My family motto was very different: “You send us your shuttlecocks, we’ll bring the double entendres.” Which is why we had no friends. But the cousin has a point: whoever crossed his criminal mob family by offing the corpse in the mountains will get got. At the end of episode one, a snowplough pulls over so as not to crush a naked woman. She is the woman from an earlier scene, probably a sex worker who visited the chauffeur-driven alpha male at his lair for the usual reasons. My money says the alpha male has been punished by the Bulgarian family for offing their own. Cut to a gang of roughnecks around a brazier, one of whom cackles: “Shall I tell you a secret?” As anyone who has ever watched TV knows, cackling goons around a brazier means only one thing. No good.