David Conn presents an accurate and fair appraisal of the shortcomings in highlighting the practical benefits to the UK’s regions of EU membership (What has the EU done for us? We still don’t have an answer, 10 July). I know from experience that it was not for want of trying. In the event of a further referendum the lessons of 2016’s failure must be fully understood when, as we know, a heavy price was paid for not winning the argument on the significant benefits of EU membership to the UK’s regions, including the one I represent in the European parliament. But the headline of Conn’s article, perhaps inadvertently, falls into the trap that could lead to losing this argument yet again. Looking at this from a standpoint of “What has the EU done for us?” risks reinforcing the lazy and damaging characterisation of a monolithic EU handing down to us, telling us what’s best for us and so on. The reality is that the benefits of EU membership have been secured because we have a voice in the EU’s institutions – leading, shaping and influencing, and making the case for strategic priorities like the regional investment Conn is right to highlight. Those of us who believe leaving the EU is a wrong and highly damaging course need to pitch our argument not on the basis of what the EU has done for us, but on what more we can do together by staying in the European Union.Rory Palmer MEPLabour, East Midlands • David Conn cites Liverpool as an example of a beneficiary of EU funds. This city was transformed through EU support – £2.1bn in structural funding was invested in business, training and infrastructure over 25 years together with European Investment Bank support. The requirement to develop an economic strategy and attract private-sector funding alongside public investment doubled the benefit and was key to focusing minds on sustainable economic regeneration. The city’s transformation and potential was recognised when it was awarded European Capital of Culture status in 2008. There is still much to do. The EU’s pivotal role is well understood in Liverpool Riverside, where 73% voted remain in the 2016 referendum. Recent polling showed that support for remain had increased to 79.2% (Best for Britain, December 2018). This challenges the myth that northern working-class people are all Brexiteers. It also reinforces the need for the people of the UK to be asked in a new referendum whether they seriously wish to unravel what has been achieved and risk economic breakdown in a potentially catastrophic Brexit that can only make the situation worse in areas that have been “left behind”. Remaining in the EU is the best deal we have. Louise Ellman MPLabour (Co-op), Liverpool Riverside • David Conn elucidates the immense importance of EU funding to areas of the UK hammered by industrial decline. That swaths of the north remain relatively impoverished is due to government prioritising London and the south-east and privileging financial services and retail instead of capitalising on EU regional support. High-profile cultural assets like the Sage in Gateshead or Tate Liverpool cannot compensate for lost manufacturing, as Nissan’s EU-backed investment in Sunderland has done. But it is ironic that the EU role in Sunderland’s economy is not appreciated. This goes to the heart of what democracy is worth. Political debate has been corrupted by a media in cahoots with narrow sectional interests and the BBC’s obsession with ratings and “balance” over truth. Charlatans get airtime to make sensational claims regardless of facts. Lies repeated become accepted as legitimate opinion. Politics for many consists merely of telling people what they want to hear. Voters switch off, bored and indifferent, reduced to inanities like “We voted to leave, why don’t they just get on with it?”, having no understanding of the consequences for trade, for security, for Ireland, for food on the shelves or drugs to treat chronic illness, or the impact on Britain’s reputation and status in the world. Dictatorship prospers in a fog of ignorance and a sea of despair. The referendum in 2016 was a rightwing coup without tanks. If all of value is swept away we will look back with nostalgia on what Conservatism, never mind liberalism, once meant.Dr Simon SweeneyUniversity of York • David Conn is right to ask “What has the EU done for us?” but there is a gaping hole in his answer. While the UK is covered in his discussion of the architecture of EU funding, the “us” in question is evidently the English in the north-east and north-west. The EU has actively supported peace-building projects on both sides of the border in Ireland since 1995. We are now on the Peace IV programme, which runs to 2020. An estimated €1.6bn has been committed to peace in Ireland by the EU over the 25-year period. No wonder the EU prioritised defence of the Good Friday agreement in negotiating the withdrawal agreement. Ignorance of the significance of the “backstop” among many Westminster politicians is underlined by their ignorance of the EU’s investment in peace and what the EU has done for “them”.Mike TomlinsonBelfast • One of the reasons we are in the current mess is that, unlike in most other EU countries, we rarely see the EU flag flown alongside the union flag. We have “othered” the EU rather than seeing ourselves as part of it.Dan LevyEynsham, Oxfordshire • “What has the EU done for us?” asks David Conn. He then omits to mention that most precious benefit to my generation: seven decades of not having to sleep in air-raid shelters. Has it really got to be all about cash flows? “Lift up thine eyes” seems appropriate.John D WalshSwindon, Wiltshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition