‘“I’ve got nothing to prove to anyone,” says Geraint Thomas, his baritone lilt failing to mask an unexpectedly spiky dash of defiance. “If I end up as a one-hit wonder, it’s still a pretty good hit to have. A lot of guys just dream of riding the Tour de France. I have won it.” That answer comes after a light barrage of questions about the defending champion’s fitness and form going into this year’s race, which begins in Brussels on Saturday. It comes before a deeper probe into whether the amiable 33-year-old Welshman has the mindset to back up last year’s epic yellow jersey victory by claiming multiple grand tours. Thomas insists that he does – and that he also cannot wait to ride out of Brussels with the No 1 on his back, soaking up the cheers and the atmosphere. But then with the next breath he maintains the pressure is off. “I’ve always wanted to do as best I can and win as much as I can but at the same time if I don’t win this year it’s not like I’m going to retire and be like: ‘I should have won that stuffing Tour in 2019.’ I’m not saying I don’t care. I am certainly going to give everything I’ve got. But I want to get the chance to soak this Tour up, not in too much of a way that it throws me off but just to appreciate it more.” The good news for Thomas’s fans is that he insists he is physically ready after taking a while to get back on the saddle following last year’s Tour and a crash during the Tour de Suisse. Moments before stepping on to the podium in Paris last year, he had promised that the party to celebrate his yellow jersey would go on for “two weeks or perhaps even a month”. The glint in his eye suggested he was not joking and he proved to be as good as his word. But one month became two, and then three, with Thomas admitting it took until just before Christmas that he really got going again. “I was getting some hours in December, and from January I was training hard,” he says. “When it comes to the regime on the diet, and being fully on that, I guess it was February time. But I started to feel in decent nick in the Tour de Romandie [in early May]. Coming third there was a nice little boost for my morale.” But just when Thomas believed he was peaking nicely he suffered a nasty crash on the fourth stage of the Tour de Suisse, just over a fortnight ago. It leaves him uncertain about how his form compares with that of his rivals. But he is hoping to work his way into the race before relying on his class and experience towards the finish. “The team trial is a key stage at the start and I can hopefully begin on the front foot. After that the next big day will be the time trial which is already into the end of the second week. Then it’s just a big finale – the Tourmalet, Foix Prat d’Albis and then the three days in the Alps, all in the last week really so it’s certainly hard. The altitude may affect a few people. But generally I find I’m OK at 2,000-odd metres.” The absence of Chris Froome, following a serious crash in training, certainly gives him a better chance of retaining his title, although Thomas does not quite see it that way. “His absence definitely leaves a big hole,” he says. “He’s one of the greatest ever Grand Tour riders and to not have him there lining up is a huge shame, for him personally but especially for the team. By the sounds of it the crash was horrific and it did a lot of damage, so I’m just super happy he’s on the road to recovery. We’ll certainly miss him.” With Froome unable to go for his fifth Tour victory, the Team Ineos principal, Dave Brailsford, has opted for Thomas and the young Colombian Egan Barnel, who finished 15th last year despite doing much of the heavy lifting in the mountains, as co-leaders. It does not sound like a vote of confidence in Thomas but he is full of praise for his teammate, calling him a potential winner “I don’t see why not. He’s certainly a massive talent and I would put a lot of money on him winning the Tour at some stage of his career. He’s going well and hopefully he’ll be there right in the crunch in the mountains.” Thomas also says there will be no problems if the pair end up fighting it out for yellow as he and Froome did last year. “I think we can ride together really well. The communication between us is good, even though we haven’t raced that much together.” Thomas also tips Britain’s Adam Yates and his former Team Sky teammate Richie Porte to do well but admits the race is more open than it has been for years. “There’s a hell of a lot of guys in the mix, that’s what makes it exciting,” he says. And despite his recent crash Thomas insists he is primed for battle. “I want to have that feeling again that I got last year: riding strong and racing well in the biggest bike race of them all,” he says, the excitement evident in every syllable. “It’s certainly going to be hard but I’d love to repeat. That’s what’s motivated me from the start of the year. To get right for the crunch again.”