“I’m not sure anyone at the moment has a steady heart … Seven weeks of cricket, 48 games, one ball. Here’s Boult, they’re going to push, are we in for a super over? They’ve got to go quick, they’ve got to go quick. OUT! I’m sure he’s OUT! We’re going for a super over!” The ICC montage of the last moments of the Cricket World Cup final has almost four million views – which isn’t that impressive considering three million of them are mine. Ian Smith’s commentary, in that gravelly Kiwi drawl, is spine tingling to the last second. “This is the moment. It’s Archer to Guptill. Two to win. Guptill’s going to push for two. They’ve got to go … The throw’s got to go to the keeper’s end … he’s got it! England have won the World Cup! By the barest of margins … BY THE BAREST OF ALL MARGINS … absolute ecstasy for England. Agony, agony for New Zealand.” And there is sport. Right there. The reason you turn to these back pages before the boring but important stuff at the front. I literally cannot stop thinking about that final ball. It’s almost too much for those of us who don’t play elite sport to comprehend. Everyone on that pitch at that moment is at the pinnacle of their sport. They have trained for years for this moment. Jofra Archer is in the game. Martin Guptill is in the game. Jos Buttler is in the game. Jimmy Neesham knows he has to run as fast as he can for 44 yards. Everyone else is just waiting. Will any of what transpires be in their control? I can’t stop thinking about Jason Roy. The ball is hurtling towards him off Guptill’s bat, two balls after a misfield which probably cost a run out. Every time I watch it I worry he might not gather the ball cleanly, or fall over, or get cramp in both legs and just collapse – it happened to me once clean through in the last minute of a Sunday League football match. Then I worry about the throw. It could be wild, high, to the wrong end, right on the bounce or just straight through the square. I asked Darren Gough on TalkSport this week if he would have wanted the ball to come to him at that moment – the chance to be one of the heroes, to be part of a clip to be repeated on loop until the end of cricket. A beaming grin crossed Goughie’s face, as it often does. “I said to my kids as Archer was running up to bowl: ‘Whatever you do don’t hit that ball at me’ – every other fielder, every single one, would have been delighted when that ball went to Roy.” Even then I can’t relax – I check the montage again – what if Jos Buttler doesn’t take it cleanly, or treads on the stumps? I know he’s practised this. I know it’s regulation. And more pertinently, I know it’s already happened – it’s been set to music. Even still I’d like to check Guptill definitely hasn’t made his ground. There was nothing that could take away from this moment. But then there was. Jacob Rees-Mogg. I was enraged by his attempt to politicise England’s victory with an idiotic nonsensical tweet about not needing Europe to win. At a time when a divided nation comes together for one tiny moment, why try to score political points? I had my say on the radio – basically repeating many other more eloquent critiques. It was brave because he wasn’t there. You can see the two minutes online – where I play the role of a poor man’s James O’Brien – listing the reasons why it’s stupid, before explaining that I love this team precisely because they represent the England I know – diverse, different, interesting – as Moeen Ali articulated so well Monday. The below the line comments were, in the main, surprisingly positive – plenty of “well said” and “spot on” to the equally supportive if slightly less helpful “imagine the absolute lake of gammon and white van man piss he’d have boiled when he said this on air”. At the same time I was told to “give it a rest mate. Making a mountain out of a molehill just to show how PC you are is very boring”, while of course receiving many “Don’t mix politics and sport” and the mandatory “Max Rushden is a left-wing nonce though”. The conflict of politics and sport is a frustrating one. We want it to be pure. It felt pure on Sunday. We don’t want them to overlap, even if we know they do. Of course the players had to be invited to Downing Street. There’s precedent. What if they hadn’t been? Although I do wonder if Theresa May quickly hid the Windrush file in a pot plant as Archer walked in to the drawing room. And perhaps I’m as guilty as Rees-Mogg. I criticised him for politicising a moment none of us wanted to be political. Yet my response was and still is politically charged. Another response was slightly more provocative: “You guys creamed your pants when Meghan or whatever her name is politicised sport but now don’t like it when Moggy talks about it. Have a consistent standard you cunts.” At this point I turned off my notifications because I want to put my head in the sand, just for a little while, to enjoy an incredible contest that neither side deserved to lose. New Zealand certainly didn’t. And though winning matters because sport needs someone to hold the trophy, it also doesn’t matter at all. That’s why it’s in the sports pages, and not the boring but important bit at the front of the paper. The Kiwis’ humility and humour in defeat, led by Kane Williamson, was maybe the most impressive part of all of this. Nasser Hussain’s assessment of the New Zealand skipper nails it. “You end careers with wins and statistics and what you won but you also end your career with what sort of bloke were you, how did you play that game, and the way Kane Williamson carried himself – there are so many things that went against the Kiwis, and yet their skipper stood there at the end and did not make any excuses, what a man he is.” If there is a conclusion to any of this, it’s that I’d rather be Kane Williamson than Jacob Rees-Mogg.