Callum Hudson-Odoi’s representatives will hold talks with Chelsea in the next few days to discuss his future at Stamford Bridge after head coach Frank Lampard admitted the teenager “can be a big player for us”. The England forward has entered the final year of his contract but has yet to formally reopen negotiations over a new deal after handing in a transfer request in an attempt to force through a move to Bayern Munich in January. The German champions have not given up hope of signing him after seeing a new £22.5m bid turned down last month and are still hopeful that he may reject a new contract with Chelsea worth up to £100,000 a week, leaving him free to sign a pre-contract agreement with them in January. Hudson-Odoi is continuing his rehabilitation from the ruptured achilles he suffered in April that ruled him out of England’s Nations League semi-final, although he is expected to be back as early as September. It is understood that he is now open to staying at Chelsea after speaking to Lampard following his appointment a fortnight ago but also remains tempted by the prospect of moving to the Bundesliga. Yet having already persuaded several of the club’s homegrown players to sign new contracts, including Mason Mount and Ruben Loftus-Cheek, Lampard admitted that keeping Hudson-Odoi is a priority. “We want young players, you can see that. Other players are signing up around him and hopefully it is something that is going to be done,” he said. “Of course, we want him to sign at this club and be a big player for us. I have spoken to him a couple of times because I want him to know how I feel.” Lampard added: “There are two things. One is the football side, which I am involved in, and one is the negotiating and making sure the contract is signed, which I am not. So to say I am confident would mean that I know every side, I don’t quite, I leave that to the club. What I do know is the club want Callum to sign. He is a player who has come through the Chelsea academy, broken into the England squad and he is, of course, potentially, a huge player now and in the future. “Callum knows how I feel, he can be absolutely central to this team. He is young, there is a lot of improvement — which is only good news for all of us. He is a really big talent. The fans love him here. The club want to love him.” Hudson-Odoi did not travel with the Chelsea squad to Japan, where they will face Kawasaki Frontale on Friday before a meeting with Barcelona on Tuesday.