There is a vast pool of exciting 40-something coaches determined to make a splash as managers, some of whom are taking their first plunge while others, notably Paul Hurst, are hungry to kick on. Determined not to allow a 14-game reign at Ipswich define his reputation, Hurst has the look of a managerial catch for Scunthorpe United, given his success at Grimsby and Shrewsbury where he surpassed expectations, eking every sinew out of his players. At Glanford Park, however, Hurst will have to cope with the expectation that comes with the territory of being fancied for an instant return to League One. The signing of Andy Butler, who started his career at the club, seems a sensible addition. It is impossible to look beyond Plymouth Argyle as serious contenders, given how they have transplanted a promotion-winning squad into green and white. Plymouth are beneficiaries of Bury’s financial troubles, gutting last season’s runners-up by re-homing five of their players, as well as manager Ryan Lowe and his backroom staff. “I feel a little bit of guilt about it, but we paid good compensation for them,” said the Plymouth chairman, Simon Hallett. “The club [Bury] and its executives got itself into this mess, the players aren’t getting paid and they are young men who need income.” Lowe has also recruited fellow Liverpudlian Jose Baxter, who started his career at Everton and returned from a drugs ban last season, on a short-term contract. After spectacularly stalling at the tail-end of last season, Mansfield Town will fancy their chances of going one better, with Nicky Maynard, who averaged a goal every 140 minutes at Bury last season, a superb free transfer, though the video that accompanied confirmation of his arrival made excruciating viewing. Bradford City, too, should be in the mix under Gary Bowyer; the former Everton striker James Vaughan, who has been given the captain’s armband, and Clayton Donaldson will cause defences problems, but it was picking the ball out of their own net that was a recurring theme last season. Mark Cooper’s Forest Green Rovers almost snuck into the automatic places in May and, despite losing in the play-off semi-finals, they will expect to go close once more having made huge strides in three years under Cooper. Losing Christian Doidge and Reece Brown was a big yet unsurprising blow and Rovers have recruited smartly, with Matt Mills, formerly of Nottingham Forest, joining his younger brother Joseph at the club. Up the M5, it would be a surprise if a new-look Walsall were not in the reckoning under Darrell Clarke, while Richie Wellens can send Swindon close in his first full season; Zeki Fryers, formerly of Manchester United, is an eye-catching signing. Exeter City will be expected to challenge after falling short last season and Matt Taylor has freshened up his squad with nine new faces, including the former Reading goalkeeper Lewis Ward and forward Nicky Ajose. Mike Flynn worked wonders to guide Newport County into the play-offs on the back of another fine FA Cup run last season but repeating that feat looks a tall order. Salford City have grand plans but a fifth promotion in six seasons may prove too big an ask. The former Burnley defender Graham Alexander continues to be handsomely backed by the Singaporean billionaire Peter Lim and the ‘Class of 92’, with Richie Towell, who featured for Rotherham in the Championship last season, an eye-catching signing from Brighton, but whether they can topple the top seven remains to be seen. Stevenage could be dark horses under Dino Maamria, if they can start where they left off last season. If new signings gel with a youthful group – Luther Wildin, 21, and Arthur Iontton, 18, have shone – they could shake things up. The arrival of Jason Cowley is intriguing, with the striker signing from non-league Bromsgrove Sporting, for whom he scored 102 goals in 127 appearances. Thirteen successive seasons at this level is not to be sniffed at but Morecambe begin, as they do every season, up against it. By now, though, Jim Bentley, the longest-serving manager in the country at eight years and 78 days and counting, is used to the battle. Kevin Ellison will play on past his 41st birthday but Andy Fleming has been forced to retire aged 31, because of a serious knee injury. “He was the only outfield player still at the club since I played,” said Bentley, who has signed defender Tom Brewitt, who came through the youth ranks alongside close friend Harry Wilson at Liverpool. Laurent Banide worked with a baby-faced David Trezeguet and Thierry Henry at Monaco but after almost a decade working in the Far East, he becomes the 12th manager in four years at Oldham Athletic, where he has said his role does not include recruiting players. Paul Scholes lasted just 31 days and after another summer of sea change – including eight signings – it is impossible to predict the outcome of their latest experiment. Elsewhere, financial unrest still plagues Sol Campbell’s Macclesfield Town, while Gabriele Cioffi’s Crawley Town have work to do. Danny Mayor, Plymouth Argyle Ryan Lowe endeared himself to supporters by bullishly telling them he has signed the “best No 10 in the league” in Mayor, insisting the former Bury midfielder, who won the League Two player of the year award last season, is better than Graham Carey and Ruben Lameiras, two former Devon darlings. A versatile winger, Mayor, like Lowe, is gunning for successive promotions. Danny Guthrie, Walsall After a stint in Indonesia, the former Liverpool and Newcastle midfielder, who was born in Shrewsbury, has returned closer to home following a trial. The 32-year-old, who made more than 100 Premier League appearances, last played in England for Blackburn. “You need a good balance in League Two, plenty of energy and a bit of know-how,” said manager Darrell Clarke. Aaron Collins, Forest Green Rovers The striker went from McDonald’s to Molineux in less than two years, earning a move to Wolves after impressing at Newport as a teenager but following his release in January, the 22-year-old had to rebuild his confidence. Collins impressed at Morecambe, scoring eight goals in 15 games to earn a summer move to a side serious about chasing promotion under Mark Cooper.