A frisson of excitement willowed through Wimbledon shortly after Pimm’s on Wednesday afternoon. The mixed doubles draw had landed. And there it was, confirmation of a historic partnership: Andy Murray, feminist and all-round good guy, to play with Serena Williams, the American he calls “one of the best tennis players of all time”. This once-in-a-lifetime show will, the All England Club hope, run for longer than their first-round match against Germany’s Andreas Mies and the American-born Chilean Alexa Guarachi. “Alexa? What are the odds of Murray and Williams reaching the second week?” “I’m sorry. I don’t understand the question.” The first part of the question was not answered until late on Tuesday, about 15 hours before the entry deadline, when Murray and Williams stopped teasing everyone and announced they were an item. His courting of the women’s Tour was looking forlorn until then, as texts and phone calls crisscrossed the strange Tinder world of doubles, where relationships can last as long as cream on a strawberry. As is his nature, Murray agonised over his commitment to both forms of doubles as if he were picking a birthday present for his mother. He said after practice on Wednesday: “We chatted about it for a couple of days. I know she had had problems with her knee this year and both sides wanted to see how her match [against Giulia Gatto-Monticone] went before we did the final part. She felt fine [serving up to 125mph] and I saw her briefly today. She seems like she is up for it. “With everything that has gone on the last couple of years, you don’t know what’s coming next. The opportunity to play with Serena, one of the best tennis players of all time and one of the greatest female athletes ever – it’s something that I may never get another chance to do. And I might not play mixed doubles again so, if I’m going to do it once, the chance to play with her is brilliant.” Murray earlier in the week talked about how the grand slam tournaments could boost doubles – both versions – by cutting matches to three sets and revive the profile it had in the days when John McEnroe was a regular with Peter Fleming, when the singles stars regularly tried their hand at a two-hander. “It [would] be a positive thing for tennis if more guys were playing doubles,” he said. “But here it’s difficult because of the format, the best-of-five sets. I would never expect a top singles player to enter the doubles here because playing potentially 10 sets in one day is just too much. That’s something that would be worth looking at, to give more value to the doubles event, to get more of the top singles players playing, reduce the length of the matches.” That went down like lukewarm punch with Richard Lewis, chief executive of the All England Club, but he is a forward-thinker always open to persuasion – especially if the best player in the nation’s history is talking. There has not been this much interest in mixed doubles at Wimbledon since Murray’s elder brother, Jamie, broke through for the family at the highest level in 2007, when he and Jelena Janković won the title. Actually, his second win in the discipline, with Martina Hingis two years ago –when they beat Heather Watson and Henri Kontinen in the final – probably matched it. Jamie and Serena’s compatriot, Bethanie Mattek-Sands, are in the bottom half of the draw. What a final that would be, a Scots-American showdown on Centre Court, the very last match of the championships. “Who’d have thought that, Alexa?” “Not a soul, mate.”