After all the rain, the iron-weight zing bails and the threatened menu of endless dead matches, the round-robin section of the Cricket World Cup has been utterly absorbing – with England’s riches to rags to riches journey the switch-hit on top of the toenail-blackening yorker. Oh the utterly audacious drama! But the very best thing about the tournament for me has been the chance to catch up with old friends. Last week I went out for dinner with Sharda Ugra and Neeru Bhatia, wonderful sports writers at ESPNCricinfo and The Week, and purveyors of the most delicious gossip. The last time the three of us had been out for a meal together was in Pietermaritzburg during the 2003 World Cup to celebrate my birthday, the day a 20-year-old James Anderson charmed the swinging ball in Cape Town and ripped through Pakistan’s top-order to win the match for England. There was much to catch up on, endless stories to share. There were nuances on nuances on nuances they could explain, not just because they are immersed in Indian cricket but because of their mastery of so many languages. Sharda speaks English, Hindi, Urdu and Marathi; Neeru English, Hindi, Punjabi and Urdu. Both rattle between them all without a skip or a backward glance. For the record I have GCSEs in French and German, one is rusty, the other all but useless unless in need of a tour of the cathedral, and both are of limited value when covering a cricket World Cup. If English is your only language you carry around a half-empty bag at a tournament where half of the 10 nations playing are from Asia. Just a small insight came at the press conferences prior to the New Zealand and Pakistan game at Edgbaston, which seems way back in the mists of time, but was actually only last month. The Pakistan bowling coach Azhar Mahmood wandered in with his cap back to front and first gave lucid answers to questions in English before everything switched to Urdu. It was enthralling to listen in as he tripped through long sentences dotted with seemingly random English phrases: “the right areas,” “momentum” “mindset”, “is part of the game” and “crunch situation”. Afterwards I cornered another multi-lingual journalist and asked why those particular words were said in English and was told that there are no cricket clichés in Urdu – if you are in the mood to reach for one, you have to reach for English. Hmmm, it is good to know you speak the language of last resort. And it turns out this is true for many fans across the subcontinent, who grew up with English commentary on their TV cricket coverage. It is only recently that Star Sports started televising cricket with commentary in six Indian languages as well as English – Kannada, Tamil, Bangla, Telugu, Hindi and Malayalam. Just towards the end of his conference, Mahmood broke from a stream of Urdu to finish a sentence with: “Everyone has to have a bad day so hopefully New Zealand do tomorrow.” Then he grinned. “He’s a very smart guy,” it was reported back, “he said that in English so the New Zealand journalists would write about it”. Whatever the purpose, it was prescient. New Zealand did go on to have a bad day – the first of a few – and Pakistan won by six wickets. The Afghanistan cricket story has also posed many questions for those who only speak English. The relationship between Afghanistan, Pakistan and Indian cricket is complicated – with most of the Afghanistan players learning their cricket as refugees in Pakistan, but the recent survival of Afghan cricket is reliant on the largesse of the BCCI, which has given them an adopted home ground and other help with basic organisation. This is on top of political tensions between Kabul and Islamabad. The UK authorities were caught short during the tie between Afghanistan and Pakistan in Leeds when pockets of violence broke out both outside Headingley, where a group of young men charged the gates, and inside the ground. It all culminated in a pitch invasion where floundering security men in fluorescent jackets were outfoxed and outnumbered. The Afghanistan side generally refused to answer questions in Urdu during the tournament but Gulbadin Naib, the muscle-flexing captain, delighted his audience of journalists when he slipped from Pashto into Urdu before the game against Bangladesh, with a warning for the teams then scrabbling for semi-final play off places. “Hum toh doobay hain sanam, tujhe bhi leke doobenge [We have already sunk, darlings, but we’ll drag you down with us].” Whatever their background, most of the players from Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Afghanistan try to learn at least some English once they have been chosen for the national team in order to sound more confident and to prevent their own media dismissing them as yokels. As the next World Cup is in India, perhaps some of us mono-lingual cricket lovers should try it out ourselves and learn at least a soupcon of Hindi. Especially at a time when the ability to speak English as a first language has been hijacked by the Conservative party leadership campaign, which conveniently forgets that being bilingual brings insight, joy and cross-national understanding, and is the default position for much of the world – and the majority of cricket fans. • This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.