Fine weather or foul McLaren have done little but ride out storms at recent British Grand Prix meetings. The team return to the race this weekend, however, in their best shape for some time. From their young drivers to the very heart of the team in Woking there is now a palpable sense that they are back on track in their attempt to return to the front of the grid. Better still fans at Silverstone can enjoy their resurgence in the hands of a homegrown talent, Lando Norris. He is rated by those who work with him closely as mature beyond his years and destined for great things. This week McLaren reasserted their confidence in him by extending the 19-year-old’s contract by three years. There is work for him to do at McLaren. The once mighty team, winners of 12 drivers’ championships and eight constructors’, have been on a downward curve for some time, even before their switch to Honda engines dropped them to the back of the field. They have not won a race since 2012, the year Lewis Hamilton left for Mercedes. Peter Revson took the team’s first victory of 12 at Silverstone in 1973. But after Hamilton’s departure their best result was Jenson Button’s fourth here in 2014 but they have fallen away even further on the old airfield since, with Fernando Alonso’s eighth last year their highest finish. There is every sign this year will be different. Amelia Lewis is a performance engineer in the team’s simulator department, working closely with Norris and his Spanish teammate Carlos Sainz. She joined McLaren in 2016, when the team was sinking fast, but harboured no doubts they would fight back. “You walked into the building and felt like it was impossible not to succeed,” she remembers of that year. “You realise how much knowledge and passion there is and you think: ‘Well we are going to get back to winning ways.’ How could we not when we have these people with this passion. For me it was a case of not if but when.” The 26-year-old from Nottinghamshire is at the heart of McLaren’s rebuilding process. Always interested in engineering and a fan of F1, she made up her mind to pursue a career in the sport when McLaren gave a talk and brought one of Hamilton’s cars to the University of Bath where she was studying mechanical engineering. “I remember being completely mesmerised by it,” she says. “Then I thought: ‘Oh my God, I am in the perfect position to work in motorsport.’ Before then it had been a far off dream, a fantasy.” Taken on as part of the team’s graduate scheme, she is now a full-time performance engineer, putting Norris and Sainz through their paces before every race. Her enthusiasm is obvious as is the sense that this is a team now pulling together. “The really nice thing about working in McLaren is that there is one clear goal that everybody is pushing for; you are always trying to make the car go faster,” she says. “It is much more collaborative than anything else. People are just raring to go. It’s really nice to see how there is always that passion and now it is amplified. At the moment we are keeping that momentum going, keeping focused and keeping moving forward. There is real optimism here. The drivers carry that with them as well.” This momentum has translated into a solid fourth in the constructors’ championship in front of the Renault team who supply their engine. Even their opponents’ driver, Daniel Ricciardo, has recognised the achievement. “Looking at the McLarens, they’re the benchmark now,” he said. “They’ve really come on, they’re the ones with that kind of package that we’re looking for.” It is a package being wielded well by both drivers but Norris in his rookie season has been outstanding. He has out-qualified Sainz, who is now in his fifth season in F1, by six to three. As well as turning in some confident, impressive performances he has proved to have the makings of the full driver. He dealt well with compromising his race in Monaco to help Sainz; remained cheerful in adversity after mechanical failure in Canada and fought like a demon in France to try to hold his place with an ailing car. At the last meeting in Austria he was in the mix from the off and fearless. He took third from Hamilton on the opening corner at the Red Bull Ring. Then later battled valiantly with the race winner, Max Verstappen, and made a breathtaking pass on Kimi Räikkönen through the hairpin to ensure sixth place. Lewis has worked with him at McLaren since his season in F2 in 2018 and is not surprised by his performances. “It’s impressive that somebody that young can be so mature in this sport,” she says. “The way he acts, holds himself and interacts with engineers is not that of a typical 19-year-old at all. He is so mature beyond his years. It is only when he gets out of the car and he is joking round, you realise he is a teenager. He is a different guy when he puts on the helmet.” McLaren have seen this before when Hamilton made such an impression in his opening season, demonstrating a fearlessness of the then world champion Alonso, that feels familiar with Norris. “In Austria seeing him in third position going toe to toe with Hamilton is not something you expect from someone in their rookie year,” says Lewis. “But he wasn’t phased by it; he knew he was good enough to be there and that is really great to see.” Norris’s chances of taking it to the world champion this weekend are slim, Mercedes will expect to be strong at Silverstone again but McLaren will at least be able to take pleasure in their home grand prix for the first time in years.