When future historians compile the list of great British documents that explain our culture, one from 2019 will rank alongside Magna Carta and Shakespeare’s First Folio: Wimbledon’s latest version of A Guide to Queueing. Such is the legendary status of the tennis tournament’s line for tickets that there is a 31-page guide, detailing etiquette (no smoking, no drunkenness, no gazebos, no food deliveries after 10pm), and 24-hour stewarding to monitor overnight campers. Any fears that the queue’s days were numbered – to be replaced by digital technology – were allayed this week by Richard Lewis, the chief executive of the All England Club. “I wouldn’t consider using [technology] for the queue, because we get such great feedback on it,” he said, describing the queue as one of Wimbledon’s “great traditions”. Mariska Oosterhuis, from the Netherlands, has been camping for nine days, packing her tent up each morning at 5.30am – and queuing to hand it in at the storage facility – before rejoining the queue for tickets. “The atmosphere is really nice, because it is tennis fans together,” she says. “We chat about tennis and get to know new people every year.” She has taken out a membership for a month at a nearby gym so she has somewhere to have a shower and change clothes. “We eat in the queue, or get a takeaway and eat in front of the tent.” Queuers can’t leave their spot for more than 30 minutes, but Oosterhuis says there is time to grab something to eat nearby. This year is Zac Sheppard’s first time at Wimbledon. He and a friend decided to head down and “give it a go”: “We’d heard about this legendary queue and how fun it is. It was a good atmosphere. We were pitched up next to people who had been doing it for years, who were much older than us, so you meet people from all walks of life.” They arrived at 3pm on Thursday, stayed overnight in their tent and were woken by stewards at about 5am. “What surprised me was how well-organised it is. They give you a number, you never feel that rushed, everyone knows what they’re meant to be doing.” They got Centre Court tickets. This is Tani Christians’ seventh year camping at Wimbledon. “I queue for Roger Federer’s matches,” she says. “I queued from Saturday for his first match on Tuesday, then after the match you run back to the queue and start again for the next match. It’s very nice to hang out with other fans, but it’s very tiring, too. You don’t sleep much and it’s hard to get a decent meal or a shower.” She has rented a room at a nearby B&B to have a quick shower. Nonetheless, she doesn’t think she would prefer a digital system. “The queue is special. I enjoy it.”