Spoiler alert: this recap is for people watching The Handmaid’s Tale, series three, on Channel 4 in the UK. Please do not add spoilers for later episodes in the series. When the season three tagline was revealed, we didn’t think they meant ‘blessed be the fight’ in a literal sense – and yet here’s June, taking off her wings just as a woman in a pre-Gilead age might have taken out her earrings before throwing down. We’ve been waiting all season for her to take the fight to Gilead, but instead she finds herself taking her frustrations out on Ofmatthew, who, yes, is extremely punchable, yet whose piousness is probably the result of trauma and brainwashing. But at the end of the episode, as June’s circle of handmaids drag her away from Ofmatthew and shield the scuffle from the Eyes, it is herself she’s really furious with. Her cause is righteous, but her approach is dangerously reckless. As Commander Lawrence keeps reminding her, June is no genius tactician. She is a desperate woman, and people are getting hurt. In this episode, June’s single-minded focus on seeing Hannah, just from a distance, has resulted in death, pain, and Hannah moving further out of her reach than ever. This week explored the ways Gilead forces people to compromise themselves. June’s manipulations of the innocent Martha Frances and vulnerable Mrs Lawrence are some of the worst things we’ve seen her do on the show – and all so she could smudge herself against the wall of Hannah’s school. It’s a small deed to warrant such a large punishment. “We saved you,” Ofmatthew insists as Frances hangs. Ofmatthew has a very warped understanding of salvation. June and Mrs Lawrence’s field trip taught us a little more about Mrs Lawrence, and her relationship with the Commander. She wanted children but he didn’t, and besides, doctors were always adjusting her ‘dosage’. It seems she struggled with mental illness even before her husband become a mass-murderer by-proxy, and it strikes us that Gilead isn’t the sort of regime that looks sympathetically on medication for mental illness. Poor Mrs Lawrence, cut adrift in the world, “keen on an adventure” she’s never quite up to. Canada offers up some positivity this week, as Moira and Emily bond (“How do we not have any gay in common?!”) and Moira helps Emily rediscover her fighting spirit after a demoralising interview with the same Swiss official who questioned June and the Waterfords last week. While most of Emily’s violent actions in Gilead were carried out in a state of shock, she is fully in control now as she and Moira ‘bird dog’ a politician, and their subsequent holding cell feels more like triumph than punishment. The two women reflect on their actions in Gilead – hands up who else had forgotten that they were both cold-blooded killers? – and decide, reasonably, that they were justified. Murder is only murder on the outside; in Gilead, it is the only sort of justice they could get. As everyone else is suffering and dying, the Waterfords are having a romantic mini-break in DC, taking in art galleries and balls, while Serena is house-hunting around ‘unrestored’ houses from before the revolution, where glasses of wine have been unfinished for years and a nursery is chillingly unoccupied. “I think they were Baptists,” Olivia Winslow says blithely as they admire the house’s excellent proportions. Serena’s guilt seems to have evaporated entirely under the approving glow of the Winslows. Does she even wonder what happened to the child that slept in that nursery before their parents became enemies of the state? The ball was a jarringly out-of-tone moment. Perhaps it was intended as a comment on the hypocrisy of those who impose theocratic rule only to flout it themselves in private, but Jezebels conveyed that more plausibly in season one. Olivia told Serena she was ‘with friends’ among this group of urbane wives, all trussed up at a ball Jane Austen would have rolled her eyes at. But Washington DC is a city that staples women’s mouths shut, and where even the wives have to wear veils in public. Surely balls would be out of the question? A music-light week, with only Every Single Night by Fiona Apple playing us out as June reels after her fight with Ofmatthew. The song includes the lyric: ‘I just made a meal for both of us to choke on’ – a fair assessment of the collateral damage June is racking up at this point. • Is this the first time a TV show has had its viewers cheering someone choking a pregnant woman? Just as Moira and Emily mused on how Gilead changed their morals, perhaps it is having an effect on ours too. How else would we find ourselves itching to throttle a brainwashed pregnant woman, or hoping that Fred finds himself coerced into providing sexual favours in return for promotion? • Are the handmaid-assisted hangings a replacement for the stonings that were effectively boycotted in season one? If so, that’s another bleakly minor victory for June.