On 4 May, Alia Abdulnoor passed away in hospital in the UAE after a lengthy battle with breast cancer, which resurfaced shortly after her arrest in 2015 (Report, theguardian.com, 26 July). According to reliable sources, up until her death she did not receive adequate medical care to treat her illness and was reportedly forced to sign a document stating that she had refused chemotherapy. In the last months of her life, the UAE ignored calls from the UN to grant her early release on medical grounds. Instead, Alia died in inhumane conditions, shackled to a hospital bed, in a windowless room without ventilation. In past statements, both UN and EU representatives appear to have been satisfied that there is credible evidence that human rights violations occurred in her case. A UN spokesperson recently said her detention conditions “could amount to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment”. Despite being diagnosed with breast cancer just a month into her arrest, Alia was repeatedly denied access to adequate medical care and was only transferred to a hospital over a year after the diagnosis. She also suffered physical abuse at the hands of prison warders, according to testimonies of fellow inmates. Alia was finally convicted in 2017 for terrorism and sentenced to 10 years in prison in a case Human Rights Watch has described as marred by due process violations. As parliamentarians, we call on the UAE authorities to open an independent investigation into her case to establish whether she was treated in line with internationally agreed standards and, if appropriate, to initiate the prosecution of those responsible for any human rights violations that may have occurred. Jo Swinson Liberal Democrat, East Dunbartonshire Caroline Lucas Green, Brighton PavilionStephen Kinnock Labour, Aberavon Hilary Benn Labour, Leeds Central Martyn Day SNP, Linlithgow and East FalkirkChristine Jardine Liberal Democrat, Edinburgh West Ben Bradshaw Labour, ExeterPatricia Gibson SNP, North Ayrshire and ArranLloyd Russell-Moyle Labour, Brighton KemptownAndy Slaughter Labour, Hammersmith Layla Moran Liberal Democrat, Oxford West and AbingdonChris Bryant Labour, RhonddaKaren Buck Labour, Westminster North Tommy Shepherd SNP, Edinburgh East Tom Brake Liberal Democrat, Carshalton and WallingtonKerry McCarthy Labour, Bristol East Christopher Stephens SNP, Glasgow South West Tonia Antoniazzi Labour, Gower Jamie Stone Liberal Democrat, Caithness, Sunterland and Easter RossStuart McDonald SNP Cumbernaild, Kilsyth and Kirkintilloch EastPaul Sweeney Labour, Glasgow North East Darren Jones Labour, Bristol North West Stewart Malcolm McDonald SNP, Glasgow South Richard Burden Labour, Birmingham Northfield Jo Stevens Labour, Cardiff Central Sir George Howarth Labour, Knowsley David Drew Labour, StroudPaul Farrelly Labour, Newcastle-under-Lyme Geraint Davies Labour, Swansea West Paul Scriven Liberal Democrat, House of Lords • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition