If you spoke to Australia’s captain after the Taunton Test match on Sunday, you would have noticed a certain impassiveness. “It’s a good position to be in,” was Meg Lanning’s underwhelming description of having the Women’s Ashes trophy in her hand luggage. “We came over here to firstly retain the Ashes so it’s nice to tick that off I guess. We still feel like we’ve got a bit to achieve on this tour.” For an England supporter this statement would be intimidating. It should be. Lanning is rarely anything but serious in front of the media, but her flatness of eye and of tone was especially so in this moment. After four matches of this multi-format series, her team has unfinished business. There is a grudge that lives on in a few Australian hearts. Two years ago the women’s team retained the Ashes with a couple of wins in the one-day games, a drawn Test, then a thumping victory in the first Twenty20 in Sydney. Then a sudden flurry from spritely English all-rounder Danni Wyatt blindsided them in Canberra, blitzing the last two games of the series to tie it on points. Australia still had their trophy, but having already celebrated on the night of the retention, they ended the series proper with a sense of anticlimax. They remain deeply miffed at their spoiled party. Lanning wasn’t even playing in that series, she was sitting out with an injured shoulder. But she has obviously taken that result as personally as anyone. “We finished 8-8 in the Ashes series in Australia and we really don’t want to feel like that again. There won’t be any let up. I think our group has really developed some good resilience over the last couple of years in terms of keeping the foot down when we’re on top of sides.” This was the same grim determination that Australia displayed on the final day of the Test, choosing to bat England out of the game rather than consider a declaration to give some chance of a result. The wisdom of that approach is a whole discussion of its own: suffice for here to say that the rarity of women’s Test matches makes the perception of them even more important. But the Australian captain’s take was as flinty as ever. “At different points we were trying to win it. We just lost time throughout. When it got to a point where we felt we couldn’t win the game, we weren’t going to throw it open to England to give them a chance.” Wanting to shut out the opposition completely before even considering a win: that speaks to the ruthlessness from this team that we noted in these pages after Ellyse Perry’s first innings with the bat. Perry carried on the same way on the final day, scoring 50 at a decent pace, then slowing up once it became clear that her team would bat until abandonment. Even in this innings you could see Perry’s endless quest for perfection. With her score on 49 she played a lovely late cut from Katherine Brunt, timed off the full face of the bat but just close enough for backward point to field. Her next shot was exactly the same but a foot or two squarer, perfectly splitting the field for four. She manufactured full tosses, coming down the wicket to turn England’s spinners away to the boundary. She had the solidity of those players at their utmost peak. Perry was so controlled that she didn’t even accelerate late in the day towards a century. She kept knocking singles around to finish on 74 not out. This is something we may never understand: no one has made twin tons in a women’s Test match, and it’s not like the chance comes around often. In the last stages of a dead draw, it would have been something to cheer. But this, apparently, is the single-minded focus of the Australians. Something a little beyond human.By the end of the match, Perry averaged 78 with the bat in Test cricket. England coach Mark Robinson certainly seemed to see them as a race of super-beings. “God gives you physical attributes. I could send our whole group of 21 players to the WBBL, it won’t make them better athletes. I can’t make somebody be able to run and do what Ellyse Perry does,” he said. “There’s no easy answers, there’s no quick fixes.” Well, no. But Perry didn’t just tear open an oak tree and walk fully formed from its hidden cavernous depths. There’s a reason that she’s fit and fast and the best player in the world at present in either cricket discipline. And that wasn’t an easy answer or a quick fix either. Australia’s players are where they are because of the support they’ve been given and the bloody-mindedness to make the most of it. They have worked incessantly to become the best. Hence they ground through their Test and gave nothing away right to the end. It didn’t make for the most interesting cricket but you couldn’t question their commitment. Unfortunately for England, there’s that other commitment that the visitors want to meet next.