A Chinese state newspaper called for “zero tolerance” after protesters in Hong Kong stormed and ransacked the city’s legislature following a day of protests against a controversial extradition bill. Tensions over the weeks-long movement against the bill escalated on Monday, and Hong Kong police fired tear gas early on Tuesday to disperse hundreds of defiant protesters who had occupied the city’s legislature on the anniversary of Hong Kong’s 1997 return to Chinese rule. “Out of blind arrogance and rage, protesters showed a complete disregard for law and order,” the Global Times, published by the ruling Communist party’s People’s Daily, said in an editorial on Tuesday. “Chinese society is all too aware that a zero-tolerance policy is the only remedy for such destructive behaviour witnessed. Otherwise, and without this policy, it would be similar to opening a Pandora’s Box,” it said. Opponents of the extradition bill, which would allow people to be sent to mainland China for trial in courts controlled by the Communist party, fear it is a threat to Hong Kong’s much-cherished rule of law. In a separate editorial, the state-run China Daily reiterated the principle of “one country, two systems” in Hong Kong – a formula that allows freedoms not enjoyed in mainland China – saying the former British colony is an “inalienable” part of the China, and that Hong Kong affairs concern only China. “The only way for the special administrative region to sustain economic growth and maintain stability is for it to further integrate its own development into the nation’s overall development,” the newspaper said. Meanwhile, China Daily, an English-language state-run newspaper, published a celebratory report about the anniversary. “A festive atmosphere enveloped Hong Kong on Monday as people from different backgrounds joined various activities to celebrate the anniversary,” wrote the newspaper. The article mentioned the protests in the final paragraphs of the story. “Also on Monday, a large number of protesters took to the streets to march against the government’s suspended extradition amendment bill. Some clashed with police as they stormed into the legislative council,” said the article. “The HKSAR government strongly condemned the acts and expressed deep regret over the violence. A government spokesperson said Hong Kong is a society that respects the rule of law and has never tolerated violence.” Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, also condemned “the extreme use of violence” by masked protesters who stormed and ransacked the city’s legislature. In a pre-dawn press conference, Lam, the city’s Beijing-appointed chief executive, described the scenes of vandalism as “heartbreaking and shocking”. “This is something we should seriously condemn because nothing is more important than the rule of law in Hong Kong,” she said, with the city’s police chief Stephen Lo by her side. Lo added: “Protesters’ violent acts have far exceeded the bottom line of peaceful expressions of demands.” On Monday, some hardline protesters appeared to have reached breaking point, saying they felt compelled to storm parliament because their concerns were going unheard. “We have marched, staged sit-ins... but the government has remained unmoved,” Joey, a 26-year-old protester, told AFP as she walked over shattered glass inside the building. “We have to show the government that we won’t just sit here and do nothing.”