After the tremor that ripped through Wimbledon on day one, Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal survived early scares when they stepped on to the grass for the first time on Tuesday, but it is the Spaniard who must prepare for another rumble on Thursday when he faces his new nemesis, Nick Kyrgios. It is fair to say the match of the first week should be and could be the one in the second-round between the Mallorcan matador and the Aussie bull in a china shop. Kyrgios is the opponent from heaven and hell, armed with an often unfathomable game and an acid tongue. Now, like the loud lad in the pub who has been banging on about the guys in the next postcode, he must back up his recent podcast roasting of “super salty” Nadal, the perceived sore loser, and duke it out with him in front of everyone. After spending nearly three-and-a-half hours ousting his long-time friend and compatriot Jordan Thompson in five angry, crazy sets that set the tournament alight, Kyrgios at first did not sound quite so belligerent towards Nadal. They have history, old and new, some good, some bad, some civilised, some not so. Nadal needs no reminding that the lowest-ranked player he has lost to at Wimbledon is Kyrgios, who beat him in the fourth round five years ago when the Spaniard was in his pomp and the loud winner was the most precocious teenager outside of Hollywood, ranked 144 in the world. It was the sort of seismic shock that should have spread through the game with much more force and longevity than it did. Why it didn’t, only Kyrgios knows. “I’ve looked back on that moment,” Kyrgios said. “That’s never going to leave my tennis career. It was one of the most special moments I’ve ever had.” Now they meet again where it all started for them, with their career score three-all. “Going into this match, he’s one of the greatest tennis players of all time,” Kyrgios said. “I go into that match as an unbelievable underdog. I know if I play the right type of tennis, I can have success against him. I have to come with the right attitude, I have to be willing to fight. If not, it’s going to be butter for him.” However, when asked if he thought his criticism of Nadal and his uncle Toni would have an effect on his mood or performance, he bridled, falling back on his old tactic of questioning the questioner. “Did I go at him first or did his uncle come at me first?” he inquired. When the flustered (and young) journalist hesitated, Kyrgios said: “I assume you get your information right.” Asked if he would like to get to know Nadal better, he said:“Not sure that me and Rafa could go down to the Dog and Fox and have a beer together. I don’t know him at all. I know him as a tennis player. I just don’t … no, I don’t know him very well. I don’t know what you want me to say to the question. It’s a very strange question.” But not quite as strange as some of the answers. Elsewhere civility reigned. After Federer beat the 22-year-old South African Lloyd Harris, 3-6, 6-1, 6-2, 6-2 in an hour and 51 minutes on Centre Court, Nadal – who lost the first 11 points – put the Japanese qualifier, Yuichi Sugita, into touch 6-3, 6-1, 6-3 in a tick over two hours on Court No1. Federer next plays the British wildcard Jay Clarke, who was a solid four-set winner over the American qualifier Noah Rubin – and from there the draw opens up a little for the 37-year-old Swiss in pursuit of a ninth Wimbledon title. When Nadal went two games down at the start of his match against Sugita, he might have been saying to Federer: “Anything you can’t do, I can’t do – like win the first set.” But he rediscovered his focus more quickly than the Swiss had, held and broke back and forged on to win comfortably. From there to the end, he looked more like the player who almost beat Novak Djokovic in last year’s semi-final than the one who, after making the 2011 final, had gone out of the tournament four times in a row to players ranked outside the top 100, a remarkable statistic in itself.