As anybody who ever sat blinking in front of a blank page or canvas knows, boundless creativity can be paralysing. Sandbox games such as Minecraft can have a similar effect. Building things without instructions can be liberating, but can also leave us feeling lost. Dragon Quest Builders 2 balances creative freedom with direction, and allows even the most imaginatively challenged of us a taste of the joy of making something. Unlike the more open-ended Minecraft and its ilk, Dragon Quest Builders 2 is an adventure game, based around building, that gives you the option to flex your creative muscles if you so choose. Set in a world where any kind of building is banned by a destruction-worshiping religion, it drops you on to a mysterious deserted island, with an enigmatic amnesiac companion called Malroth. I was initially annoyed at the prospect of having someone following me around all the time, but Malroth endeared himself to me by fighting monsters and collecting materials at my side – and only very occasionally getting in the way of my masterful crafting. The story is intriguing enough to hold the player’s interest, but the real stars of the show are the dialogue and localisation work that shine in every Dragon Quest game. Packed full of puns and humour, it makes reading the not insignificant amount of dialogue a real joy. Farmers describe things as “gurt lush”, miners speak in cockney rhyming slang, and a guard named Britney screams “YOLO” as she charges into battle. The original Dragon Quest Builders was divided into chapters: you would spend hours building up a settlement, only to move on to the next, never to see your hard work again. Here, the Isle of Awakening is a hub where you can build freely, rope in online friends to help with your grand plans, and recruit villagers to build homes. As you expand the settlement you unlock new things to craft and new islands to visit, all dotted with puzzles and places to explore. Each island has a little narrative of its own. Some are inhabited by bosses and regular waves of enemies, which turn the game into a kind of tower defence experience. Disappointingly, however, combat is simple and very repetitive, mainly consisting of mashing one button and waiting for your more powerful companion to finish enemies off. While the game ran smoothly on PS4, I did come across a bug that vanished all the writing from speech bubbles and menus, causing about 20 minutes of panic before a reset fixed it. This is a very slow game, and while I enjoyed the gentle journey, the constant stream of new things to learn sometimes made me feel as though I were trapped in an endless tutorial. But breaking up your list of tasks with some independent creation and exploration time makes it a lot more tolerable. After completing a long series of main missions, I unwound by creating my own dream cabin and garden, as the villagers built a huge pyramid. (It was not lost on me that this division of labour seemed entirely unfair.) That gentle back-and-forth between idle creative play and world-saving missions makes Dragon Quest Builders 2 absorbing and likable. Dragon Quest Builders 2 is out on 12 July; £44.99