Of all the horrific details of teenager Shana Grice’s murder by her ex-boyfriend in 2016 – her reporting him to authorities five times over six months, her throat being slit in her bedroom and his attempts to burn her body afterwards – there is another that particularly disturbs. Grice was fined £90 by Sussex police for wasting police time, after it emerged she initially failed to disclose that she had previously been in a relationship with her eventual killer. On Tuesday, a misconduct panel found that former officer Trevor Godfrey’s behaviour amounted to a breach of police rules. But, during the two-day hearing, he maintained that in the lead-up to her death, Grice wasn’t being harassed as she had sent her ex texts punctuated with kisses. He also claimed she had lied as a “smokescreen to disguise her affair”, so her new boyfriend did not find out that she was still seeing her ex; Godfrey considered the latter relationship to be consensual. The police force failed Grice in many ways, among them not acknowledging how many women engage with men they are afraid of. It is commonplace for women to placate those who may harm them (or in the case of Grice, kill them) if they do not. We can comprehend a negotiator saying what they need to in order to bargain with a kidnapper for the lives of hostages. But as a woman, when you are the hostage, doing the same leads to scepticism and scorn – even more so if you have a previous relationship with your tormentor. As the counsel presenting the case against Godfrey put it: “There is a stereotype that if Person A is in a relationship with Person B, one cannot be at risk from the other.” Yet we know the opposite is true – two women die at the hands of former and current partners in England and Wales each week. A fifth of women killed by their partners had contacted the police. Cases like Grice’s are chillingly common. In 2013, Joshua Stimpson began harassing a young woman after they had been on a Tinder date. She had reported him to the police but it was not recorded as a crime. Four years later, Stimpson murdered student Molly McLaren two weeks after she ended their relationship. In 2016, Alice Ruggles had her throat slashed by an army signaller, Trimaan Dhillon, while she was in the shower at home. Just days before, she reported him to police after he hacked into her social media accounts and began skulking outside her property. The police left it to the soldier’s superior at his barracks to warn him about his behaviour – despite Dhillion having a history of offending against ex-partners. We often say the hardest part of seeking help as a victim of domestic violence is taking the first step of contacting authorities. What we omit is the suspicion and stereotyping you may face once you have done so. These young women are put on trial long before their killers. Their deaths come at the hands of brutal men after a police force has chosen to punish them instead of treating them as victims.