Warrington held off a spirited challenge from Hull FC to book their place in next month’s Challenge Cup final and ensure a second successive appearance in rugby league’s showpiece event. The Wolves, 12 months on from their Wembley defeat by Catalans Dragons, will have a chance to atone for that in four weeks’ time after emerging through a thrilling semi-final in Bolton. Steve Price’s side appeared well-placed for a more comfortable victory midway through the second half, after forging a two-score lead though Toby King’s try which, coupled with Stefan Ratchford’s conversion, made it 16-8. Scott Taylor’s late try for Hull produced a grandstand finish but Warrington survived the dramatic finale to book their place at Wembley. The Wolves were the better team for large periods of the first half and they led by two points at half-time through tries from Bryson Goodwin and Ben Currie while Hull’s only touchdown in response came from a remarkable team effort eventually finished by Bureta Faraimo. Two penalties from the boot of Marc Sneyd either side of that try - which were to all intents a natural consequence of the horrendous conditions - kept Hull, too, in contention. However, when King claimed a wonderful Blake Austin kick to touch down early in the second half, it put Warrington well and truly in control. Hull had to score next and while the Wolves did hold them out for a prolonged period, eventually the more direct route to the line proved the key to unlock their defence as Taylor charged over, with Sneyd’s conversion reducing the gap to two again. Though the Black and Whites further piled on the pressure inthe closing minutes, an error deep in their own half enabled Joe Philbin to kick through and guarantee Warrington’s place at Wembley for the second consecutive season. Captain Courtney Hill’s late try meant Leeds Rhinos successfully retained the Women’s Challenge Cup with a 16-10 victory over Castleford Tigers. Tries from Fran Goldthorpe, aged 16, and Caitlin Beevers, aged 17, had put the Rhinos in front midway through a thrilling first half in Bolton, before Tamzin Renouf’s try on the stroke of half-time made it all level at 10-10 at the break. That was how it remained until the hour mark, with several near-misses for both sides before former Big Bash cricketer Hill (pictured holding the trophy) supported a break from Danielle Anderson and ran in from halfway to score what proved to be the match-winning try. Aaron Bower