Tommy Fleetwood, one of golf’s happiest souls, was walking on sunshine on the third day of the 148th Open when he fashioned a round only marginally less brilliant than that conjured by the tournament leader, Shane Lowry. The Southport man struck five birdies in a flawless 66 to trail the Irishman by four strokes on the eve of what threatens to be a howling final day of wind and rain as they go shot for shot for the title. It will not be quiet, the Shootout in the Storm: Tommy v Shane. When Fleetwood and Lee Westwood stepped on to the first tee five hours earlier, the sun was shining and there was enough bonhomie to stop a fist fight. Keeping the smilers honest were Offaly’s own and the American JB Holmes, bowling along behind them at the tail of the field like a pair of bearded chubsters on their way to a noisy real ale convention. “It was great, playing Saturday at the Open,” Fleetwood said. “I played a lot of really good golf shots – plus you hear what’s going on behind. It was a lot of fun. You hear the cheers all the time, because Shane’s holing everything. It’s going to be a massive challenge tomorrow to play my own game and stay in the moment.” The English pair provided an intriguing contrast in style and attitude, Fleetwood still burning with ambition but keeping his sense of perspective, Westwood happy to “give it a go”, but happy also to have once reached the top of the mountain. As Fleetwood said after walking off the course with a 67 on Friday: “Whatever position I’m in, I’m in contention. Whatever feelings come to me, you’ve just to enjoy them and embrace them.” Those feelings will have been pretty good as the “Woodies” took the lead, with scores all around them tumbling too, and Holmes drawing alongside then edging in front. Westwood went to nine under on the achingly beautiful Islay, the par three from where you can see bits of Scotland, and there was already a sense that this might be their day. The vibe dipped briefly on Fred Daly’s, the 482-yard par four named after the 1947 Open champion, the most local of local heroes, when Fleetwood found the thick filth on the left, but he got out of trouble by banging his approach into the bank and was relieved to see the ball roll to safety. Westwood got his third birdie in a row to join Holmes in the lead at 10 under, two ahead of Fleetwood, and his chip, stunned into the slope of the green, from an impossible spot on the edge of the par-three 6th was a candidate for the shot of the day. When Fleetwood joined Westwood, Holmes and Lowry on 10 under with a birdie on the new Currant Point par five – a monster 592 yards from an elevated tee – the tussle for dominance intensified. The “Woodies” turned in 33 and, moments later, Lowry claimed sole leadership at 11 under. On the 10th, Westwood, straining for an angle on the acute dog-leg corner, thrashed his tee shot into a thicket, agreed with the referee it was unplayable but not lodged in the ground or an artificial restriction and so took a one-shot penalty, slipping a shot behind his playing partner, who holed a 10ft birdie to join Lowry in the lead. Fleetwood, hitting seven out of 10 fairways for the tournament, was down to 60% on Saturday, but he found a beauty on the 10th and made birdie from 15ft to edge a shot closer to Lowry, who had nailed another birdie there after an unbelievable, caddie-inspired approach shot from thick rough found the bank and rolled handily towards the flag. Westwood stalled momentarily and Fleetwood pulled three clear of him when he drilled another birdie at the course’s new par five, lengthened to 532 yards. There was still an hour of golf left to do some damage. Westwood had not scored a birdie since his hat-trick at the start of the day but, apart from his little adventure in the bushes on 10, was steadiness itself, while Fleetwood, with five birdies spread through 13 holes, was attacking in waves. It was a fascinating combination as each player found his own way to tackle this beautiful and challenging piece of God’s green land. The finish was a bit of a struggle for Westwood, who lipped out for bogey on the 15th, and probably was not inclined to enjoy the view on what is regarded as the loveliest hole on the course, while Fleetwood, with a string of solid pars, stayed in touch with Lowry, whose gallery had grown in volume in both senses of the word. Westwood, giving credence to the perfectly named Calamity Corner, finished 98 yards short on the par three, got stuck in the rough but played a wonderful recovery shot to save par – and Fleetwood missed a birdie putt, just as Lowry was nailing his seventh on the hole behind. They didn’t need to look. The Englishmen’s drivers steered them home, and they would be well satisfied with a pretty good day’s work. On Sunday, the tempest arrives.