Greyhound racing in Ireland is facing a backlash after a TV documentary reported that thousands of dogs are culled each year for not being fast enough. Lawmakers have summoned industry representatives to parliament and two commercial sponsors have pulled their support amid public revulsion at the revelations, which detailed doping and other abuses. RTÉ Investigates: Greyhounds Running for Their Lives last week reported that 5,987 greyhounds were slaughtered in 2017 because they failed to make qualification times or their performance had declined. The documentary found that many were culled at knackeries – with one company saying it shot dogs in bulk – in breach of a regulation that only veterinary practitioners can euthanise greyhounds. The programme also documented the use of performance-enhancing drugs in illegal hare coursing, with one vet saying he had seen dogs with so much erythropoietin (EPO) that “their blood is like treacle”. A business analysis report commissioned by the industry in 2017 found that it was breeding 1,000% more puppies than it needed, according to the documentary. On Tuesday, FBD Insurance and Barry’s Tea announced they were ending sponsorship of greyhound races and urged the industry to improve animal welfare. Barry’s Tea said it was “saddened and horrified” by the revelations. The companies were relatively minor sponsors but are household names. The move put pressure on bigger sponsors such as the bookmaker Boylesports. It said it was “appalled” by the programme’s revelations. State support for the industry, which has suffered dwindling attendance, is also under scrutiny. The department of agriculture is set to give €16.8m to the Irish Greyhound Board this year. A parliamentary committee on agriculture ordered the board and the Irish Coursing Club to appear at a hearing next week to discuss reforms. The Irish Greyhound Board blamed the abuses on an “irresponsible minority” within the industry that it vowed to root out. In a statement, the board said it had adopted new safeguards. “The IGB is now arranging for the implementation of these schemes. The welfare of greyhounds remains a priority for IGB and we will continue to build on the reforms within the sector over the last number of years.” Last month, animal welfare charities in the UK renewed calls to end greyhound racing in Britain after the industry published figures showing that almost 1,000 racing greyhounds died or were killed last year.