Definitive ranking of every celebrity pairing on Celebrity Gogglebox (Friday, Channel 4, 9pm) so far this year: Denise van Outen and her fiance Eddie; Rylan Clark-Neal and his mum (joint 1st); wholesome Fiat 500 banger merchants Little Mix (2nd); Gyles Brandreth, but only when he’s saying: “Does she turn you on like I do?” in a sultry Maura voice because he’s watching Love Island with a semi-revolted Sheila Hancock (3rd); Literally Everyone Else (4th); voiceover man Craig Cash Talking To You Like You’re A Toddler Who’s Just Suffered A Brain Injury (5th); Chris Eubanks Jr and Sr (6th); Rachel Riley and Pasha Kovalev (7th); and here, dead last where he belongs, is Eamonn Holmes. We should confront the fact that Celebrity Gogglebox is not as good as Actual Gogglebox, the show from which it is derived. It, in fact, drives deep into the heart of what makes Actual Gogglebox so good – the sheer humanity of the people in it; their tendernesses, their quirks, their choice of biscuits; the way all the mums sit with a cushion on their laps – and tears it out and kills it, putting recognisable faces front-and-centre instead. Some celebrities are good value (Rylan, who is long overdue his knighthood now, watching Channel 4 docs about gay dogs with his frequently baffled mum), and some are absolutely not (Chris Eubank, carefully and insanely wearing a sheriff’s badge at all times, explaining incredibly simple subjects to his large adult son). But the problem here is not the quality of the celebrities; it’s more the fact that they are even celebrities at all. Here’s how I can best explain it: Celebrity Gogglebox is a performance whereas Actual Gogglebox is not. This can’t be helped: the people here are performers, and they are never not performing, even when they are not performing. Little Mix are always being Little Mix, aren’t they? They were taught to be Little Mix a few seconds after leaving school and they’ve been Little Mix ever since. When they are squabbling about what cake to eat in front of the telly, they are still fundamentally Little Mix. Rylan is always being Rylan. Eamonn Holmes is always the TV approximation of Eamonn Holmes. Toff is here, from I’m a Celebrity…, having graduated from Made in Chelsea, and there is something sordid-feeling about that – that Gogglebox has become yet another stop along the appearance-fee-and-then-out promotional circuit, just another Celeb Come Dine With Me or ITV2 panel show where someone’s got a book to sell. Gogglebox, Actual Gogglebox, is about people in mismatched pyjamas taking complicated tea orders from four people who all have their own place on the sofa. It’s about eating a yoghurt your mum was saving for later and getting gently chided for doing so. It’s about that lazy, fuggy air of domesticity: getting a curry in because no one can be arsed to cook. The Dog Has Made A Smell. And that’s what I want; not beautiful people with stylists and makeup artists performing an act of enjoying TV. I want Jenny and Lee, stranded in a static home outside Hull. There is already too much Eamonn Holmes on my television. I don’t want him watching it with me as well.