Marcus Rashford has agreed a four-year contract with Manchester United with an option of a further 12 months, in a deal that makes the 21-year-old one of the club’s highest-paid players. The news is sizeable boost for Ole Gunnar Solskjær as he seeks to make United credible challengers again. The manager views Rashford as his first-choice No 9 and he fits the profile of young, fast players the manager wants to make up his team. Rashford said: “Manchester United has been everything in my life since I arrived at the age of seven. This club has shaped me both as a player and as a person, so it’s such a privilege every time I get the opportunity to wear the shirt. “I want to thank Ole and his staff for everything they have done for me. They are the perfect group of coaches to learn from as I continue my development and look to push on to the next level. I will be giving everything I have to help get this club back to where it belongs and deliver the success that our fans deserve.” While Alexis Sánchez’s basic salary of around £390,000 per week means he remains United’s highest earner, Rashford’s salary, which will include considerable incentives, should yield him more than £250,000 per week. He scored 13 goals in all competitions last season. Solskjær said: “Marcus is one of the most talented English players of his generation. He is an outstanding player – blessed with natural pace and energy. “Marcus is a shining example of the talent our academy produces and his upbringing means he truly understands what it means to play for Manchester United. “Despite being 21 years old, Marcus already has great experience. He has a fantastic future ahead of him with the club and I am delighted he has signed a new contract.” Rashford’s decision to commit himself to United for the next five years follows Solkskjær’s signing of Aaron Wan-Bissaka last week. The right-back arrived on an initial £45m transfer from Crystal Palace. Daniel James, a pacy winger who is also 21, like Wan-Bissaka and Rashford, was bought last month from Swansea for around £15m. Solskjær is thought to be interested in Newcastle’s Sean Longstaff, who is a midfielder and is 21, too. Sporting’s Bruno Fernandes, a 24-year-old midfielder, is also being monitored.