With 18 minutes left of the Super League match at Ealing Trailfinders on Saturday, there was an historic moment. A former England rugby union international came on for his senior debut in rugby league, the first player to do so since Five Nations winner Nigel Heslop turned out for Oldham 27 years ago. With them leading London 36-6, Luther Burrell’s cameo for Warrington was as uneventful as debuts get. Playing at right centre, the giant former Northampton Saints player joined in a few tackles and carried the ball once. The Super League will get a lot tougher than that. “It’s a huge challenge, but I’m on my journey now. My new path started today,” said Burrell afterwards. He won 15 caps for England’s union side and also wants to be capped by his country at league. It will not be easy. Burrell turns 32 in December and no one has swapped the England rugby union team for the league side since John Bentley did it in 1992. “Obviously I’m aiming to become a regular at Warrington first, but who knows after that?” Although Burrell has spent the past seven years in the East Midlands with Northampton, where his displays earned an England place under Stuart Lancaster only for Eddie Jones to look elsewhere, he is back home in the north. He grew up in Huddersfield and spent the first six years of his union career with a variety of northern clubs. Having played league as a teenager and been a dual-code trainee at Leeds, Burrell’s game understanding is not being learnt from scratch. “My rugby league background definitely helps. I’ve watched it religiously all my life. I’ve been surrounded by it for years. Stuart Lancaster was a big rugby league fan and introduced league drills with England; and with England there was Joel Tomkins, Sam Burgess, Owen Farrell, George Ford, all league lads. It’s in my DNA. Now I just need to get up to speed.” Having had less than a month training with Wolves’ strength and conditioning supremo Ade Gardener, Burrell was given a rapid introduction on Saturday as Warrington coach Steve Price opted to rotate his squad for the game in Ealing. “He’s come in earlier than expected because of his actions,” explained Price. “He’s been quality in training and is very motivating for the rest. Luther is a work in progress. He’s on a new journey. You’ve got to start somewhere. It’s all about taking small steps.” Price suggested he would also consider Burrell for the left centre channel currently occupied by Bryson Goodwin, but admitted Burrell will do well to shift the in-form Kiwi star from there. The right side has Ireland international Toby King in between the England pair of second rower Ben Currie and winger Josh Charnley. Does being surrounded by internationals make things easier for Burrell or put him under more pressure? “Both. It’s a pressure environment. They create a strong mentality and being around great players naturally makes you want to become better, quicker, as they demand the best of each other. Ben is quality – outstanding with ball in hand and defence – and his communication is second to none. It definitely makes me more confident to have that information on my inside and having Josh on my outside. It’s a good balance.” After a first half that he accurately described as “outstanding”, Price rested Mike Cooper, Jason Clark and Blake Austin, giving opportunities to Burrell and impressive young hooker Danny Walker in a second half which the Wolves actually lost, 6-0. Price suggested that may have had something to do with “spending seven and a half or eight hours on the bus” on Friday. Given that the train takes 90 minutes from Warrington to Euston, the club’s decision-makers may review their travel plans if they are returning to the capital for the Challenge Cup final next month. Of all the clubs in serious relegation trouble, pokerfaced London are the only ones sticking. Leeds have cried “twist” twice, swapping stand-off flop Tui Lolohea with Salford’s enigmatic Robert Lui and bringing in Papua New Guinea star Rhyse Martin from the NRL’s Bulldogs. The Rhinos promptly won two in a row. Huddersfield have simply called up more talent from their academy – who helped them to an excellent win at Salford on Thursday night. Hull KR swapped hookers with Leeds, taking Matt Parcell in exchange for one-time England man Shaun Lunt, won the derby then got stuffed at Wigan. Only the Broncos have kept faith with their united front, owner David Hughes opting not to throw money at a survival bid. “We’ve had worst periods than this and come out of it,” said coach Danny Ward, relating to their dismal eight-game losing streak in spring that was followed by four wins in five. “It’s a rollercoaster and this is a little dip. Don’t panic.” The decision not to buy is either true faith or naive folly. We will know on 15 September, if not before, given the Broncos’ run-in: four of their final five games are away from their favoured 4G pitch. Bradford’s hugely impressive 26-24 win at Toulouse on Saturday needs to be put into context. The temperature was around 40 (Celsius, not Fahrenheit). The Bulls players did well to come through intact, let alone win a thriller that blows the top-five play-off race wide open. It raises the question of whether games in southern France in summer should have to kick off in the evening. Yes, France is suffering a record-breaking heatwave but it still seems strange that games can start in the afternoon when temperatures can be dangerously high. At least we now have some geographic variety and meteorological challenges in our competitions. The new CEO of Wales Rugby League, Gareth Kear, is a busy man but, as always, he still found time to travel up from Cardiff to watch his son Elliot playing for the Broncos on Sunday. He’s currently working on junior age Origin games, trials for Lee Crooks’ Wales Under-16s, forming a Wales women’s team and putting together plans for the inaugural World Cup 9s at the new Parramatta Stadium in October. Wales, who are unlikely to play a full international this year, hope to be far stronger than they were at the World Cup in 2017 or last year’s European Championship, when Gil Dudson, Ben Flower, Regan Grace and Morgan Knowles all pulled out. The NRL are paying for everything and providing attractive stipends to ensure every team has their best available players. RLWC2021 are working on a similar plan. When will the Super League learn? Last Friday there were two other Super League games while Castleford v Leeds was on Sky. Then on Sunday – one of the quietest sports weekend days of the year, when the media had little to cover apart from the Women’s World Cup final – there was not a single Super League game! This happens time and again. Robert Elstone must surely draw up a list of target dates – days in the year when there are no Premier League games or major men’s tournaments in the same time zone – and take full advantage. Moving games from Sunday afternoons to Thursday and Friday nights was supposed to spread the appeal, not make the Super League less available to the public. Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook