SK Brann’s Europa League campaign ended on Thursday with a 2-1 defeat by Shamrock Rovers in Dublin, just down the road from where their very first continental adventure foundered 46 years ago at the hands of the Belfast side Glentoran. Decades of competition in Europe for the Norwegian club began under the guidance of an intrepid Englishman, Ray Freeman, who died this year and is remembered with great fondness. Brann fans used to call him the Madman of Bergen because of his touchline gesticulations and hollering. But his method and personality won such admiration that within two years of his arrival he became the first person to be awarded honorary citizen status in Norway’s second-biggest city. He inspired Brann to their first Norwegian Cup triumph for 47 years. Which was some going for a man who took the job when he was only 27 and just after Brann’s star player, Roald Jensen, had been banned for kicking a referee up the backside. Freeman had a knack for bringing the best out of people and a determination to make the most of himself. “Brann had used foreign coaches before but not for a long time, but when Ray came he got a lot of respect,” recalls the former Brann midfielder Bjørn Dahl. “But it was tough. You had to run and train a lot and he gave orders very directly. Not in a sweary way but he made himself clear about how he corrected us: ‘No, don’t go here, go there, you have to do this.’ But he got a lot of respect, especially from the younger players, because he really cared about us and really improved our play. And he was a nice man. A hard coach but a nice man.” Freeman’s playing career was ended prematurely by a broken leg. It began at Cambridge United and included spells with Stevenage, Romford and San Diego Toros, where he played against Pelé and was a teammate of another Brazilian World Cup winner, Vavá. His manager at San Diego was George Curtis, who knew him from Stevenage and who would later take charge of the Norwegian national team. It was he who recommended Freeman to Brann in 1972, aware that his former player was an excellent leader and educator: Freeman had, after all, become the youngest person to gain full coaching qualifications from the FA, graduating at the age of 21 from a course run by Bobby Robson. Freeman embraced the Brann challenge. The club was struggling when he arrived, not least because of the six-month suspension imposed on Jensen for booting a referee during a pre-season indoor tournament. Jensen was one of Norway’s best-loved sportsmen, the first of their footballers to make an impression in Britain, having had an eye-catching but injury-plagued stint at Hearts. Known as “Kniksen” (“Juggler”) because of his trickery, he was celebrated by fans for his maverick larks: one story says that during a victory over Rosenborg that condemned Brann’s arch-rivals to relegation, Kniksen took off his boots and played on in his socks so as to deepen Rosenborg’s humiliation. He was so good that even though his ban meant he featured in only 10 games in 1972, he won the league’s player of the season award. Years later, in 1990, the annual award was officially renamed the Kniksenprisen. Freeman would not have succeeded if he had pandered to one player, especially a player who was not allowed to play most matches. The manager’s skill was to foster cohesion and spirit while improving each individual. “He was particularly special to me,” says Dahl. “I was only 17 when he arrived. He saw me play for the youths and put me into the team ahead of a 33-year-old ex-international! He taught me a lot of technique. He was instrumental in turning me and other young players us into good footballers. “It was as very fun squad to be in. We had the famous Kniksen. He was 33 when he came back from Scotland and he didn’t like to train very hard. Even though Ray was six years younger than him, he pressed him to practise. I remember once I tackled Jensen in training and he came charging after me and said: ‘Junior, never do that again.’ Ray then came straight over to me and said: ‘Bjørn, just do it again.’ So I did it again. And that’s how I got the respect of Mr Jensen.” Brann finished eighth in the league in Freeman’s first season but trounced everyone en route to the cup final, where Rosenborg awaited. It was Brann’s biggest match in nearly half a century and Freeman had a huge decision to make. “There were seven rounds from the first to the final and I played in the first six but he left me out for the final,” explains Dahl. “He was afraid I would not be able to cope with a full stadium in Oslo [attendance: 17,700]. “He told me in the morning that he was putting in someone with more experience [Erling Mikkelsen] for the final. He did it in a nice manner. ‘I have to go with experience,’ he said. ‘It’s important for us, we have to get into Europe.’ He really wanted to qualify for the Cup Winners’ Cup, where he hoped we might get drawn against Arsenal.” Freeman, you see, was a lifelong fan of Tottenham Hotspur. Brann beat Rosenborg 1-0, an achievement that sparked jubilation in Bergen and even made headlines in England. “An unknown Briton has conquered in Norway” blared Goal magazine, which praised Freeman for blazing new trails for British coaches. Freeman’s second season saw the club make a spectacular debut in European competition. Not against Arsenal (England’s representatives that year were Sunderland) but against the Maltese outfit Gzira United, who were whopped 9-0 on aggregate. Brann exited in the next round with a 4-2 loss to Glentoran. Freeman decided to return to England after two years at Brann. He became the first-team coach at Cambridge, where Brendon Batson was among the players he attracted. “My confidence was low having just left Arsenal but he boosted my self-belief and made me realise I could progress my football career at the Cambridge United,” recalled Batson this year. “I’ll forever be grateful for his positive advice.” Cambridge later promoted Freeman to caretaker manager before, in November 1974, giving the job full-time to a 32-year-old Ron Atkinson. Freeman used to say that Atkinson wowed the club’s directors by turning up for the interview with a briefcase. Freeman was later lured back to Norway to manage Frigg, before he moved back to England and turned his hand to another trade. He made a success of that, too, becoming an expert in fine wine and a regional manager for the Pieroth company. He later opened his own interiors business, which, unsurprisingly, flourished as “suppliers of the unusual and interesting”.