The UK’s competition regulator will seek to have ticket resale website Viagogo found in contempt of court, after it allegedly ignored repeated warnings to comply with consumer law. The Competition and Markets Authority has sent a “letter before action” to Viagogo, triggering a process that it had warned would begin unless the company cleaned up its often-criticised business practices. If found in contempt, the company risks significant fines, while directors could even face prison. The DCMS select committee chairman, Damian Collins, welcomed the move, saying: “The CMA clearly shared our concern and we look forward to a speedy resolution to end what has been a troubling and distressing time for music fans who’ve had bad experiences with the site.” Labour MP Sharon Hodgson said she hoped the action would force Viagogo to change its “parasitical” business model. The Switzerland-based website has been criticised for flouting consumer law and teaming up with ticket touts to squeeze high prices out of fans for access to events such as a talk by Michelle Obama and charity concerts by Ed Sheeran. The CMA obtained a court order last November, demanding that Viagogo overhaul its website to abide by consumer law before mid-January. Viagogo has repeatedly insisted that it is doing so but the regulator said on Thursday that it was still in breach, despite several warnings. The CMA said Viagogo was not doing enough to inform buyers that they might be turned away at the door if venues or promoters have banned resale. Viagogo is also publishing “misleading” information about the number of tickets available, it said, while some seat numbers are still not being displayed on ticket listings. Under pressure from the CMA, Viagogo has begun printing the names of touts who sell more than 100 tickets per year but the regulator said addresses were often incomplete. Andrea Coscelli, chief executive of the CMA, said: “It is simply not good enough that Viagogo is continuing to drag its heels by not complying in full with this important court order.He said fans “deserve to know the facts before parting with their hard-earned money.”.“After the CMA repeatedly raised concerns with Viagogo […] we are very concerned that it still hasn’t done what it was ordered to do. “We are now taking the next step in legal action to ask a court to find Viagogo in contempt.” Viagogo has been monitored by an independent adjudicator, a process the regulator said had secured £400,000 in refunds for customers who had been refused them. The company said it was “surprised” by the CMA’s move and believed it had until 18 July to comply with the court order. It denied being in breach of compliance with regulations, adding that the independent adjudicator had said it was “reaching compliance”. “We will continue to work closely with the CMA, as we have been for the past year, to ensure we are offering the best possible consumer experience and protections in the UK,” it said.