It is five years since Nick Kyrgios beat Rafael Nadal at Wimbledon but somehow it feels like a lifetime ago. At the time it seemed the Australian was a future Wimbledon champion, a star of tomorrow. He was fun, dangerous, different, a breath of fresh air for tennis. Five years on and, while Nadal has just won his 18th grand slam title, Kyrgios remains an enigma, still a box‑office draw but his talent in danger of being outshone by on‑court misdemeanours. Kyrgios has been fined at Wimbledon for tanking, not making enough effort and in effect throwing away a match. He has been banned from the Tour twice, the first a one-month suspension for sledging Stan Wawrinka with some unsavoury language in Canada in 2015 and the second a two‑month ban when he was accused of a lack of effort in Shanghai the following year. He owns a grand slam of fines, picking up penalties at each of the four majors. His ranking, which topped out at No 13 in 2016, has dropped to No 43, with a number of injuries affecting his momentum. He is yet to make it past the quarter-finals of a major. But when he takes on Nadal in the second round tomorrow, there will be some extra spice, thanks to a spat between the two that goes back to Acapulco earlier this year (and perhaps beyond). Kyrgios defeated Nadal on his way to the title in Mexico, after which the Spaniard said Kyrgios was good enough to be contesting for grand slam titles but also that, because of his behaviour on court, he “lacks respect for the crowd, his opponent and towards himself”. Kyrgios responded in kind, saying: “I’m different. Rafa’s different. He can focus on what he needs to do. He doesn’t know the journey I’ve been through. He doesn’t know anything about me so I’m not going to listen at all.” In a recent No Challenges Remaining podcast, Kyrgios said Nadal had always been “super salty” to him off the court and Kyrgios has also been going back and forth with Toni Nadal, the uncle and former coach of Nadal, who accused Kyrgios of a lack of education. After Kyrgios’s five-set win against another Australian, Jordan Thompson, in the first round, he said he could not see Nadal and himself going for a beer at the Dog and Fox, a pub in Wimbledon village. Nadal said he was “too old for all this stuff” but he stands by his original comments. Kyrgios divides opinion but he is hugely popular with younger fans and there is no doubt many people who come to Wimbledon will do so hoping to see him, looking out for the odd underarm serve, the tweeners and no-look volleys. “I’m never going to change,” he said. “I used to be like this when I played under‑12s, 14s. I just go out there, have fun, play the game how I want it to be played. I know people are going to watch. They can say the way I play isn’t right or he’s classless for the sport, all that sort of stuff. They’re probably still going to be there watching. Doesn’t really make sense.” If he is in the mood, then Nadal knows he will be in for a battle. The pair have played six times before, with Kyrgios winning three. If he struggles for motivation at times, put him front and centre against one of the best players around and the chances are he will produce the goods, something Nadal knows better than most. “I play against a top-talent player, very dangerous player when he wants to play tennis,” he said. “Normally against the best players he wants to play tennis. When that happens, he’s a very dangerous opponent. For a second round it’s a super tough one. I know that. I need to be at my 100%. I am going to fight for it.” Kyrgios said he will be “an unbelievable underdog” against “one of the greatest tennis players of all time”. But the Australian knows that anything is possible. “I know if I play the right type of tennis, I can have success against him,” he said. “When you’re a kid, you want to play the best players in the world on [what] I think is the best court in the world. This is something that I can’t take for granted. There’s no guarantee I’m going to be here again in this position. Could have an injury or something like that. I’m going to grasp with both hands, go out there, give it my best shot.”