This statement glossy red lip, as seen at the Ryan Lo SS19 show, is so punchy you can go minimal on everything else, and with clever application it will stay put all day. Start with a smooth canvas (a lip scrub helps), line the edges (stops it from bleeding) add a matt red lipstick and layer on gloss. Yes, it’s a little high maintenance but there are small mercies. Unlike its predecessors, the new wave of glosses are less gloopy so at least you won’t spend your life picking your hair off your lips. 1. Burberry Kisses Lip Lacquer in Military Red £30, lookfantastic.com2. Kilian By Kilian Le Rouge Parfum in Heaven Rouge £42, harrods.com3. Hourglass Unreal High Shine Volumising Lip Gloss in Icon £28, spacenk.com4. Christian Louboutin Loubi Glitter Gloss in Rouge £65, netaporter.com5. L’Occitane Raspberry Scrub Delicious Lip Scrub £14, loccitane.com The Body Shop Body Yogurt in Pink Grapefruit £8.50, thebodyshop.com I am obsessed with body moisturisers. This has been ingrained into me from childhood. Ashiness was never an option. My mother was extreme – she would moisturise my siblings and me until we were so greased you could have fried eggs on us. I no longer look like human lard, but the idea of leaving the house without moisturising would be akin to showering fully clothed. Finding the perfect body moisturiser is tricky. Ideally you want one that actually moisturises (you’d think it’d be easy), one that sinks beautifully into the skin (as opposed to sitting on it), one that is not watery and light, and one that leaves a healthy sheen. Also, no one wants a moisturiser that comes off on your clothes or makes you hot and clammy. I had long been a fan of the Body Shop’s Body Butters and never saw the need to try the body yogurts – a lightweight gel texture – assuming they wouldn’t impart any shine or hydration. Boy was I wrong. They tick all my boxes. Intensely moisturising, brilliantly cooling – perfect for the hot weather (it really should come in travel-sized tubes) and leaves the skin with a no-grease sheen that lasts all day. They come in many scents – my fave is pink grapefruit – so you’re bound to find one you love. Save this file For a quick, safe and effective way to remove layers of hard skin, you need this brilliant steel foot file (with compressed crystal technology pads). It is literally everything. Margaret Dabbs London Foot File, £24, margaretdabbs.co.uk Socks appeal This innovative sock – essentially a foot mask – has infused a cacophony of dead skin-nibbling acids to leave you with brighter, smoother feet. Patchology Poshpeel Pedi Cure, £18, spacenk.com Smooth operator Cracked skin begone. There is a reason why this concentrated, non-greasy foot cream has developed a cult following. It does exactly what it says on the tube. O’Keeffe’s Exfoliating Foot Cream, £9.49, boots.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.