I’ll give the Anglesey Arms a shout, lovely to sit with a good beer beside the Menai Strait on a sunny day. ferret70 The Victoria Arms in Old Marston, Oxfordshire, is right on the River Cherwell and has lovely views, especially in summer. It used to be The Ferry Inn, named for the punt ferry that took people from the north side of the river to the south, and was the only way to cross the river at that point until the 1960s.BritLassCO I feel obligated to name the Cross Guns Avoncliff in Winsley, near Bradford-on-Avon, outside Bath. Apologies to the locals who have this amazing piece of historic boozeria on their doorstep but it is impossible not to recommend. Besides the River Avon running beside you, the Kennet and Avon Canal runs overhead on the viaduct. All that and possibly the best sausage roll I have ever eaten.steveP I’m afraid I’ll have to accuse the compilers of the original article of being philistines of the highest degree for failing to mention the Lamb & Lion in York. With the medieval bar walls on one side and York Minster on the other, I have never seen a better place to have a beer and a meal (apart from the rooftop restaurant at the seaman’s mission in Honk Kong).atholforest The Great Western in Gloucester has a lovely garden. It’s a tucked away locals’ pub. Unlike others I don’t mind if this draws in “outsiders”, as I would hate to lose this gem as pubs struggle to survive. WendellG The Stag Inn in Dufton, Cumbria, with views to Dufton Pike. Perfect village and perfect view, plus you get to chat to Rory Stewart whenever he pops in.SchwarzwaldBummel The Druid’s Arms in Stanton Drew, Somerset (home of the Stanton Drew stone circles and cove). Where else in the world could you relax in a beer garden with standing stones at your fingertips? And then there’s Llanthony Priory Hotel in Abergavenny – the 11th wonder of the beer garden world, as it boasts an abandoned monastery in its beer garden, courtesy of Henry VIII.colbristol The Scott Arms, Kingston, Dorset. The most sublime view across the valley to Corfe Castle.GARYafCb The Monsal Head Hotel offers spectacular views (despite what John Ruskin said). Good beer and food, especially the Monsal Pie. Also equally well suited to arriving by bike or on foot.NDL1234 And [the Scott Arms does] great food, too, if you like Jamaican food. Which gives you the opportunity to phone your mates up and tell them you’re currently eating jerk chicken in Kingston.PetetheTree There are some stunning pubs close to me on the Fylde in Lancashire. First off is the lovely Ship Inn in Freckleton, with a beer garden overlooking Freckleton marsh and where, if you like a fighter jet, you can see some whizzing off from nearby Wharton. Freck’ is lovely but if you want Miss Marple bucolic idyll, theres the Grapes Hotel at Wrea Green. It overlooks the largest village green in Lancashire. Theres a duck pond, a village cricket team playing on Sundays and lovely pretty thatched cottages. kizbot The Live and Let Live on Bringsty Common, near Worcester, is a real gem. Great views, thatched roof and stunning beer. What more could you want? alip28 The Tyn-y-Capel in Minera, near Wrexham, offers great views and is a community-owned-and-run pub. Good food and local booze, too. DeenieP Ahh, I miss England in the summer. Try the Rose and Crown Trent, just outside Sherborne in Dorset. Pick a weekday, it gets a bit busy at the weekends. Rolling countryside views from the garden and great food and drink. 1scamp I nominate the Rising Sun at Pensford, near Bristol, which has a lovely little sheltered spot by the River Chew … but I might head across to Bath and check out the White Hart [that’s been recommended here] sometime. Nasporran