It’s been hot, brutal, unrelenting, but it’s finally time. Love Island draws to a close on Monday night as the finale reveals which couple has won the nation’s hearts, the £50,000 prize money and a golden opportunity to rinse the influencer economy dry by flogging protein shakes and teeth whitening products. Despite the assault by streaming services on terrestrial television, ITV2 has broken records: more than six million tuned in this month and a US version has been launched in tandem. It is a bona fide cultural behemoth. So much so that the channel has announced it will launch a winter edition next year. Putting a bunch of half-naked young people in a holiday villa for eight weeks and telling them to couple may seem a naff, cynical concept. But Love Island knows this.Its formidable comedian voiceover, Iain Stirling, definitely does – it’s a significant part of the appeal. What the naysayers don’t get is that human relationships, insecurities, lust and love just do not get boring. We’re invested in the profoundly wise (Ovie, Amber) and heinously callous (Danny, Curtis, Michael, Jordan). This season has been an acute study in two key themes. What does and doesn’t constitute bad behaviour in the mystifying rules of Girl Code? And to what extent does the villa prove that men are, indeed, trash? The deliciously communal experience of the show is another key part of its popularity: it’s difficult to get “into” Love Island trying to watch it on your own just to see what the fuss is about. The truest and funniest believers take their nightly analysis and memes to Twitter; the rest of us might have a Love Island whatsapp group to joke, bitch and scoff through the minutiae of the show together. Does anyone remotely care who wins? That’s not really the point. So, to find out why Love Island is such a major hit, we asked a cross-section of viewers why they’ve been gripped. Parent: Martin Love I have three children aged 24, 22 and 17. Love Island is so binge-worthy that all three of them will stop and watch it if it’s on, but the show has created a special bond between me and my youngest, Vita. We’ve now watched all five series and feel weirdly smug about having been in on it before it became so zeitgeisty. At face value, it’s just another cheesy game show with bikinis and silly catchphrases thrown in. Terms like “cracking on” and “muggy” have even crept into our own vocab. But once you get to know the contestants, you start to root for them on “their Love Island journey”. You can also watch the show on a more thought-provoking level. As the petty loyalties of the islanders are tested to breaking point, broader social topics, such as bullying, consent, dating mores and the rules of “girl code”, act as jumping-off points for Vita and me on the sofa – and it’s not always easy for a father to launch into a discussion about relationships with a teenage daughter.Hearing the forceful Maura, for instance, take down a disrespectful Tom when he bragged, “It will be interesting to see if she’s all mouth or not”, gets the conversation flowing. Love Island lets parents tune in to the way young people really talk to each other when we’re not listening. It’s sort of like relationship and sex education for the over-50s. Media analyst: Tom Harrington Love Island is a stunning cash cow for ITV. Everything and anything is available for sale; from the water bottles (more than 350,000 were sold last year) to the dresses. You can even travel to Brighton and take a selfie around a recreation of the fire pit. And you just have to look at the viewing figures to begin to understand why ITV can do this: 39 of the top 40 most-watched shows this year by viewers aged 16 to 34 are Love Island episodes. In that age bracket, double the viewers watched Curtis shatter Amy’s world than watched the men’s singles final at Wimbledon. Older viewers can barely stand it –the top episode is only the 25,981st most-watched programme this year for those over 65. And this is why it is so lucrative. Advertisers who want to target youth know that they can reach 2.5 million of them for an hour six times a week, and aren’t wasting money by displaying their clothes, phone plans, health products or food delivery apps to older people who will never buy them. With two series next year ITV will try to extract maximum value from the format before the kids move on. Tom Harrington is senior research analyst at Enders Analysis MP: Stella Creasy Even after five series, Love Island is still a source of joy and intrigue. From controversies such as showing what “gaslighting” looks like on primetime TV and rewriting “girl code”, to mysteries such as why Ovie remained single for so long and why any woman would forgive a man’s stupidity because he uses toast to write sorry on her plate. It all makes for compelling viewing. In the era of Tinder and Grindr, it’s positively quaint to see contestants worrying about their “connections” with each other and going on cheesy dates where they have to actually make conversation – their later clumsy attempts at sex hinted at in infrared clips rather than centre stage. Much of it is done with a knowing wink. Gender stereotypes are presented with a flourish and then upended, while Iain Stirling’s commentary takes firm aim at the mechanics of reality TV. Yes, other programmes offer more biting social commentary in these uncertain times. That’s not really the point. In a sweltering, angry summer, for one glorious hour a night you can lose yourself in its gossamer charms without serious consequence. As the participants this year repeat ad nauseum, it is what it is. Stella Creasy is MP for Walthamstow, London Psychologist: Denise Freeman Whether listening to my clients in therapy, or children at home, the buzz about Love Island is unavoidable. Its appeal is in its near-perfect recipe of escapism, voyeurism and love: ingredients that make for compelling viewing. However, I can’t avoid the nagging feeling that I’m watching a bunch of young and vulnerable hopefuls pitched into a situation designed to produce massive emotional turbulence. I fear that some may be at risk of a psychological nosedive back in the real world. So, what’s the problem? The bit we forget is that these are real people in an unreal situation, chasing fortune, recognition and possibly even genuine love. They are not seasoned celebrities with teams or 'people' to spin their words but civilians at a vulnerable stage in life Although they are oblivious to the extreme public reactions to their behaviour, these will soon become apparent once they leave the villa. Personal attacks, from judgmental social media and an intrusive press, could impact deeply on their lives. These are not seasoned celebrities with teams or “people” to spin their words and deeds but civilians at a very vulnerable stage in their lives. And what about the audience? I have learnt professionally that relationships are every bit as varied as the individuals who engage in them. However, many of the young people watching will be just beginning to formulate their understanding and expectations of a loving relationship. What they may learn from Love Island is about interpersonal commodification, with disposability, disloyalty and perfectionism rife. Just as internet porn has provided a generation with distorted ideas of sex and body image, my fear is that Love Island will do something very similar for their understanding of commitment to a partner. I hope not. Denise Freeman is a BACP-registered therapist and psychological consultant Fan: Casey Whiting “Did you watch last night’s Love Island?!” This has been the way I’ve greeted my friends for about six weeks now. At 8:45pm every night I’m preparing snacks and drinks that will complement the 9pm drama. I’ve watched the past two series live as they have aired (and all the others on catch-up) and it’s difficult to describe what makes Love Island such compelling television. Certainly it has a little bit to do with the fact that it’s a bunch of attractive people lounging around in a villa, but even if it was regular people I would still be obsessed. I think, particularly as a 23-year-old, it’s even more engaging because you are watching your peers, so it’s easy to imagine you could be watching one of your mates. Most conversations I have at the moment with friends revolve around Love Island. Having trouble with your boyfriend? Tinder date went bad? Let me tell you how this episode of Love Island can help. I think there is something about watching the very raw emotions (sometimes) displayed on the show that encourages people to make the big step in discussing their own feelings. If people can get rejected, big time, on national television and come back even stronger with a boohoo sponsorship, then you, too, can tell that person you fancy them! The show has massively evolved since it first started; this year’s series feels very polished and directed – even though I know that it’s not necessarily authentic. Love Island producers hype you up a month before the show even starts, and every day they release a short two-minute “first look” video to get you amped for the night’s episode. Say what you will, they know what their audience wants, and are really good providing it.