Have you heard of the uncanny valley? If not, let me say straight away, before you get at all excited, that it’s an IT thing. It’s a theory in robotics that just happens to have an evocative name. The valley it refers to, far from being a magical land between Narnia and the Big Rock Candy Mountain, where everything’s a bit weird and the fish fly and the bees swim, is actually just a valley shape on a graph. A flattish asymmetrical U. Specifically, a dip in how positive people’s reaction to a robot tends to be as its appearance becomes more human. The theory is that, in general, as robots look more human, we self-obsessed humans like it more and more, so the line of the graph goes up. Until, that is, the robots are nearly identical to humans. Then our approval dips into the uncanny valley, because we suddenly find it creepy, like watching a bee swim. Until, again, the robots become even more humanlike, and indistinguishable from real people, when our approval rises once more at the comforting sight of what we mistake for our own kind. This provides the other side of the metaphorical valley. This notion has been knocking around since the late 70s, but is now backed up by scientific evidence. Some neuroscientists and psychologists in Britain and Germany have been doing fMRI scans of people’s brains while they reacted to images of robots and, according to Dr Fabian Grabenhorst of the University of Cambridge, “We were surprised to see that the ventromedial prefrontal cortex responded to artificial agents precisely in the manner predicted by the uncanny valley hypothesis.” If Johnson were to lose, that would be a hilarious pratfall that would dwarf his previous attempts to amuse That’s good enough for me. Instinctively, I thought the theory sounded true. In fact, the only thing that surprises me about this outcome is that Grabenhorst says they were surprised. Then again, we don’t know that he was really surprised. I’d be surprised if they were surprised, but perhaps I shouldn’t be surprised that they said they were surprised. It wasn’t Grabenhorst’s brain activity that was being scanned, so he could be faking his surprise to make the findings seem more interesting. Confirming what everyone is already convinced is true is probably an area of research that finds it hard to attract funding. The uncanny valley has got me thinking about the Tory leadership contest and why it is that I hope Jeremy Hunt becomes the next prime minister. I mean, that’s quite a thing. I can’t say I ever envisaged hoping that, but I do hope it. I hope it, I hasten to add, merely because it’s the only alternative to Boris Johnson becoming the next prime minister, but it absolutely is the only alternative to that, and hence I hope it. Genuinely. Put me in an fMRI scanner and you’ll see. It’s slightly put me off the whole concept of hope, to be honest. If this is the hope, God save me from the glory. But why do I hope it? Is it because Jeremy Hunt is the marginally more moderate of the two candidates? I don’t think so. They’re both at pains to prove their extreme Brexiter no-deal-embracing credentials with every utterance, now that the hardcore leavers dominating their party have decided that anything less than catastrophically crashing out of the EU is a betrayal of 52% of voters requesting an ordered withdrawal. They’re desperate to be seen to respect what most of the 160,000 Tory members have decided that all 17 million leave voters really meant. Being more moderate in that frothing context profanes the very concept of moderation. Is it because Jeremy Hunt is more honest? I’d say he is undoubtedly more honest than Boris Johnson. But if faint praise can be damning, that’s faint enough to consign him to an eternity in the lowest circle of hell. It means virtually nothing. And, bearing in mind that what Boris Johnson says he’s going to do if he wins is so nonsensical and destructive, the thought that he may be lying is relatively comforting. Is it for sadistic reasons of my own? Partly, yes, I must admit. There’s no doubt that, if Johnson were somehow to lose the leadership election from here, that would be a hilarious pratfall in public life that would dwarf his previous attempts to amuse. After all his careless, self-interested opportunism, the pain and embarrassment that he would feel, would be a balm to soothe me through the first disastrous months of the Hunt administration. Still, I don’t think that’s the main reason. My hunch is that this election will cause Johnson pain either way. He won’t be a good or happy prime minister because he doesn’t really want to do anything except show off. He’s pathologically dishonest and unfaithful, which is fine in showbusiness, but it’s going to screw up his premiership, which will make him very angry because, at heart, he doesn’t believe anyone has the right to question his desires. And look at the state of his life: professionally it’s going OK, but personally, he’s a middle-aged divorcé, living apart from all of his many children, shouting and spilling wine on the sofa in his girlfriend’s south London flat. It conjures up images of his socks over the radiator and his tablets and foot powder jostling for bathroom shelf space with a young woman’s cosmetics. It’s a bit grim. So I think I’ll get to watch him suffer either way. Fundamentally, I think I hope Hunt wins because Johnson is in the uncanny valley. Hunt is the robot-like creature of politics. With no discernible charm or charisma, he’s the typical forgettable figure by which Westminster has been dominated in recent decades: Andy Burnham, the Milibands, Nick Clegg, Jeremy Hunt. The plausible men in plausible suits, platitude-spouting mediocrities, not real people. Johnson has always seemed different – more fun, more charming, more human. To many – to me for a while – this was preferable, more like recognisable flesh and blood. But then at some point, perhaps when he was blathering on about painting cardboard buses, something changed. Like a twinkle of LED behind the automaton’s human face, I glimpsed the icy contempt. The human warmth is fake, and its very similarity to the real thing is offensive and revolting.