Lewis Hamilton has expressed how at ease he is with himself and his driving after taking his seventh win of the season at the British Grand Prix. After 10 races it is the strongest opening sequence of his career and increased the Mercedes driver’s imposing lead in the world championship standings. Having taken the flag at Silverstone the five-times world champion, who has often come into his own at this stage of the year, also ominously warned that he is now feeling hugely confident with his Mercedes car. Hamilton won at Silverstone – a record sixth victory in the British GP – beating his teammate Valtteri Bottas into second after the Finn had started from pole. Hamilton harried him fiercely in the opening laps but Bottas defended superbly. However when Hamilton opted for a one-stop strategy, with Bottas committed to taking two, the race swung in the British driver’s favour. A free stop under the safety car meant he took the lead and he drove superbly to take his tyres to the finish. Hamilton now leads Bottas by 39 points in the title race which, with 11 meetings remaining, is now a straight fight between the two Mercedes drivers. Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel, who was 16th at Silverstone after he took a penalty for crashing into Red Bull’s Max Verstappen, is 100 points behind and effectively out of contention. Hamilton has won four of the past five championships and believes each one has brought him on as a driver but insisted he would not stop looking to further improve. “Every year you get a bit more comfortable within yourself and within the methods you use and the processes you go through,” he said. “But qualifying’s not been spectacular this year, still not perfect, there’s still work to be done but the races have generally been relatively strong.” Mercedes have won all but one race this season and completed a remarkable seven one-two finishes. Their car has a comfortable edge over the rest of the field and Hamilton was relishing in its performance. “My trust in the car is incredibly high,” he said. “I know what the car is able to do and so I guess the experience of last year has made me a bit more confident to push it more, and being that it is so close I need to try and eke a bit more out of the car.” In the buildup to the race, Hamilton had bemoaned the clash with Wimbledon and the Cricket World Cup final but on the ground at least, the British GP boasted the most spectators with a sell-out crowd of 141,000 fans. It was announced last week that the British GP has renewed its contract to host Formula One for a further five years and the dates of the race will be under consideration. Those watching at Silverstone on Sunday were treated to a thrilling encounter, with close racing, overtaking and wheel to wheel contests across the field. Despite the intensity of some of the racing, particularly between Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc and Verstappen, the stewards deemed it all to be hard but fair and imposed only one penalty, on Vettel for his misjudgment which he admitted had been a mistake. The drivers welcomed this approach by the stewards. Hamilton too approved of them allowing a hands-off approach as long as the racing was clean. “That’s what everyone wants isn’t it?” he said. “Good for them, I’m glad it was a great day for the sport.” With Mercedes enjoying a strong advantage and Ferrari no closer to matching them, the Scuderia’s task looks increasingly to be battling a resurgent Red Bull. Verstappen is now a solid third in the championship, 13 points in front of Vettel. At Silverstone their race pace was impressive and Pierre Gasly, who has had a lacklustre season thus far, returned his equal best F1 finish with fourth and pulled a great move to pass Vettel during the race. Hamilton knows he is now in a two-way fight for the title but bemoaned the lack of a greater challenge at the front. “I love the racing, I do love the racing element, I loved competing against Ferrari last year. I wish the battle today was with the Ferraris. It’s different when you’re racing within a team and I much, much prefer it when you’re racing with the Red Bull and the Ferrari, but currently that’s not how it is.”