When Conrad Black, then owner of the Spectator and Daily Telegraph, and his wife, Barbara, decided to throw a party in Boris Johnson’s honour, the magazine’s editor and aspiring politician had already let his proprietor down. The upwardly mobile journalist had promised Black he would abandon hopes of a political career to preside over the political weekly, but was almost immediately seeking to contest a parliamentary seat. By the time the Blacks threw open their 11-bedroom Kensington house to guests in 2001, Johnson was not just a magazine editor, but also the Conservative candidate for Henley – and his reputation for getting away with it was well and truly established. A high point of the party was a performance by Kit and the Widow, a satirical double act. One of the guests made a note of the chorus: “That effrontery so sordid/should be cherished and rewarded/Is a fact to be applauded/As public life goes on/Let honour be accorded/That he’s pulled off such a con/Let it be lauded, the BoJo phenomenon.” Black even declared: “If Boris wants to run for No 10, the Telegraph is behind him.” But nobody took him seriously. As the guest ruefully observed: “Everybody puddled themselves with guffawing laughter of disbelief at the very thought.” Over the course of the week, the Guardian is publishing a series of news reports, features and multimedia components on the man widely expected to be the next Conservative leader – and therefore prime minister. In coverage that ranges from his early days as a journalist to his last senior job as foreign secretary, we will seek to shed light on the exploits, ambitions and values of one of the most consequential – and most divisive – politicians of the age. Johnson’s tenure as editor of the Spectator from 1999 to 2005 partly overlapped with his seven years as the Conservative MP for Henley. He also wrote a column for the Telegraph, motoring columns for GQ and several books, and was briefly – and disastrously – on the Tory frontbench as shadow arts minister. His period at the helm of the Spectator was so colourful the conservative weekly became known as the Sextator – its publisher, a star columnist and the editor were all embroiled in separate affairs – and he only just kept his political career on track. Johnson had narrowly avoided being fired by the then Conservative leader, Michael Howard, in October 2004, after an unsigned leading article in the magazine (in fact written not by the editor but by Simon Heffer) accused Liverpool of indulging in “victim status” in the aftermath of the murder in Iraq of Kenneth Bigley, who came from the city. In the end, after being sent to Merseyside to apologise in person, Johnson hung on – but only a month later, he was toast. It transpired Johnson had been engaged in an on-off affair with Petronella Wyatt, a columnist with the magazine. He had been married to Marina Wheeler since 1993, and his four children were all of primary school age at the time. But Wyatt had become pregnant and chose to have an abortion in a private hospital – two days before Johnson’s trip to Liverpool – a decision Johnson backed, although he initially declined to help pay the £1,500 bill. When confronted about the affair by the Mail on Sunday, he lied, saying: “I have not had an affair with Petronella. It is complete balderdash. It is an inverted pyramid of piffle.” It was, however, later confirmed by Wyatt’s mother. As Sunday newspapers prepared to run the story, Johnson told one journalist to “publish and be damned”. Two hours later, he was fired from the shadow cabinet. He had lied about the affair, and his political career imploded. Andrew Gimson, the Spectator’s then foreign editor, was also Johnson’s first biographer. He remembers his boss was already being talked about as a contender for the party leadership when Howard – always intended to be a caretaker – stepped aside. “In 2005, Boris found he couldn’t run for the leadership; he had been shown to be too unreliable. It was his connection with the Spectator that did for him. He hated the fact that [David] Cameron won, but he had got himself in a hopeless position with Petronella, where he couldn’t keep everybody happy,” Gimson said. Johnson ran the Spectator as he ended up running the London mayoralty. He presided, but as far as day-to-day matters were concerned, relied heavily on his deputy, Stuart Reid, not least to make sense of an often chaotic commissioning process where some writers were left wondering if pieces urgently demanded by Johnson would ever be published. Johnson’s campaign did not respond to requests for comment on his time at the Spectator. Those who worked there at the time largely remember the period fondly. Peter Oborne, who was political editor, says he received very little direction from Johnson beyond “a two- to three-minute phone call on a Sunday evening, where you got what you needed”. Johnson “never told me what to write”, he said, but despite being a Conservative insider, passed on few tips either. Editorial conferences, when they happened, frequently descended into mirth. “It didn’t matter if you didn’t have a story as long as you had a joke,” Gimson said. “And if you didn’t have a joke, he could supply them.” Joke telling was a serious, even competitive business at the title, but there were some journalistic successes too: although it was an Oborne story, it was the Spectator that first reported that Tony Blair’s Downing Street had sought a more prominent role for the then prime minister in the Queen Mother’s lying in state. Blair’s then director of communications, Alastair Campbell, complained to the Press Complaints Commission, but the weekly was vindicated and Campbell forced to withdraw after a parliamentary official, Black Rod, refused to endorse No 10’s version of events. Johnson’s time at the title ran out when the indulgent Black, short of money, lost control of the magazine. Its new owners, the Barclay brothers, installed Andrew Neil as chief executive, who expected more by way of a work ethic. “We are now looking forward to a period of quiet,” Neil said at the height of the Sextator scandal, and a year later, Johnson departed as editor. Few of these dramas seemed to have much impact in Henley, where Johnson was selected to be the party’s candidate in July 2000. He had made it to the final three in part because of a sense his presence would liven things up at the hustings, where around 500 turned up to Benson village hall. Barry Brown, a party activist, said there were many unfamiliar faces at the meeting. “There were so many people we had never seen. People who had never had anything to do with the association,” he said. Even Johnson conceded that the other two candidates – David Platt and Jill Andrew, both lawyers – were better than him on the night. Platt was the association’s favourite, but his cause had been damaged by questions about his unmarried status. “My single greatest advantage over David Platt was that I had a wife, beaming up at me from the front row, with every appearance of interest, wearing a suitably colourful flowery coat,” Johnson wrote in his 2001 book Friends, Voters, Countrymen. He beat Platt by a handful of votes. Richard Pullen, whose wife, Maggie, was president of the constituency association at the time, said: “The management committee certainly were not happy that [Johnson] had been selected. “We all left him afterwards and came here [to Pullen’s house] and had some champagne with the other candidates. We just didn’t feel he deserved to get it.” Despite these concerns, with a safe and prosperous seat, getting to the House of Commons was never going to be difficult; his majority in 2001 was 8,458 over the Liberal Democrats, rising to 12,793 in the following election. Labour was in power throughout, so there was no requirement to defend unpopular government policies. Richard Reed, the news editor at the Henley Standard while Johnson was MP, said the local paper, like many constituents, did not seem particularly bothered by stories about his affairs in the national press. “We didn’t bother with it,” he said. “It’s not what the Henley Standard does. We were a pretty parochial paper in many ways and we didn’t really like bad news.” Speaking of his wife, Pullen said: “Maggie was always surprised that the ladies of Henley didn’t criticise him for his affairs. In fact, most of them would always say that it was Marina’s fault.” During that time and despite holding two jobs for much of it, Johnson wrote and wrote. Perhaps most notably, in Friends, Voters, Countrymen, he said that despite his Euroscepticism, he believed the UK’s interests were “on balance served by maintaining our [EU] membership”. Johnson wrote: “This has brought palpable benefits to Britain in free trade and bestowing British citizens the rights of free movement and free establishment in the EU, and withdrawal would mean a potentially worrying loss of influence.” In 2004, he published a novel, Seventy Two Virgins, which features a hapless Tory MP so preoccupied that his misdeeds will end up in a tabloid newspaper that he fails to notice a terrorist attack unfolding in front of him. The reader is initially encouraged to think Roger Barlow’s crime is an affair, although it is revealed in the final pages that a newspaper was poised to reveal the MP had invested £20,000 in a lingerie business that was a cover for a brothel. “Barlow had strayed outside the weird and hypocritical matrix that the tabloid imposed on the conduct of public and semi-public figures,” wrote Johnson. “He was a goner.” The novel is packed with racially loaded caricatures. A black parking warden called Eric is described as “six foot two of anthracite handsomeness”, with scars on his cheeks denoting “that he was a prince of the royal blood in the Hausa tribe” in Lagos. A group of Kosovan Muslims have “burning eyes, hook noses and hairy black eyebrows”. Barlow’s American assistant, Cameron, is described as having “a deep and sexist reverence for men who really knew stuff”. He wrote: “It amazed her sometimes how little appearances mattered. He could be bald, he could be spindly or sweaty or tubby, but if the man’s disquisition had enough interest, fluency and authority, it would speak directly to her groin.” The opportunity to indulge such fantasies seems a long way from the likely day-to-day tasks and responsibilities of a prime minister – and some former associates wonder whether he is cut out for the job. “I can’t imagine he’ll enjoy it,” said Andy McSmith, a veteran political journalist who wrote about Labour and the unions for Johnson’s Spectator. “It’s not like working out who to have around for the next Spectator lunch or dashing off a column. So much of what a prime minister has to do is very dull, having meetings with boring heads of government, attending committees, keeping people happy. I just don’t think that’s what motivates him.”