Bury face the threat of expulsion from the English Football League if they do not meet the insolvency policy. The cash-strapped club – who were last week deducted 12 points after entering a company voluntary agreement – remain in crisis less than a fortnight before the start of the League One season. The EFL’s Articles of Association provide for clubs, following an insolvency event, to be served with a notice of withdrawal of membership. Once issued, clubs have 14 days to meet all outstanding requirements of the league’s insolvency policy or membership of the EFL may be terminated. It is understood the EFL’s notice of withdrawal has not yet been issued, but the EFL is continuing to monitor the situation closely. Its executive chair, Debbie Jevans, said: “This is an incredibly difficult and complex situation for all those involved, in particular the staff, players and supporters of the club. “We fully recognise the value and importance of the club to the local community and its fans, and will continue to work proactively and diligently with the ownership, as we have done over an extended period of time, to try and ensure Bury FC has a long-term future as a member of the EFL.” Bury were facing further problems on Thursday as the local Safety Advisory Group met to consider whether the club meets all the requirements necessary to safely stage EFL fixtures at Gigg Lane. The EFL said the league has the ability to suspend Bury’s fixtures should the SAG confirm the club does not have the sufficient resources and facilities for its opening fixtures and/or it fails to provide all the outstanding information and documentation. Bury were promoted from League Two last season but entered the CVA after a winding-up petition over unpaid debts was adjourned at the high court last month. Their chairman, Steve Dale, said the future of the club would be safe after agreeing the CVA. Dale, who said the club is working with the EFL to deal with outstanding issues, told Bury’s website: “We have worked tirelessly to achieve the result today while taking a lot of flak. Some might say our methods were questionable but we can all pass comment with hindsight. “My job was to save Bury FC and that’s done. We have other hurdles but the main one is complete. Over the coming weeks, our fans will see the truth appearing once the police have completed their inquiries and arrests, and they will realise who had the club’s best interest at heart. The facts as always will outweigh the social media spin and lies.” However Bury supporters have seen the break-up of Ryan Lowe’s promotion-winning squad this summer. There has been a player exodus at Gigg Lane and Lowe himself has left to become manager at Plymouth, with the former Everton and Nottingham Forest striker Paul Wilkinson appointed as his replacement this month.