My girlfriend did a show in Ciao Roma and ever since the owner has treated her like his child. When we walk in, it’s like the prodigal has returned. People are moved from “our” table mid-starter. Italian men dote on me, tell my girlfriend how lucky she is and bring us carbs. Because it’s the fringe I’m too tired to examine the gender politics and just enjoy the food and have a cry in a relatively private corner. Also, gelato! Catherine Bohart Edmonstone’s Close, an extremely narrow side street that smells of urine and serves as the most idyllic backdrop for any secret rendezvous. I have always flirted with the idea that reality is fiction and I’m just a character in a Nancy Meyers film. This feels most true when I frolic around the city with a lover and nip into Edmonstone’s Close to exchange hot beer-breathed kisses to the hum of a passing silent disco tour. Olga Koch Mosque Kitchen is my go-to place for food and comfort. Feeling sad? Have a curry. Feeling happy? Celebrate with curry. Missed breakfast? Why not have a curry? There is nothing like being in the vicinity of religion to make you feel like maybe that three-star review isn’t the end of the world or that kissing that musical comedian isn’t going to ruin your career, even though it probably should. Sofie Hagen In 2017, I spotted a little restaurant on South Clerk Street with a name so simple and enticing that I floated inside. Noodles and Dumplings promises relatively little but delivers so much. A wonton noodle soup I will remember forever – its light but meaty broth, its fresh wonton mince and hand-pulled noodles with just the right amount of whatever al dente is in Chinese – began a month-long obsession. I flapped my wet meaty gums about the place to anyone who would listen. And now, I’m flapping them at you. Flap flap flap. Phil Wang I love the sea and sand. Subtext: I’m a beach babe for goodness sakes! No, but seriously now, getting in the vast, blue sea at Portobello Beach makes you realise that in the large scheme of the universe your little comedy show couldn’t matter less. Having said that, do come along, it is a really important show of course. Lou Sanders Where is your favourite place in Edinburgh? Glasgow, as the old joke goes. At Princes Street Gardens, I watch tourists mesmerised by Edinburgh’s architecture and ponder Scotland’s big questions. Why is it always cold? And who thought sauce instead of vinegar on chips was acceptable? Susie McCabe Spoon on Nicholson Street guarantees a nourishing meal, which is essential in a month that tests the physical limits of the human body by attempting to run it exclusively on lager and kebabs. The food is excellent, the service cheery, and it’s an ideal place for me and David O’Doherty to hang out, so we don’t have to go to bars with the young comedians and feel like everyone else’s dads who have turned up uninvited to a house party. Nish Kumar I always stay in Leith which has my favourite pub, The Lioness of Leith. Benny Abbott, who used to be my boss when I was a struggling comedian made the perfect boozer. Quality food and alcohol, vintage arcade games. It’s my fringe haven. Jayde Adams On South Bridge you’ll find Edinburgh bakery institution The Piemaker. The day I discovered it I ate a bridie (a Scottish variation of a meat pie), a macaroni and cheese pie and a cheeseburger pizza. Jack Rooke I did so many of my early fringes at Pleasance Courtyard. The place has a truly magical it’s-the-same-but-completely-different quality every year. I’ve not played there in years but the nightmare of trying to get somewhere to sit and sup a pint while being relentlessly flyered, especially when it’s raining, is something I make sure I experience. Don’t go out of season, the empty car park is heartbreaking and spell-shattering. Al Murray Turn up at the Salt Horse on Blackfriars Street mid-afternoon and occasionally you’ll catch the eye of another comic, sitting alone, nursing a third of a pint, deconstructing their show for the umpteenth time and flustered that someone else has discovered the location of their secret oasis. It is my secret oasis, too. Consequently, and most importantly, none of you are invited. Ahir Shah Slap bang in the middle of the Royal Mile. Look at it! Just look. It’s unlike anything you’ll see anywhere. Thousands of people from everywhere sing, juggle, dance, unicycle, laugh and prance about in costumes. Take a flyer. These thousands of people made something they want you to enjoy. Don’t go there if you’re a cynic – or in a hurry. Marcus Brigstocke When I began dating my fiance he visited me at the fringe. We spent a weekend falling in love and galloping about like idiots. We climbed everything, drank original recipe Irn-Bru and visited The Fudge House on the Royal Mile. I’m aware this sounds like a huge double entendre but it’s what we did. Sampling Italian nougat and salted-caramel fudge. The owners of the shop are Scottish-Italian and so is my better half. They are always making a new batch of something and it’s great to watch. We eat till our bellies and hearts are full. Tiff Stevenson At a basketball court in the New Town there is always a group of high-school kids and some seemingly semi-pro players having a social game. Well, it can turn antisocial. A couple of years ago Ronny Chieng, Matt Okine and I went to shoot some hoops and the competition was intense. Before I invite someone to play I always warn them. Loyiso Gola The Meadows is everything to every man. I have run very gently across the park width-ways then looked at my watch and gone “yeah, probably about 5k”. I have sat with fish and chips and watched the fireworks from the Tattoo. I have comforted a teenager I found crying after the boy in her student production of Titus Andronicus (set in space) went off with the girl playing Alien Lavinia. I have been there at 7am, when no one had enough living room space to accommodate a last-minute dance rehearsal and everyone was still drunk. And I have walked home across it at 5am, as the sun came up, and thought what a stupid, magical, wonderful place Edinburgh is. Tessa Coates One of my most treasured Edinburgh memories is going with a fellow comic for a hot-towel shave at a barbers at the top of Leith Walk. Surprisingly, it included having my nostril and ear hairs burned off (I’d not realised they’d existed, let alone that they needed to be razed to the ground). The surprise face, head and hand massage was truly sublime. I’ve never been back, in case it’s terrible now, so instead I sport a beard. Alun Cochrane Walk down the cobbled Victoria Street with its quaint shops and you’ll find the treasure trove that is La Barantine. The courteous waiter goes through the delightful menu full of delights. I wave my hand to stop him because I know what I want. The tart with french salad followed by macarons and a superbly brewed cappuccino. Njambi McGrath I spent August 2008 walking up and down the Grassmarket with crinkled flyers. I hated it, then grew to love it. One day I was tired, sweaty, not feeling funny. A man said to me: “I think we went to school together.” The school was in Nairobi, and we had last seen each other 20 years earlier. Another time I had a bag snatched there and chased down the thief like a comic-book hero. I also fell in love with someone I met at the Grassmarket. Ended horribly but great beginning. Daliso Chaponda The Wee Red Bar is the best place for pulling fit eccentric artists and dancing like an idiot. The DJ always plays my requests, the drinks are limited to cheap cans of beer and spirits and I’ve blocked out my memory of the toilets but it’s the best night out in Edinburgh. Fern Brady The car park behind the George Square Lecture theatre. Sounds weird but I did my first Edinburgh show in 2006 around the corner from it and got my first agent because of that show. I also saw one of my comedy heroes, Demetri Martin, do his show that year at the same theatre. Lots of fond memories associated with that cobbled, quiet car park. The rest of the festival can go to hell. Arnab Chanda The Tron was where I first sniffed success back in 2010, the Pleasance Courtyard was where I got dragged on stage by Al Murray when I was 16 and Bedlam theatre was where I played three years with my old theatre company. Venue 45 was where I first performed with my school and decided this was what I wanted to do with my life and Queen Dome, where I return this year, was where I performed my favourite show This Means War! in 2012. Top of everything though is City Cafe where I’ll visit once to get an artery-hardening meal when I need a deep-fried pick-me-up. Nick Helm The Cineworld complex at Fountain Park. Food, drink, Imax … everything a hardened performer could ever need to take their mind off whatever car crash is going on in their head. Matinees, evening performances and late nights. Do one. Do two. Do my personal record of five. Last year, I asked if I could stage one of my shows there. I’m not kidding. They said no, which in my book is yet another reason to love them. Adam Riches There are no festival-related events at the Vue Cinema at the Omni Centre. It’s just films that don’t care if they get a three-star review that reads like a four. During the week there’s almost no one there so you can sit in a giant, air-conditioned room by yourself, in a soft, supportive chair, and watch really famous people pretend to be something they’re not. Which is a lovely distraction from talking to not-famous people pretending to be themselves. Stuart Laws As a lover of hiking/miser who refuses to pay for a taxi, I go everywhere on foot at the fringe. So I’m going to recommend my favourite walking itinerary! Lace up the waterproof boots, stick Bruckner’s Symphony No. 8 on the iPod and you’re ready to go! Start at Holyrood, go through the wild flower meadows by parliament, up Arthur’s Seat, down into Newington (optional haggis burger at The Southern), do a lap of The Meadows and end up back at Summerhall – where I got married! Wear shorts if it rains: legs dry quicker than trousers. Kieran Hodgson