Boris Johnson is refusing to sit down for talks with EU leaders until they agree to ditch the Irish backstop, despite invitations to meetings from the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and the French president, Emmanuel Macron. His official spokeswoman said the prime minister had made clear that he wanted to strike a deal, but there was no point in holding face-to-face talks unless the EU agreed to reopen the withdrawal agreement. But on a visit to the Trident nuclear base at Faslane in Scotland on Monday, Johnson painted a more optimistic picture of the prospect for talks, insisting to reporters that there was “ample scope” to achieve a new deal. He said: “We are not aiming for a no-deal Brexit at all. What we want is to get a deal and I’ve had some interesting conversations with our European partners. I’ve talked to Jean-Claude [Juncker] and Angela Merkel and we’re reaching out today to Leo Varadkar. The feeling is, yes there’s no change in their position, but it’s very, very positive.” But he added: “They all know where we are: we can’t accept the backstop, it was thrown out three times, the withdrawal agreement as it stands is dead and everybody gets that. But there is ample scope to do a new deal and a better deal.” While Johnson has spoken to Merkel and Macron, there are no plans to accept their invitations to visit without a change in their position on the backstop. Meanwhile Irish officials are understood to view the delay in contacting Varadkar, the Irish prime minister, as indicative of an unwillingness to enter serious talks. Varadkar is adamant that the backstop must stay to prevent a return to a hard border on the island of Ireland and preserve the integrity of the single market. The spokeswoman said: “The PM has been clear that he wants to meet EU leaders and negotiate, but not to sit down and be told that the EU cannot possibly reopen the withdrawal agreement. And that is the message that he has been giving to leaders when he has spoken to them on the telephone so far.” “The EU has said up to now it is not willing to renegotiate [the backstop] ... The prime minister would be happy to sit down with leaders when that position changes. But he is making it clear to everybody he speaks to that that needs to happen.” Asked about his plans to kick-start negotiations with the EU over the summer, after the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, appeared to suggest on Monday morning that he would not reopen talks until the EU agreed to ditch the backstop, Johnson said: “I believe in reaching out. I’ve already been talking to colleagues around the table in Brussels, I have absolutely no inhibitions about that. We are going to engage and obviously ask for very profound changes to the current basis for leaving the EU.” He said that, while the formal position of the EU that there can be no further negotiations on the withdrawal agreement remained unchanged, “I think they understand that the UK and the EU are two great political entities and it is possible for us to come up with a new deal that will be to the benefit of both sides.” Despite the positivity of Johnson’s outlook in Faslane, where he met naval personnel working inside the nuclear submarine HMS Victorious, his underlying position on talks makes clear that No 10 is now proceeding towards a no-deal Brexit unless EU leaders change their minds about not reopening the withdrawal agreement. It is counter to expectations among some of Johnson’s supporters that he would embark on a whistlestop diplomatic tour of European capitals to propose an alternative to the backstop, instead leaving the ball in the court of EU leaders to make a move. The No 10 spokeswoman added: “I think he has been clear that the backstop has to be abolished. He remains confident that the EU will stop claiming that the withdrawal agreement cannot be changed. But until that happens we must assume that there will be a no-deal Brexit on 31 October.” Earlier, Raab refused to say whether Johnson was planning to see EU leaders any time soon, saying there would be meetings “in due course”. While Johnson refuses to negotiate on the EU’s current terms, he is ramping up planning for a no-deal Brexit with a series of new cabinet committees to prepare for leaving on 31 October. The government is also planning an advertising campaign spending up to £100m on warning the public and businesses that they need to get ready. Johnson’s spokeswoman could not say what the exact messages would be or whether the public would be advised to stockpile ahead of that date. It will not involve leafleting every household, but broadcast and billboard advertisements are likely. On his visit to Scotland, Johnson also heaped praise on the Scottish Conservative leader, Ruth Davidson, who on Sunday issued a defiant challenge to the prime minister, pledging that she will refuse to back a no-deal Brexit. Claiming that he was “with Ruth in wanting to avoid a no-deal Brexit”, he said: “Ruth has been a fantastic leader of the Scottish Conservatives. I am lost in admiration for what she has achieved. I’m a massive fan of the way she has taken the argument to those who would destroy our union.” Davidson has made no secret of her reservations about the new prime minister, and Johnson infuriated her last week by sacking her ally, David Mundell, as Scottish secretary, against her advice. The first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said she intended to set out for him the “considerable damage” that any Brexit, and especially a no-deal Brexit, would do to Scotland’s economy. Speaking in advance of her first face-to-face meeting with Johnson since he became prime minister, she said: “Boris Johnson has formed a hard-line Tory government with one aim – to take Scotland and the UK out of the EU without a deal”.