Officials have been left bewildered after opening two tombs at the Vatican to see if the body of a girl missing since 1983 had been hidden in either and finding them both empty. Experts were looking for the remains of Emanuela Orlandi, the daughter of a Vatican clerk. Her disappearance at the age of 15 – she failed to return home after a music lesson in Rome – has been the subject of speculation in the Italian media for years. Exhumation work began after a morning prayer in the Teutonic cemetery, a burial ground just inside the Vatican walls, used over the centuries mainly for church figures or members of noble families of German or Austrian origin. Officials were expecting to find at least the bones of Princess Sophie von Hohenlohe, who died in 1836, and Princess Carlotta Federica of Mecklenburg, who died in 1840, but there was no trace of either. “The result of the search was negative. No human remains or funeral urns were found,” the Vatican spokesman Alessandro Gisotti said. Gisotti said the Vatican would examine records of structural work done in the cemetery at the end of the 19th century and again about 60 years ago to see if they could shed any light on the new mystery. Princess Sophie’s tomb led to a large empty underground room, he said. Theories about Emanuela’s disappearance have run the gamut from an attempt to secure freedom for Mehmet Ali Ağca, the Turk jailed in 1981 for trying to assassinate Pope John Paul II, to a connection to the grave of Enrico De Pedis, a mobster buried in a Rome basilica. His tomb was opened in 2012 but nothing was revealed. Last year, bones found during ground work at the Vatican embassy in Rome prompted a media frenzy suggesting they might belong to Emanuela or to Mirella Gregori, another teenager who disappeared in 1983. DNA tests  came back negative. The Orlandi family later received an anonymous letter saying Emanuela’s body might be hidden among the dead in the Teutonic cemetery where a statue of an angel holding a book reads “requiescat in pace”, Latin for “rest in peace”. The two tombs were opened in the presence of the Orlandi family and descendants of the princesses. Police in 1983 did not exclude the possibility that Emanuela may have been abducted and killed for unknown reasons or been a victim of human trafficking.