My youngest is three weeks old now, just enough already to know the best and worst of English cricket. She was born right around the time they beat Afghanistan, came home on the day they lost against Sri Lanka, and her first match – the one I watched while she sat on my lap – was that bleak and dispiriting defeat against Australia at Lord’s. “No, no this team are different,” I said when Eoin Morgan flapped a catch to fine leg and his side were 26 for three, “really, they can still win this”. She gave me one of those quizzical looks babies make while they’re learning how to work their face, like she wanted to say: “Unlike you, I wasn’t born yesterday.” Well, since then there have been those back-to-back wins against India and New Zealand, and England seem to have arrived at the semi-finals full of confidence. Which seems just a touch rash, since – as you, me, and everyone else who’s ever watched them knows – it’s the hope that gets you in the end. Australia may have lost that last match against South Africa, they may be playing at a ground, Edgbaston, where they haven’t won since they crushed England by an innings and 118 runs in 2001 (Steve Waugh 105, Damien Martyn 105, Adam Gilchrist 152, Shane Warne eight for 100, and doesn’t that make you wince), and they may have suffered that sudden flurry of injuries – broken arms, pulled hamstrings, side strains. But they still have one great advantage over everyone else: they are Australia. Which means there is a part of me, as there must be in every longstanding England fan, that’s half-sure they will somehow end up stronger for whatever changes they have to make. It might be Peter Handscomb, who was averaging 43 at a run a ball in one-day cricket this year before they dropped him from the squad, or Matthew Wade, who, playing for their A team, has just blazed 117 off 67 balls against Northamptonshire and 155 off 71 against Derbyshire, or even Mitch Marsh, who swept up five for 33 the last time he played against England in a World Cup. (Gary Ballance 10, Ian Bell 36, Joe Root 5, Eoin Morgan 0, Jos Buttler 10, England 231 all out. Think of this as exposure therapy.) Because it is never just Australia’s batting, bowling, fielding, England have to overcome, it is what John Arlott once called their “Australianism”, too, and the perpetual threat that someone is going to pull an Andy Bichel on you. “Where the impossible is within the realm of what the human body can do, there are Australians who believe they can do it,” wrote Arlott, “and who have succeeded often enough to make us wonder if anything is impossible to them.” Which, perhaps, says as much about how the English have learned to watch cricket as it does about how the Australians have learned to play it. Arlott traced this neurosis back to the Ashes match in 1882, when Australia collapsed in their second innings from 66 for none to 122 all out. During the innings break their famous, feared fast bowler Fred “the Demon” Spofforth is supposed to have said: “This thing can be done.” And then, to show it could, he went and did it. He snatched the match with seven for 44, “in the face of all cricket probability and 11 great English cricketers”. England were bowled out for 77 and lost by eight runs. Ever since, Arlott wrote, “when England are winning we have dreaded an Australian recovery – for every Australian seems capable of saving his side – and when Australia have been on top then we have felt, in our hearts, that they would never relax”. England’s women, flattened three-nil in the first three matches of this year’s Ashes, are learning about this all over again right now. It occurs to me now, midway through all this, that it might not be quite the sort of peppy read I probably should have turned in the day before the game, less “here-we-go-then” than “here-we-go-again”. Morgan and Trevor Bayliss, plus their coaches and psychologists, will be trying to drum this thinking out of England this week. Even if they have to fake it to make it happen. In Channel 4’s documentary The Greatest Series, which went out on Sunday night, Michael Vaughan said they had done exactly that in 2005. He talked about how insecure he and his teammates felt that summer, and if we didn’t necessarily guess it from watching them, Vaughan explained, that was because they were all busy pretending they were sure of themselves. Well, since all I have to do is watch, I will let him keep his optimism. I’ve tried it on for size, and it doesn’t suit nearly so well as my inveterate Eeyorism. I told myself, and everyone else, Australia were there for the taking before the start of the tournament, then I said it again during their game against West Indies at Trent Bridge, when they were 79 for five, and one last time, right before they thrashed England at Lord’s. So now it has come down to England needing to beat them in a semi-final, I have given up on this wishful thinking. Think of it as a public service. I have decided to spare us all another woeful prediction. Expect the worst. It is less painful that way, and, yes, may turn out more surprising, too.