Arsenal hope to tie up a deal for Nicolas Pépé and won’t stop there – “There are different players on the table with the possibility we can achieve their signature,” says Unai Emery. “We are only thinking about people who can really, really improve this squad. We will only look at men who can really strengthen a position. One centre-back, one full-back and one winger. We are going to do that. Really I want a better team than last year.” Metro think they have identified the centre-back, revealing the Gunners will try to sign Daniele Rugani from Juventus on a season-long loan. Manchester United have agreed terms with Sergej Milinkovic-Savic, who will sign a five-year contract worth €6m a year after tax should they submit a rumoured €75m bid to Lazio – “plus €15m in bonuses, €5m easy and €10m more complicated,” reports the Corriere dello Sport. The player’s agent, Mateja Kezman, has set up a temporary base in London, where he will remain until the deal is done (which won’t be until Paul Pogba joins Real Madrid, which won’t be until Gareth Bale goes somewhere, so he’ll have plenty of time for sightseeing). Kezman could also hang out with Miguel Pinho, the agent of Sporting’s Bruno Fernandes, who according to the Correio da Manhã is also in England and also will not return until his client’s own move to Manchester is finalised. “United’s top priority is the signing of Harry Maguire,” they report. “Followed by Milinkovic-Savic and Fernandes. Bruno might be the last of the trio, with Ole Gunnar Solskjaer intending to play him as a second striker.” According to the Mirror, Crystal Palace have rejected Everton’s £50m offer for Wilfried Zaha, because “it fell £10m short of their valuation”. According to the Sun, the offer was £55m and Everton were “told he is not for sale at any price”. The Mail insist the bid hasn’t yet been submitted, but that when it is it will be £52m – and it will be declined because Crystal Palace’s actual asking price is £80m. The Telegraph says the offer is already in – at £55m – that the rejection is still forthcoming and that the asking price is indeed £80m. In further Everton news, Sky are reporting that Idrissa Gueye’s move to Paris Saint-Germain is now so close that the midfielder is actually in the French capital, where he is expected to have a medical ahead of a £28m transfer, while widespread gossip suggests that either Mainz’s Jean-Philippe Gbamin or Chelsea’s Tiémoué Bakayoko will eventually replace him. Bournemouth are ready to sell Harry Arter, with Fulham, Stoke and Sheffield United all interested, and “are actively looking in the market” for further recruits, says Eddie Howe. Newcastle are after PSG’s Stanley N’Soki, a 20-year-old defender. Cardiff are close to sewing up a £2m deal for Oxford’s Gavin Whyte, a 23-year-old winger. Nottingham Forest, meanwhile, are preparing a fresh bid for Aberdeen’s 22-year-old defender Scott McKenna, with Burnley’s Ben Gibson next on their list should that deal fall through. Blackpool will spend £750,000 on Blackburn’s 22-year-old striker Joe Nuttall.