An episode of The Jeremy Kyle Show was withdrawn after broadcast because of concerns the programme’s lie detector test was unreliable, amid continued scrutiny of the tactics used by the now-cancelled reality TV show. ITV’s chief executive, Carolyn McCall, said the show employed trained providers to carry out polygraph tests on individuals who were attempting to settle family disputes in front of a live audience, with an expected accuracy rate of more than 90%. “We are aware of only one instance where a guest who had failed the lie detector test later advised The Jeremy Kyle Show that they had taken another test administered by a different polygraph examiner, which gave a different result. The episode was not transmitted again.” The show was cancelled earlier this year following the death of a participant, Steve Dymond, after he failed a lie detector test. The incident prompted a reckoning for the entire television industry and, as a consequence, Ofcom has proposed a new requirement for all television producers to protect the “dignity” of members of the public. In evidence to the House of Commons’ digital, culture, media and sport (DCMS) select committee inquiry into reality TV, McCall confirmed that the producers of The Jeremy Kyle Show often used the show’s Facebook page to encourage its 1.2 million followers to apply to the programme in return for a free lie detector test. This echoed similar adverts broadcast to viewers of the main television programme. The committee chairman, Damian Collins, said he was concerned that on one occasion in late 2018 the programme’s makers “used Facebook ads to find individuals who wanted to take lie detector or DNA tests”. “It is particularly concerning that the production team appeared to be specifically targeting people who were hoping to resolve a difficult personal situation,” he said. ITV said that this was a one-off incident where they experimented with paying to boost the audience of a single Facebook post. This suggests the advert would be mainly seen by existing fans of The Jeremy Kyle Show who already liked the page – as opposed to ITV going out of its way to narrowly target individuals wanting to take a polygraph test who had not heard of the programme. Despite this, there is evidence that the promise of a free lie detector test was a major attraction for many vulnerable participants on the programme. Former participant Dwayne Davison, who was called “the most hated Jeremy Kyle guest ever”, told the Guardian earlier this year it was the promise of a free lie-detector test to settle an argument which prompted his decision to contact the programme. Davison said the appearance – and the subsequent social shaming that followed repeats of the programme and clips circulating on social media – led him to attempt suicide as he struggled to deal with his infamy, which he claimed was a result of being provoked by the show’s producers. British television producers have warned they could shy away from highlighting underreported issues involving individuals from the fringes of society as a result of increased regulation. “Reality TV has already played a role in raising social, health and welfare issues amongst the public through the inclusion of participants from across the socio-economic, gender identification, political and cultural spectrum,” said Pact, the trade body which represents the UK’s independent television production companies. Channel 4 also provided evidence to parliament. Asked by MPs whether it had many complaints from contestants on Naked Attraction – its nude dating show – it said fewer than 5% of contestants had given negative feedback. The chief executive, Alex Mahon, said complaints were mainly from people who did not find their nude date attractive. A small number of participants said they were unhappy they did not appear attractive on television when the show was broadcast. Mahon said they were offered additional psychological support.