Novak Djokovic called his Wimbledon final victory over Roger Federer “the most mentally demanding match of his career” after finding a way to overcome his opponent and a Centre Court crowd that was overwhelmingly against him. The Serb came through 7-6 (5), 1-6, 7-6 (4), 4-6, 13-12 (3) after four hours and 57 minutes of play, having had to survive two championship points in the fifth set, but insisted he had never lost his self-belief. “I had the most physically demanding match against Rafael Nadal in the finals of Australia that went almost six hours,” he said. “But mentally this was different level, because of everything. I was one shot away from losing the match, as well. This match had everything. It could have gone easily his way. He was serving extremely well, I thought, the entire match. I had a lot of difficulties to read his serve. “I thought most of the match I was on the back foot,” he added. “I was defending and he was dictating the play. I just tried to fight and find a way when it mattered the most, which is what happened. “I just tried to never lose self-belief, to stay calm, and to just focus on trying to get the ball back, return, which wasn’t serving me very well. And in the most important moments, in all three tie-breaks, I found my best game.” Meanwhile Federer tried to put a brave face on his defeat, which hurt all the more given that he missed two match points when serving and 8-7 up in the final set. “I don’t know what I feel right now, he said. “I just feel like it’s such an incredible opportunity missed, I can’t believe it. But you take it on your chin, you move on. You try to forget, try to take the good things out of this match. Federer was also asked about how this match compared to 2008 when he lost another five-set classic against Rafael Nadal. “Epic ending, so close, so many moments so sure there’s similarities, he said. “But I’m the loser both times, so that’s the only similarity I see. “Maybe like after 2008 I will look back at it and think: ‘Well, it’s not that bad after all.’ For now it hurts, and it should, like every loss does here at Wimbledon. “But I’m very strong at being able to move on because I don’t want to be depressed about actually an amazing tennis match.”