Reports of discrimination across all levels of football rose by a third last season, according to figures released by Kick It Out, with the anti-discrimination organisation’s chief executive, Roisin Wood, describing the increase as “not surprising” and stating that “football reflects the society it is played and watched in”. There were 422 reports of discrimination during the 2018-19 campaign, up from 319 in the previous year, with racism remaining the most common form of discrimination, in both professional and grassroots football, constituting 65% of reports – a 43% rise. Faith-based discrimination, which includes Islamophobia and antisemitism, rose higher than any other across, with reports increasing by 75% from 36 to 63. “Football reflects the society it is played and watched in and these figures are sadly not surprising,” said Wood. “The fact that racist reports have risen by 43% clearly shows the massive work that all of football still needs to do to challenge this. In 2019 we need to ask the question what can we do better and what is not working? “The sharp increase in faith-based discrimination is also worrying and represents a challenge to us all - what are we doing to address this intolerance?” Discrimination relating to sexual orientation increased by 12 %, from 61 to 68, while reports relating to gender remained at the same level (eight). Disability discrimination reports dropped from 15 to nine. Social media incidents, meanwhile, increased to 581, a 12% rise from the season before. “The online statistics in our view represent the tip of the iceberg and we renew our call for social media platforms - and the government - to help tackle growing incidents of online hate,” said Wood. There was also a call from the chief executive for the Football Association to do more, specifically in regards to incidents in grassroots football. According to Kick It Out’s figures, the governing body have not informed them of the outcome in 79% of the 109 cases reported at that level. “We feel that incidents at grassroots level are still under-reported and this could be due to the length of time it takes a complainant to get their case satisfactorily concluded, and even then there’s often disenchantment in the type of sanctions handed out,” said Wood. “We need to build confidence that if you report a grassroots incident it will be dealt with effectively and efficiently.”