MPs have passed a cross-party amendment compelling the government to bring forward regulations to decriminalise abortion in Northern Ireland. It is, as many campaigners – spearheaded by Ann Furedi at the British Pregnancy Advisory Service – have celebrated, a historic moment. But it’s chastening to consider how history will judge us, as neighbours, as feminists, as compatriots: it would be low to rejoice in the end of this situation without acknowledging the shame of how long it has persisted. You have to observe an injustice in greater depth to see what it really means: I knew, and had always known, that abortion laws were different in Northern Ireland, and in Ireland. The constitutional implications of abortion law in Northern Ireland were profound – it’s hard to comprehend what it means, for women’s rights to be “devolved” in this way, that there would be a pocket of your nation where an entire cohort of people could have circumscribed rights that you would think belonged to another age. But the one thing a failure of imagination cannot survive is confrontation with practicality: in 2012, Marie Stopes opened its first clinic in Northern Ireland. The setting, an anonymous office block, was anything but clinical, for two reasons; there was nothing under the law they could do, clinically, bar confirm that women were pregnant and refer them on; and everybody who visited that building needed plausible deniability. They needed to be in a building with other offices, temp agencies, ingrowing-toenail services, they needed a million other reasons why a person might be walking in and out. Not because there was already – on the first day of opening – an anti-abortion campaigner standing outside pontificating, but for the thousand eyes you may not notice who would see you go in. It was a situation beyond shame; one in which your predicament, your fertility, your intentions, could be judged at random, with consequences unknown. I couldn’t see any concrete difference between this and the era of the Stasi, except, of course, that it didn’t affect men. I know people who have taken active steps to help Northern Irish women, put them up when they’ve had to travel to England for an abortion; with no doubt, some people made the logical connection between what the law was and what it was like to live it. But I know I didn’t. Same-sex marriage, I feel sure, occupies the same space; you can agree with the principle, but you have to hear a human describe what it’s like to be denied it before you are even close to being an ally. This amendment, alongside one on same-sex marriage and passed by a similarly resounding majority, came about by happenstance and cunning, Labour MPs Conor McGinn and Stella Creasy bringing dogged persistence, agility and acuity into an alignment so rare that it feels like the politics of another age. None of this could have happened without great creativity; nor could it have happened without the deadlock at Stormont, which has been directionless for reasons unrelated since 2017. Yet reproductive rights have not been controversial, in any real sense, for the UK parliament for more than 20 years. There has been a pro-choice majority in parliament, uninterrupted, since 1997. Same-sex marriage is often claimed, in the absence of anything else, as Cameron’s great victory, yet the only opposition he faced was from his own (now gruesomely empowered) grassroots. The supreme court, the United Nations Committee against Torture, and the UN Committee for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women have all told governments repeatedly that the law as it stands – with no abortion provision for Northern Irish women and the risk of prosecution if they bought pills online – is a breach of women’s human rights. The LGBT case was similarly unambiguous. What blocked action was not uncertainty or division, but this lackadaisical sense that women’s and LGBT rights, or the failure to uphold them, were like a violent row in someone else’s bedroom; not nice to dwell upon, but nobody else’s business. This is salient not just as a collective self-flagellation, a luxury afforded by, finally, a win; but because these rights, won out of nowhere after many years of inertia, are still fragile. They could still be used as a bargaining chip by a future prime minister seeking a deal with the DUP. They are heavily reliant on stasis at Stormont or, better still, newly invigorated forces for progress, which horizon is pretty optimistic. The lack of reproductive rights, of equal rights to marry under the law, had an impact far beyond actual pregnancy and actual nuptials. Everyone who is female, every gay person knew what it was to be scrutinised, to be suspect, to be controlled, to be less than the norm. There’s only one way universal rights can work: for everybody, or for nobody at all. As we sink deeper into the new politics, arguing over undreamt-of matters – whether or not it’s the end of democracy to prorogue parliament, for instance – there has never been a more important time to reassert some fundamental principles that years of consensus somehow managed to fudge or ignore. • Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnist