Help your business fly, say the TV ads for Funding Circle. As if to show what’s possible, the online lending platform had itself valued at a remarkable £1.5bn in the flotation last year. Investors were invited to ignore current losses and feel the growth in revenues – up 55% to £142m in 2018, it turned out. Few businesses, even fintech operators with smart kit and a big marketing budget, can sustain that pace, but Funding Circle still reckoned 40% was on the cards this year. “We are confident of meeting our growth expectations for the year,” declared the chief executive, Samir Desai, as recently as March. As for Brexit, Funding Circle was being vigilant but “our UK business is not directly affected on a day-to-day operational basis by the prospect of the UK leaving the EU”, he said on the same day. Both boasts have now been binned. Growth projections for this year were cut in half on Tuesday, accompanied by a grumble about how the “uncertain economic environment” has reduced demand for loans from small businesses – the core market. Cue another plunge in the share price. Funding Circle has fallen from 440p to 116p in nine months as a public company. That’s not flying; it’s barely staying aloft. The shame is that, at heart, this is a socially useful company with a good idea. It supplies a market that big banks find too fiddly. The average loan is £75,000 and the average borrower is a business employing eight people. The lending capital is increasingly supplied by institutions, the arrival of which in this unfashionable field ought to be something to cheer. But Funding Circle, which earns its revenues by collecting fees from both lender and borrower, has done itself no favours by participating in a float that was plainly overhyped. Nobody doubts that extended uncertainty over Brexit has had an impact; banks tell the same story. And management is probably only being sensible in turning down its appetite for risk to try to maintain credit quality and thus lenders’ returns. The point, though, is Funding Circle has yet to be tested in a downturn, so the implied promise of go-go growth in all weathers was always silly. Lenders always have to adapt. The flotation was a grown-ups-only affair, so the punters can’t complain, not even the Danish billionaire Anders Povlsen, who bought £150m of stock. The founders’ sale of one-quarter of their holding – £20m in Desai’s case – was also fully displayed. But it does not help the wider capital-raising market if investment bankers leap on any promising tech business and oversell it. The net result for Funding Circle, now worth a humbler £400m, is a battle to restore credibility in the eyes of the stock market. It might help if the company dropped its mechanical chant about wanting to be “the world’s largest small business loans provider”. Save it until you can report an actual profit. It’s a rare day when a rail franchising award arrives on time, and here’s another that hasn’t. Indeed, it’s the big one: Chris Grayling’s newfangled West Coast Partnership, the franchise due to include the high-speed HS2 railway. Back in April, the transport secretary told the House of Commons: “We are due to award the West Coast Partnership in June.” But July has arrived and the Department for Transport now mutters vaguely about an announcement to be made “this summer”. Delay isn’t a real surprise since there are problems with all three bids. One isn’t even a bid any longer: the consortium led by Stagecoach and Virgin called the pension risks on the contract “unquantifiable and unmanageable” and was disqualified by the DfT. Then there’s FirstGroup, whose enthusiasm for financial risks on the railways has also turned wobbly; its chairman has also just disembarked after a 30% shareholder vote against him. The third contender is a Chinese consortium, a rank outsider anyway but surely a non-runner while Hong Kong dominates the foreign news. Grayling, at a push, might pick FirstGroup from that unpromising bunch. But since he may soon be shunted out of his job by the next prime minister, he might prefer to play for time. The current franchise is due to expire in November, so in theory, delay on the West Coast can’t last much longer. But there’s always the contractual option of asking the incumbents, Virgin/Stagecoach, to hang around until March 2020. Given Stagecoach is suing the DfT over disqualification, such an outcome would be farcical. So don’t bet against it.