Anti-government protesters in Hong Kong took over key roads early on Monday ahead of what is expected to be a huge pro-democracy rally on the anniversary of the city’s handover to China. The semi-autonomous city has been shaken by historic demonstrations in the past three weeks, when protesters have demanded the withdrawal of a bill that would allow extraditions to the Chinese mainland. Tensions spiked once more in the financial hub as dawn rose on Monday after small groups of mainly young, masked protesters seized three key thoroughfares, deploying metal and plastic barriers to block the way. Some photos from the scene showed protesters clashing with police. Rows of riot police with helmets and shields faced protesters on one of the streets. Hundreds of protesters shouted “retract the evil law” in the torrential rain. One protestor told the Guardian he was pepper-sprayed by police this morning when he was among dozens of protestors. He said police also used batons to hit protestors who defended themselves with umbrellas. The ongoing rallies are the latest manifestation of growing fears that China is stamping down on the city’s freedoms and culture with the help of the finance hub’s pro-Beijing leaders. Although Hong Kong was returned from British to Chinese rule on 1 July, 1997, it is still administered separately under an arrangement known as “one country, two systems”. The city enjoys rights and liberties unseen on the autocratic mainland, but many residents fear Beijing is already reneging on that deal. While top officials attend a ceremony on 1 July every year to mark the anniversary of Hong Kong’s handover of sovereignty from the UK to China, a large anti-government protest also takes place on the same day, with protesters calling for greater democratic freedoms – such as the right to elect the city’s leader. They have mustered large crowds in recent years – including a two-month occupation in 2014 – but have failed to win any concessions from Beijing. If huge crowds gather today, as expected, this will be Hong Kong’s fourth mass protest in a month against a controversial extradition law. This year’s rally comes against the backdrop of unprecedented anti-government protests over the past three weeks that have drawn millions and anger over police using tear gas and rubber bullets to clear crowds. Millions have taken to the streets to protest against the proposed law allowing for the extradition of individuals for trial in mainland China, where the opaque court system is controlled by the Communist party. The protests throughout June have been largely peaceful, but on 12 June, the scene turned violent when police used rubber bullets, teargas, pepper spray and batons to disperse crowds and some protesters threw objects back at the police. Protesters have also surrounded the police headquarters twice in past weeks in noisy and emotionally charged protests in which young people spray-painted obscenities on its front wall and barricaded its entrances. On Sunday, police set up giant water-filled barricades in anticipation of overnight rallies by anti-extradition protesters to lock down the area where the handover anniversary ceremony is to take place. While the spark for the current wave of protests was an attempt by chief executive Carrie Lam to pass the Beijing-backed extradition law, the demonstrations have morphed into a wider movement against Lam’s administration and Beijing. Lam – who has kept out of the public eye since her climbdown and has record low approval ratings – is expected to attend a flag-raising ceremony early Monday, marking the moment the city returned to Chinese ownership 22 years ago. On Monday, the government announced that the flag-raising ceremony would be moved inside, rather than on the city’s harbourfront, due to inclement weather. Sam Mu, an artist, was with a small group of friends waving black flags on Monday morning close to where the ceremony was due take place. “It’s a symbol of how are city is falling,” he told AFP. “Our city’s freedoms are shrinking, it’s going in a more authoritarian direction.” Activists, who are mainly young students, have vowed to keep up their civil disobedience campaign in the coming weeks. “Whatever happens we won’t lose heart, that’s why we’ll keep taking to the streets,” Jason Chan, a 22-year-old accountant added. “Resistance is not a matter of a day or a week, it is long term.” On Sunday, thousands of pro-government protesters rallied outside the government headquarters in support of the city’s police. Many waved Chinese flags and hurled insults at anti-government demonstrators camped nearby, highlighting the deep ideological fissures now dividing the finance hub.