Rare I disagree with Molly-Mae, a sort of human cherub with a sentient hair knot above her at all times – looming, glowing, doing all of her non-lizard brain thinking for her, anything beyond horniness and emotion dealt with entirely by The Knot. But during a particularly dramatic recoupling two weeks ago, I had to pause the TV and shout: “Wrong!” at it in anger. “It’s Love Island, not Friend Island,” she told good, thick Tommy Fury, as he nodded sweetly. “Yeah,” he said, “yup.” I know the man can knock me into a coma that would last two presidential terms with a single punch, so I’m loth to rile him up too much via the pages of a broadsheet supplement, but: you’re wrong, Tommy. You’re both wrong. The winner of this year’s Love Island (revealed live on Monday, ITV2, 9pm) has been not love-love – not romantic love, anyway, or anything that results in any significant shagging – but rather friendship, and its adjacent love. Previous years have focused on couples, love triangles, and night-vision–under-the-duvet-but-you-can-still-see-the-feet-rubbing intercourse. This year is, instead, a show where an ever-changing lineup of 16 gym bunnies and Instagram baddies slowly form lifelong friendships while underpinned by a constant, never-fulfilled sun-hot sense of horniness. Why is this? Various reasons, I suppose: truly, there are slim-to-no compatible chemistry couples in the entire villa; producers are allegedly reluctant to show too much sex in case they have a repeat of the Zara Holland incident from two years before, where the incumbent Miss Great Britain was stripped of her title as a bizarre punishment for her relatively tame actions in the villa; and Islanders themselves, meta-aware of the fact that they are slowly accruing fame and Instagram followers and Boohoo sponsorships in the outside world, probably don’t want to get a reputation as a shagger in case, I don’t know, Superdrug decides it doesn’t want to work with them. But it also helps that what is flourishing in there is real friendship, wholesomeness on a level never really seen before on TV; the whole exercise a saturated mash-up of a freshers week, a Club 18-30 holiday and the Garden of Eden. So the real key moments in 2019’s series have been platonic. Tommy and Curtis, a bizarre chalk-and-cheese bromance that peaked when they said “I love you” on the villa’s secret balcony; Ovie, a 6ft 7in lightning bolt of calm charisma, in near-tears because he couldn’t save George, who even George has forgotten was in there, from a deciding eviction vote; the collective lads, rolling around the daybed in agonising, shaking laughter after Tom got his sexual life ended by Maura; the girls, an iron-strong collective who formed a steel ring round one another whenever they needed support or a powerful red lip. Tommy and Molly-Mae might win the year’s show proper with their Actual Love Relationship, but what this season demonstrated was a sort of retooling of the entire idea of love. It doesn’t have to be between two people, cooing together in bed; it can be between many, a shared experience, love as friendship. Just don’t do it again next year, please. Next year I want to see someone rut.