There have been plenty of surprises concerning Meryl Streep joining Big Little Lies. First, there was the Streep Scream, an earth-shattering howl that launched 1,000 memes. Second, there has been her performance as a whole: sometimes Deirdre Barlow channelling Willy Wonka; sometimes a less considered Mrs Doubtfire. Yet for many watchers, the main surprise remains that we’re seeing Streep on TV at all. With her three Oscars, Streep is the queen of Hollywood’s old guard, the kind of film icon who at one time would never have done telly. She did appear in HBO’s Angels in America, but that was hardly normal TV – more theatre looking down its nose at a camera. Her appearance in Big Little Lies, a big, silly, schlocky TV series, signifies something else. Here’s a film legend accepting that, in order to stay big, the pictures have to get a little smaller. Streep’s not alone. George Clooney, who fought so hard to shrug off his role as hunky Dr Ross in ER, is back on TV in Catch-22. Sean Penn, has already starred in one series, astronaut drama The First, and will soon star in another, American Lion. Julianne Moore will head up Lisey’s Story, produced by Apple TV, hot on the heels of Julia Roberts in Amazon’s Homecoming, and Amy Adams tackling HBO’s Sharp Objects last year. It’s no surprise that movie stars are now doffing their caps to the growing cultural and financial might of TV and its associated streaming services. With Hollywood seeming ever staler, patriarchal and stuck in the same formats, TV is leading the way in writing and representation. It wasn’t exactly an abasement when Thandie Newton tackled Westworld and Line of Duty, and no one thought their auras were tarnished when Matthew McConaughey and Woody Harrelson tried True Detective. None of this has been a sudden collapse of the defences, more a crumbling after a long siege. It’s likely Streep is appearing in Big Little Lies because season one starred Nicole Kidman, Laura Dern and Reese Witherspoon, who also produced the show. The fact that Hollywood has long struggled to provide decent roles for women over 40 has tipped many towards a medium that will engage with its large female audience. “All these talented women playing wives and girlfriends, I just had enough,” said Witherspoon in 2017. If this didn’t necessarily apply to the very top tier, it is the ecosystem above which they had been hovering anxiously. Kidman’s much-vaunted career renaissance over the last few years is, in part, due to her realising she could get even better opportunities when not working in just one medium. What’s more, the success of Big Little Lies is a reminder of the collapse of a certain type of similar mid-budget film, the “classy” drama on which many of these A-listers have built their reputations. There is a strong sense that today’s movies cater to the either blockbuster crowd – the Avengers, Pokémon – or the arthouse. Roberts, for instance, bagged her Oscar in 2001 for Steven Soderbergh’s Erin Brockovich, but would it be a film today? Surely it would be a prestigious five-parter on Netflix. It is worth bearing in mind, though, that Roberts won’t reappear in Homecoming, and the True Detective cast changes every season – nothing is more ageing, after all, than doing the same role season after season. Other, younger film stars, such as Jennifer Lawrence, are holding back from TV, too, which is strange when you consider how bumpy her recent movie career has been. Indeed, it’s tempting to think that something like her recent Red Sparrow would be much more at home on the Netflix navigation bar. Sitting next to Renée Zellweger’s What/If, it could even have looked reasonably sane. Right now, a one-off TV appearance gives you zeitgeist cachet – and a younger audience. TV is where “the conversation” is and you’d have to be pretty hidebound, or rich, not to care about staying relevant. Streep’s scream could be turned into memes and gifs in minutes. Would the same scream, in a cinema, create that cultural moment? Yet some stars are still resolutely holding out, among them Brad Pitt, Tom Hanks and Johnny Depp. The most glaring absentee, though, is Tom Cruise. The big daddy of Tinseltown sticks to the big screen and his Top Gun and Mission Impossible reboots. Is the small screen too small for Cruise? Given that his stardom has been worked at as assiduously as his acting, perhaps he cannot countenance being shrunk by these newer media (although younger fans are watching his movies on mobile phones). Pitt has helped produce some prestige telly (executive producer on The OA and Barry Jenkins’s forthcoming series The Underground Railroad) but hasn’t appeared on TV yet, unless you count his recurring small turn as a weatherman on his favourite comedy, The Jim Jefferies Show. This is a very old-school approach to television, treating it like a place to lark about. In 2019, to make only a cameo looks patronising. What will lure Pitt in? Surely something soon. He’s probably at a table at the Chateau Marmont right now, pondering a witty, woke six-parter on Hulu that would bump up his credibility with the kids. And if he needs a co-star, Liam Neeson doesn’t seem to be doing any telly, either.