Put out more flags. Unfurl the mothballed bunting. Prepare that unaccustomed victory dance. England have won a World Cup – and in the most extraordinary of circumstances. On a slow-burn, horribly gripping, ultimately uproarious day at Lord’s, England’s cricketers beat New Zealand to win the ICC’s 50-over trophy. It is just the third such triumph for the nation’s sportsmen in any major global sport in almost 90 years of trying. The men now join the women as world champions in this format, a trophy Heather Knight’s team won on the same ground almost exactly two years ago. Of course, they did it the hard way. There has never been a World Cup final like this. Chasing a target of 241 after New Zealand had batted first, England found themselves beached at times on a slow, nibbly pitch, their famously aggressive style suffocated by the conditions, and no doubt by the occasion, too, on a day when for once the nation really was watching. The decision to screen this final on terrestrial television was by the end something of a masterstroke. The famous Oval Ashes Test of 1882, the game that spawned the burning of the bails, was so tense that by the end one spectator had a heart attack and another chewed through his own umbrella handle. Well, this was its modern day counterpoint, as Channel 4 was blessed with the most dramatic of finishes, the kind of painful, brutal, tortuous game of inches that only cricket can provide. England lost wickets steadily in their run chase, but were driven on to a dramatic final sprint-finish by a wonderful innings from Ben Stokes, who laid to rest a few of his demons. Stokes was briefly the nation’s most recognisable cricketer last year, if only for having a drunken, violent night out in Bristol followed by a much-publicised day in court. Here he repaid the patience of his teammates many times over with a fine, hugely determined innings to take England to a last-ditch tie on the 50-over scores. And so we reached the the agony of that ending. With the Lord’s shadows lengthening after seven weeks of competition, 48 matches and 22,410 runs scored, the final match would end with each team facing six balls to decide which would become world champions. Somehow, reaching out across the codes, the nation’s cricketers had found a way to make it go to penalties. But then, this is England, land of bruised hopes and faded glory, a place where the desire to win global sporting tournaments is entirely out of kilter with the painful reality of falling short, of last ditch collapse, of cruel, arbitrary endings. In the stands the crowd was in a state of disrepair, sitting, standing, hugging, leaping, making strange noises. Stokes it was who emerged to face Trent Boult, New Zealand’s premier swing bowler. Stokes and Jos Buttler heaved and carved and ran hard. Fifteen from the over looked enough with England’s fastest bowler, the wonderful Jofra Archer, set to defend it. What a moment it was for Archer, whose presence in this team was only confirmed just before the tournament. And what pressure, too, for a man who qualified by virtue of his English passport and British father but who has also drawn some background snark about his switch of allegiance, having played for West Indies at junior levels. Archer kicked off with a wide, as the ground seemed to sag a little. His next ball was squeezed for two. The next went for a huge six. In the end New Zealand needed two from one ball to win. Martin Guptill thrashed it into the leg side, turned, and hurtled back for the second, but was run out by Buttler. England had won in the most bizarre fashion, victors by dint of having tied the super over but having hit more boundaries than their opponents throughout the match – vindication in its own way for the muscular, adrenal attacking style that has been their creed for the past four years. In the moment of victory the air seemed to rush up and out over the tops of those low-rise stands, into the soft blue of the north London sky. The England players ran and leapt, hurling themselves to the turf in a series of victory dives. There is no template for this, no set way of celebrating an English victory dredged out of the shadow of so many World Cup failures. The last time England staged a World Cup in 1999 they were out of the tournament before the official World Cup song had been released. The disastrous 2007 campaign saw the captain Andrew Flintoff take off on a late pedalo ride into the sea off St Lucia, apparently convinced that by doing so he might stumble across Ian Botham having a party on a yacht somewhere in the Caribbean ocean. He didn’t find him. And four years ago England were crushed by New Zealand in Wellington, a defeat that seemed to mark the low point of their own frantic, trapped, oddly stiff attempts to compete with the wider world’s interpretation of cricket as a vibrant, joyful post-imperial thing. Four years of planning led to here, with the full weight of the England and Wales Cricket Board’s considerable pay-TV riches behind that elite group of players. A World Cup win is a vindication on many levels. For the players, whose names will now live in English cricket lore as the nation’s first ever 50-over champions, it is a triumph of skill, hard work and modernising brio. For the coach Trevor Baylis, a remote, shrugging sun-hatted figure who will leave this summer after the Ashes, the World Cup means he can claim to be the most influential figure in English white ball history. For the sport’s governing body in England, victory here represents a significant feat of high level planning and investment. As the trophy was presented in the evening sun at Lords it was the sense of relief that was notable above all. London had woken up to the clatter of rain, which had retreated, grudgingly, by 10 o’clock, but all day the sense of lurking jeopardy had remained, the feeling that England might yet fall at the last to a fine, gutsy and resourceful New Zealand team. The end was glorious. What English cricket chooses to do with this moment, how it can spread the game beyond its own shrinking frontiers, promises to be equally fascinating.