“Expectation management” is a well-known tactic in politics, in which a party or politician’s own side plays down hopes to ensure that even the most average performance can be spun into a sign of success. Would-be prime minister Boris Johnson’s entire political career appears to be an example of this: in which a toxic mix of entitlement, class privilege and enablement by sections of the press has cast the smallest achievement – say, a new haircut and a smattering of Latin – as proof of worthiness for the highest office of state. And yet I can’t help but think such psychology is crossing into new territory. No longer saved for just individual politicians or parties, increasingly, expectation management could be said to describe Britain itself. Brexit is in many ways the poster child for this phenomenon, in which leading Brexiteers – once promising the earth – now buoyantly boast “there will be drinking water” after the 31 October deadline to leave the EU. But this reframing of expectations spreads much further. Take life expectancy. Medics often use life expectancy as a barometer of the health of a nation and by official measures, Britain is getting sicker. For the first time in 100 years, Britons are dying earlier, leading a team of specialists to meet at University College London this month to investigate it. The UK now has the worst health trends in western Europe, with experts stating that austerity is a major factor. This is no coincidence considering that consecutive Conservative-led governments chose far deeper cuts in the wake of the 2008 global crash than many other European countries, opting for dramatic reductions in funding for anything from meals on wheels, to NHS spending and social security. Even babies are not immune to such political failings. The infant mortality rate in England and Wales is rising after more than a century of continuous improvement. As child poverty grows, the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health estimates infant mortality rates could be 140% higher here than in comparable wealthy countries by 2030. Or take local services. This week, the Local Government Association (LGA) warned one in five councils in England face making further drastic funding cuts in the coming months, just to fend off bankruptcy. Nearly a decade of hollowing out town hall budgets has seen the most basic parts of society reframed as unaffordable: libraries, Sure Start centres, parks, youth services, schooling for children with special educational needs and disabilities, social care. One in three councils surveyed by the LGA said prospects were now so bleak that within three years they will be unable to meet even their statutory duty to provide core services – that’s anything from child protection to homelessness prevention. Consider the recent spread of rough sleeping camps around the country and it gives a hint at where we’re heading: a nation with such warped standards that for the unlucky, tents and garden sheds are a home. In any reasonable country, such a crisis would be dominating the front pages and yet we trundle on, blindly wandering into a future weighted by resignation that this is somehow the best we can do. Jeremy Hunt’s muted admission in the last leadership debate that “some cuts” to social care went too far was typical of the restricted scope of the new politics. Forget visions for change; tomorrow’s leaders are barely staving off disaster and expecting applause for it. That this fatigue exists in a climate where ultra-Brexiteers spout British exceptionalism is a bitter irony. Theirs is the hollowest version of greatness – the type of grandeur that can puff its chest at Britain’s birthright as a global leader while a record number of its populace queue at food banks. The power of figures such as Johnson is that each failure, far from being their undoing, often makes them stronger. Each untruth, each scandal, each charge of hypocrisy not only sets expectations lower for the general public but is actively embraced by their supporters. Racial slurs are “character”. Incompetence is “charm”. The same, however, cannot be said for governing. Whether it is infant deaths or human beings living in tents, failures have consequences. As we crawl towards a Johnson premiership, our ability to press back against national decay slips further out of sight. Britain is sleepwalking into an era of normalised failure. Who among us honestly expects better? • Frances Ryan is a Guardian columnist