George Osborne is considering putting his name forward to replace Christine Lagarde as the head of the International Monetary Fund, according to reports, a move that would see him become the first Briton to lead the Washington-based body. The former chancellor – and current Evening Standard editor – has told allies he would be well suited to succeed Lagarde, the Financial Times reported, after she was picked to lead the European Central Bank this week. Such a development would mark a dramatic return to a major public role for Osborne three years after he was unceremoniously sacked as chancellor in the aftermath of the Brexit vote, facing a barrage of criticism over a botched campaign to have the UK remain in the EU. It would also mark the first time in the 75-year history of the IMF that a Briton has led the global body, which acts as the lender of last resort to nations in financial distress. In the unwritten rules surrounding the formation of the Bretton Woods institution, a European has always held the top job, while an American has led the World Bank – its twin institution, which aims to encourage financial stability, international trade and sustainable economic growth. Osborne could face stiff competition from other highly qualified candidates at a time when Britain’s place in the world has been coloured by internal disputes over leaving the EU, clouding the UK’s international reputation. Other contenders may include Mark Carney, the Bank of England governor, who was installed by Osborne. Although Canadian by birth, he holds Irish and UK citizenship. Carney is due to leave Threadneedle Street early next year. While Osborne’s bid may be harmed by Brexit and by a reputation for unhelpfulness during the eurozone sovereign debt crisis, he reportedly told friends that his connections with the US and China, the two biggest world economies, may work in his favour. He may also hope for support from Boris Johnson, after throwing the weight of the Standard behind the former foreign secretary’s campaign for prime minister. Osborne was criticised for doom-laden warnings over the economy made before the EU referendum, as well as for the imposition of a long period of austerity on Britain, which is viewed as being one of the key reasons that fuelled the Brexit vote.