Boeing reported its largest ever quarterly loss on Wednesday, as the cost of grounding its fleet of 737 Max airliners took its toll. The company lost $2.9bn in the three months to the end of June, compared to a profit of $2.2bn for the same period last year. Sales fell 35% to $15.75bn. The 737 Max was Boeing’s best selling aircraft until the fleet was grounded worldwide in March following two fatal crashes. Last week Boeing said it would take a $5.6bn charge to cover potential compensation to customers. The company also expects the cost of manufacturing the 737 to rise by $2.7bn due to production slowdowns. A $100m fund is being established to compensate the families and communities affected by the crashes. “This is a defining moment for Boeing and we remain focused on our enduring values of safety, quality, and integrity in all that we do, as we work to safely return the 737 Max to service,” Boeing’s chief executive, Dennis Muilenburg, said in a statement. “During these challenging times, teams across our enterprise continue to perform at a high level while delivering on commitments and capturing new opportunities driven by strong, long-term fundamentals.” The first Boeing 737 Max begins commercial operations with Malindo Air. Norwegian Air is also an early adopter of the new model, operating transatlantic flights. The model promises fuel efficiencies attractive to carriers. Lion Air flight JT610 crashes after making a sudden, sharp dive into the Java Sea 13 minutes after departing from Jakarta, Indonesia. All 189 people onboard are killed. That particular plane had been in use for less than three months. The plane's black box recorder reveals that the Lion Air plane had experienced problems with its airspeed indicators on its last four flights. Boeing issues revised instructions on how pilots should react to erroneous readings from “angle of attack” sensors, believed to be a key factor in the Lion Air crash. “In our view, the plane was not airworthy,” is the interim finding of the official investigation into the crash. The Indonesian transport safety agency did not pinpoint a definitive cause of the accident, but said Lion Air had kept putting the plane back into service despite repeatedly failing to fix a problem with the airspeed indicator. Flight ET302 crashes about six minutes after taking off from the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa, killing all 157 people onboard. The captain had reported difficulties, and flight radar data shows the aircraft was climbing erratically with an unstable vertical airspeed. The EU, Canada and the US all ground the Boeing 737 Max. Boeing itself issues a statement saying it “continues to have full confidence in the safety of the 737 Max”, but that “out of an abundance of caution and in order to reassure the flying public” it w recommending the grounding of the entire global fleet of 371 aircraft. The interim report into the Ethiopian Airlines crash finds that the pilots correctly followed Boeing’s emergency instructions, but were still unable to stop the plane’s nose repeatedly pointing down. The jet hit an airspeed of 500 knots (575mph), well above its operational limits, before cockpit data recordings stopped.  Airlines extend their ban on using the Boeing 737 Max after the US aviation regulator said it had identified a new potential risk with the plane. United Airlines becomes the latest carrier to extend its ban on using the Boeing 737 Max after the US aviation regulator said it had identified a new potential risk with the plane. In the wake of Boeing’s troubles, Airbus seems set to overtake it as the world's biggest planemaker. As Boeing reported 239 commercial plane deliveries in the first half of the year, a 37% fall, rival Airbus shipped 389 deliveries, up 28% on the same period last year. Pictures emerge of a Boeing 737 Max due to be delivered to Ryanair with the name 737 Max replaced by 737-8200 on the nose. Regulators across the world continue to investigate the fatal crashes of a Lion Air Max in Indonesia and an Ethiopian Airlines flight in Ethiopia that claimed a total of 346 lives. Last week a father who lost five family members in the Ethiopian disaster accused the company of “utter prejudice and disrespect” and said Boeing had pursued higher a higher share price and profits “at the expense of the safety of human life”. The grounding of the 737 Max has had wider consequences for the US. American Airlines, Southwest Airlines and United Airlines all used the Max and have canceled flights into November as a result of the grounding, depressing revenues. Boeing has predicted that the Max will be flying again by the end of the year and appears to be preparing to change the plane’s name to the 737 8200. 