It’s hard to write or talk about antisemitism and the Labour party’s handling of it without descending into deep despair, and not just at the mirror the sorry tale is holding up to the whole of our society, which seems to be becoming less tolerant, more racist and less safe for minorities. This is having greater consequences than the Labour leadership can imagine. In particular, it is stifling the ability of commentators and decision-makers to talk sensibly about the real issues in Palestine. My mother is Palestinian. These issues are deeply personal; we still have family in the West Bank. I am very worried that, at this critical juncture in the history of the region, activists, parliamentarians and journalists feel that they cannot speak out for fear of being branded as antisemitic. My plea is that we must speak more about Palestine, not less, and in this current climate it is something members of both houses of parliament have confided that they are more fearful than ever to do. The word “Zionist” has become toxic. To some it means believing in Israel’s right to exist as a Jewish state. To others it represents a movement that led to the expulsion and marginalisation of the Palestinian people in their own land. To me, it is simply a word I avoid completely. I am a British-Palestinian who believes in Israel’s right to exist. Equally, I also believe in Palestine’s right to exist, which is why last year I introduced a bill to parliament to recognise Palestine as a state, something more than 130 UN member states, including a number of European countries, have already done. I believe in a two-state solution, and given Britain’s involvement in the region and the fact that one could draw a direct line from the Balfour declaration to the mess we are in now, I believe it is disgraceful that this government refuses to recognise Palestine as a state. Genuine supporters of Palestinians’ rights are fighting for equality, justice and freedom, aims that are in diametric opposition to any form of antisemitism. True champions of these causes both fight for Palestinian rights and also against any form of racism, including antisemitism. It is time to stop posing these as somehow conflicting choices. Many brilliant colleagues in parliament and elsewhere do this powerfully and passionately, week in and week out. No sinister conspiracy stops them from doing this. Opposing the 52-year-old Israeli military occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, Israel’s colossal and illegal settlement project and the blockade of Gaza is a position every progressive politician should adopt. Palestinians have a right to a state. They have a right to live in dignity. Five million Palestinian refugees cannot just be ignored. Recognition by Britain of Palestine as a state would make a major contribution Palestinians also have a right not to have their homes demolished because an occupying power refuses to grant them a permit. Palestinian children should not be shot at or arrested in the middle of the night and interrogated by the Israeli military while terrified and isolated. Palestinian children should be able to leave Gaza for essential medical treatment, accompanied and supported by their parents, rather than hindered by Israel’s dehumanising permit regime. At the same time, condemning Hamas for targeting Israeli civilians with rockets and its anti-Jewish discourse is a core part of any progressive position. International inaction tests the limits of Palestinian patience. The international community should be doing more than just issuing tired old reheated press releases expressing concern at the latest violations of human rights. And there needs to be more effective pushback to the one-sided “deal of the century” promoted by the Trump administration. Recognition by Britain of Palestine as a state would make a major contribution here, and provide a much-needed boost to Palestinian hopes and aspirations, which have been in the doldrums for too long. The threat of further violence in the region is never far away, and desperation only fuels it. So, to all the vile antisemites out there: clear off from the Palestinian quest for freedom and justice. Take your odious Jew-hatred elsewhere and do not think for one second that your views help champion Palestinian rights. Never has it been more critical to talk about the political and economic state of Palestine. The two-state solution is at best in stasis, at worst it is teetering on the brink of a precipice. It needs a lifeline. And we can make a difference if our government lives up to the moral and historical responsibilities that Britain has been renowned for. • Layla Moran is Liberal Democrat MP for Oxford West and Abingdon