Without bees, we wouldn’t be able to enjoy coffee, apples and many of the other fruit, vegetables, seeds, nuts and oils they pollinate. There are 275 species of wild bee in the UK alone, and more than 20,000 worldwide: help protect them by buying fruit and veg from farms that don’t spray their crops with pesticides, and wherever possible, buy your honey from small apiaries (large bee populations push out wild pollinators). And, of course, don’t waste honey if it crystallises. Honey crystallises with age, becoming granular as the glucose molecules separate from the water. This can take anywhere from two hours to two years, and is often thought to be a sign of poor quality or adulteration. In fact, quite the opposite is true: if honey does not begin to granulate after a long time and remains clear, it’s an indication of dilution or additives. Crystals are actually a sign of quality. Crystallised honey will happily melt on to your toast or over your porridge, and is perfect for sweetening tea, or for cooking, to sweeten sauces, glaze vegetables, or as the main ingredient in this honey cake. My good friend Damian Clisby, restaurants director at Petersham Nurseries in London, has developed a delicious cake using honey from the restaurant’s own hives. This is inspired by his recipe, but made with wholemeal flour: the wholegrains not only add nutrition, but complement the sweet honey with a scrumptious maltiness. 200-250g honey150g butter, room temperature2 eggs, beaten220g wholemeal flour (khorosan, emmer, wheat, etc.)1 tsp baking powderEdible flowers to decorate Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Melt 170g honey and the butter in a pan over a low heat. Take off the heat, stir in the eggs, flour and baking powder until well combined, then pour into a greased and lined 20cm cake tin. Bake for 35 minutes, or until a skewer comes out clean when pushed into the centre of the cake. Cool on a wire rack. Spike the cake all over with the skewer, then spread or crumble the remaining honey evenly over the top. Serve plain or decorated with flowers.