The latest union-agreed stance on how Labour should in future campaign on the issue of Brexit is yet another “ifs and buts” policy (Labour should back remain in referendum on Tory Brexit – unions, 9 July). It is little more than a weak attempt to get the party leadership out of the Brexit hole it finds itself in, without having to change their core pro-Brexit convictions. Their attempt to clarify the Labour party’s position by appearing to support remain does not work. The bottom line is that if there is no general election then little changes – Labour votes against any Tory deal, while the Tories ignore them and deliver Brexit anyway. If there is a general election, the party will campaign for its own Brexit proposals, in the full knowledge that any kind of Brexit deal will leave the working people of this country worse off than they are now. So, let’s be clear and ensure there is no ambiguity about how remain Labour supporters feel. I am a party member and have been a Labour supporter since I was old enough to vote – I am now 65. In a general election I, and many like me, will be voting for a remain party. There are no “ifs and buts”. We will vote unambiguously for a party that supports remaining in the EU. It is up to the Labour leadership to decide whether they want our votes or not.Shaun SoperMidhurst, West Sussex • I have just received Jeremy Corbyn’s email setting out the Labour party’s current stance on Brexit (Corbyn says Labour would back remain in Brexit referendum, theguardian.com, 9 July). It goes some way to clarifying things, but there is still the implication that Labour would be in favour of leaving the EU under certain circumstances. Those circumstances are not specified clearly enough, nor is it explained how the country would be better off. The basic question then is still the same: is there some way, acceptable to the other countries of the EU, for Britain to leave and for people’s lives to be improved as a result? If there is, parliament would be justified in looking at that possibility. If there is not, there is no good reason to pursue Brexit.Michael BulleyChalon-sur-Saône, France • Your editorial (Labour cannot hope to win with old arguments in a new political climate, 8 July) asserts that the Brexit choice is likely to be between Boris Johnson’s no deal and a second referendum, which is clearly aimed by its supporters (possibly overoptimistically) at overturning the result of the people’s vote in 2016. That polarised choice is indeed what obstructive MPs on the no-deal and remainer extremes are contriving – in many cases defying their election commitments – but the majority vote for leaving the EU accompanied by a large minority voting to remain suggests that the centre of gravity in the country is close to the deal which is actually on the table, negotiated by Theresa May with the EU, though preferably with permanent membership of the customs union as Labour desires. As for your complaint that “Labour has not moved on from its 2017 manifesto”, the undertaking to respect the result of the referendum is the basis on which Labour MPs obtained the support of voters. It was not simply a ruse to obtain leaver votes, to be torn up once the polls had been closed and the electorate returned to impotent spectators for the next five years, as you apparently prefer.Christopher ClaytonWaverton, Cheshire • The lawyers whose letter was published on 6 July assert that a confirmatory vote would be “a continuation of the democratic process that began with the 2016 referendum”. That would be the case if any referendum question were to be confined to what “leave” option voters prefer. However, the lawyers also want a “remain in the EU” option on the ballot paper. This would not be “a continuum” of the democratic process, but rather asking a question already posed and answered by the electorate in 2016. Anthony Fincham Leyton, London • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition