Unai Emery said Arsenal’s young players will get their chances this season after Eddie Nketiah proved to be the match-winner in a 2-1 victory over Bayern Munich. After a goalless first half, Emery’s side took the lead four minutes after the restart when Louis Poznanski diverted Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s cross into his own goal before Robert Lewandowski equalised with a fine header. The match looked to be heading for a draw but the young forward Tyreece John-Jules worked his way down the left side of the Bayern penalty box to cut the ball back for Nketiah to tap home two minutes from time. The 20-year-old striker’s goal made it two wins from two for Arsenal on their pre-season tour of the United States. Joe Willock produced a commanding performance in midfield while there were cameos from Reiss Nelson and Robbie Burton, leaving Emery excited about what the youngsters can bring to his team. “We have the responsibility with the young players to give them chances and we want also to use different young players to help us,” said Arsenal’s manager. “They are going to be with us in the pre-season and some players are also going to be with us in the season. Each match, each minute they can show their performance like today. It’s important because against the big players, for example Nketiah against [Niklas] Sule, is to show how we can respond with different situations and I thought today was very positive. “Against Colorado Rapids on Monday we played a lot of young players. We need them for the moment but also in the future. Our responsibility at this club for the history, for the present and for the future is to have young players with the possibilities to take chances. I am very positive with them, I am very happy with their work every day in the training sessions and also today in the match.” Nketiah, who has been linked with a loan move away from the Emirates, only spent nine minutes on the pitch but took three shots and was, rather strangely, named man of the match after his winner. “It’s brilliant,” he told Arsenal.com. “They’re such a great team. I didn’t come on for long, so I just wanted to make an impact and do well. Luckily I was in the right place at the right time. I’m grateful.” Bayern had the first chance at the Dignity Health Sports Park but Thomas Müller could not convert David Alaba’s cross thanks to a superb save from Bernd Leno. Mesut Özil, donning a new blonde hairstyle, forced Manuel Neuer into a good stop at the other end as the first half produced few clearcut chances. The Gunners took the lead through Poznanski’s own goal but needed a hand from the onrushing Leno to deny the former Arsenal forward Serge Gnabry in his first match against them since leaving the north London club in 2016. Gnabry did have a hand in the leveller, curling a fine cross for Lewandowski to head into the top corner before Nketiah sealed victory as the Premier League side fielded a youthful team to finish the match.