Marks & Spencer has ousted its fashion boss after she failed to stop the rot at its struggling clothing business. The departure of Jill McDonald was confirmed by the company on Thursday afternoon and followed veiled criticism of her first full year in charge at the company’s annual meeting on Tuesday. The M&S chief executive, Steve Rowe, said: “Jill was brought in to establish a strong platform for the transformation of the clothing and home business … She has recruited a talented team, improved the quality and style of product and set a clear direction for the business to attract a younger family age customer.” This week Rowe told M&S shareholders mistakes had been made during a “troubled year” for its clothing and homewares business. He singled out a major jeans promotion in February that went awry after buyers failed to buy enough stock, adding that while there had been improvements in design there were problems with the buying operation. M&S said on Thursday that Rowe would take charge of the clothing business again. Prior to being promoted to chief executive in 2016 he had been running the division for close to a year. In his statement, Rowe said: “The business now needs to move on at pace to address longstanding issues in our clothing and home supply chain around availability and flow of product. Given the importance of this task to M&S, I will be overseeing this programme directly.” M&S is going through its biggest shake-up in 25 years as its hands-on chairman, Archie Norman, who joined in 2017, leads a large-scale overhaul of one of the UK’s biggest household names. Last year Norman, who is highly regarded for turnarounds during his career, including at Asda and ITV, told investors M&S was “on a burning platform … We don’t have a God-given right to exist and unless we change … in decades to come there will be no M&S.” McDonald, who was poached from the cycle and car parts specialist Halfords, joined M&S in October 2017. The 55-year-old, who was not on the main board of M&S, was a controversial choice as its clothing, home and beauty director because she had no fashion industry experience. She began her career at the health and beauty group Colgate-Palmolive before spending 16 years at British Airways and almost a decade at the fast food chain McDonald’s.