Sports Direct has delayed the publication of its results, citing the complexities of the integration of House of Fraser and uncertainty around trading. Its share price fell almost 10% on the news, to 237.8p, lowest level this year. The retailer, which is controlled by Mike Ashley, was due to publish results for the year to 28 April on Thursday. It snapped up the struggling department store chain in a £90m rescue deal last August. Sports Direct said: “The reasons for the delay are the complexities of the integration into the company of the House of Fraser business, and the current uncertainty as to the future trading performance of this business, together with the increased regulatory scrutiny of auditors and audits including the FRC [Financial Reporting Council] review of Grant Thornton’s audit of the financial statements of Sports Direct for the period ended 29 April 2018.” This means the retailer needs to compile more information than in previous years. Sports Direct added that increased regulatory scrutiny meant audits took longer to complete than previously. It now expects audited results to be published between 26 July and 23 August. “Sports Direct believes its accounts and their audit to be at an advanced stage,” it said. “However, there are a number of key areas to conclude on which could materially affect the guidance given in Sports Direct’s announcement of 13 December 2018.” On that day, Ashley gave alarming predictions for the high street after an “unbelievably bad” November, as Brexit worries deterred shoppers. Physical retailers have been hit by a combination of changing habits, unseasonably warm weather, rising costs and broader economic problems. 2018 saw the disappearance of Toys R Us, Maplin and Poundworld as a result. In terms of habits, shoppers are switching to buying online. The likes of Amazon have an unfair advantage because they have a lower business rate bill, which holds down costs and enables online retailers to woo shoppers with low prices. Business rates are taxes, based on the value of commercial property, that are imposed on traditional retailers with physical stores. At the same time, there is a move away from buying ‘stuff’ as more people live in smaller homes and rent rather than buy. Those pressures have come just as rising labour and product costs, partly fuelled by Brexit, have coincided with economic and political uncertainty that has dampened consumer confidence. Retailers with a high street presence want the government to change business rates. They also want more political certainty as the potential for a no deal Brexit means some are not only incurring additional costs for stockpiling goods but are unsure about the impact of tariffs after October 2019. Retailers also want more investment in town centres to help them adapt to changing trends, as well as a cut to high parking charges which they say put off shoppers. In the October 2018 budget the government announced some relief on business rates for independent shopkeepers. It has also set up a £675m 'future high streets' fund under which local councils can bid for up to £25m towards regeneration projects such as refurbishing local historic buildings and improving transport links. The fund will also pay for the creation of a high street taskforce to provide expertise and hands-on support to local areas. Some retailers could go under. Weakened by a difficult Christmas – which accounts for the entire annual profits of many retailers, and with further Brexit wobbles to come – retailers are facing a tough 2019. Another rise in the national minimum wage in April and the falling value of the pound against the dollar, which is used to buy goods in the Far East, have also added to costs and hit profits.  Last week, Grant Thornton came bottom in the Financial Reporting Council’s annual review of audits by the UK’s large accountants. The watchdog reviewed the company’s audits of Patisserie Valerie, Interserve and Woodford Patient Capital Trust, as well as Sports Direct.