At the end of a difficult week it is worth remembering that there are a great many agreeable things about Mahendra Singh Dhoni, colossus of cricket’s latest modern age. History will pick out the headline triumphs. Most obviously there was that six to win the 2011 World Cup, a moment caught by the TV direction with a silver screen-style cut to Dhoni’s victory face, jaw set, eyes following the white ball across the Mumbai sky, looking so impossibly handsome and heroic you expected to look down and notice he’d played the last hour with a soot-singed puppy under one arm. Other great Dhoni things: he owns “43 or 44 four motorbikes”. Not knowing how many motorbikes you’ve got, but being precise enough to know it’s in the region of forty-three-and-a-half. This is quite Dhoni. He can also be very funny. As India collapsed to a Test series defeat in England in the summer of 2014 Dhoni was asked about the red-ball technique of his batsmen. Down in the Oval basement he smiled, adopted a look of apparently genuine concern and urged the English press, “Don’t be jealous of the IPL”. It was reported as an angry slap-down. It was actually a pretty good joke. Another good Dhoni thing happened this week. It didn’t look like a good thing at the time, and it won’t look like one to anyone who believes sport only reveals value and character through victory. This has never been the case. Often it is defeat that clarifies, or brings into focus an idea of greatness. But then World Cups are awkward things. They’re not convenient. They don’t fit your plans. They come at you locked into that reproachful four-year cycle. And naturally when they get there they’re stuffed full of people forcing it, hanging in there, breaking their own greatness on the wheel. At Lord’s on Sunday England might even win one this time. But victory is only ever half the story. In Manchester for their semi-final on Wednesday India were 71 for five chasing New Zealand’s 240 when Dhoni got to the wicket and dug his claws in. The old bludgeoning days are long gone. Dhoni has another idea now, to take it right to the end and only then unsheathe his long-handled club. Indian cricket can seem opaque and intimidating. But it has Dhoni too, the most visible figure in that period of uplift It works too. When Dhoni stays there India win. A low-scoring game, Ravindra Jadeja playing like a god at the other end. This felt like another moment like the other moments. Except this time something else happened instead. The first hint came with 18 balls to go. India needed 35. Dhoni had been patting singles. Finally he got a loose one from Trent Boult and whirled into a short-arm pull, the crowd already shrieking with pre-delirium. The ball was clawed off the rope. Dhoni puffed back for two. Then he grimaced. Dhoni doesn’t grimace. Something was different here. India losing at cricket is an event in itself these days. The sport’s dominant force has become an almost comically over-resourced cricketing superpower. So much so that Indian defeat has its own sense of narrative scale, its own sheen of glamour. An Indian defeat to New Zealand is even better. And this is a New Zealand where Colin de Grandhomme sometimes opens the bowling, running up to the wicket like a man ploughing through a drizzle-sodden gale in a pair of concrete wellingtons; a New Zealand where Mitchell Santner can bowl a killer mid-innings spell, a cricketer so unstarry he appears to have wandered in by mistake from a junior surveyors’ coffee morning and been too polite to turn down the chance when someone chucked him the ball by mistake. Dhoni stands against this. Indian cricket can seem opaque and intimidating, a juggernaut driven by its own relentless will to power. But it has Dhoni too, the single most visible figure in that period of uplift. With his shovel-handed batting and that weirdly downbeat style of wicketkeeping Dhoni seemed unusual from the start. But he made the world feel a little different. He scored 183 in a one-day international before anyone really did things like that. He was captain of the World Twenty20 winning team the year the game changed for good. He sold everything from car batteries to the official Dhoni-approved data cloud storage system, but seemed to be the same likeable, steely small-town boy who was taking tickets on the Indian railways a year before he made his debut. Dhoni still averages 50 in ODIs, although his batting has become odd in his dotage. Against England he basically refused to chase the total, as though saving his energies for one last trip to the well. And with five overs to go in Manchester, with Dhoni on 33 from 60 balls, you still felt somehow that he was winning it, even as your eyes said the opposite. A ball in the helicopter slot was patted for one. As the game tightened he was down the pitch saying things to Jadeja. Dhoni doesn’t say things. Jadeja slogged the next ball up in the air. Dhoni had to hit now. He levered a slash-cut for six over point. Two balls later the man who wins the details, the fine points, was run out without any real stretch for the line. His face as he walked off was impossibly tender. This was the face of mortal Dhoni, a great cricketer who is not now what he was and won’t be again. Defeat, falling short, finding the end of the cycle. This is often the bit that makes the deepest impression in these stark, beautifully merciless tournaments. Dhoni won’t play in another. But we will remember his taut and gripping farewell; and a moment when he looked both reduced in the moment, but unanswerably great in the memory.