Midway through the week after next, and amid massive publicity, the Conservative party will choose a new leader who will become, though perhaps not for as long as they hope, the next prime minister. In the same week, but with only a fraction of the same ballyhoo, the Liberal Democrats will also choose a new leader. The Lib Dems’ choice is very unlikely to be prime minister. Nevertheless, the party’s new leader could be a more pivotal player in the emerging politics of the 2020s. The Lib Dems have spent most of this decade paying the electoral price for the coalition of 2010-15. In the 2015 election, the 50-year march towards the political gunfire that began under Jo Grimond was devastated. The party plummeted from 57 MPs to a mere eight. Under Tim Farron and Vince Cable, the party was no longer preparing for government as it did under leaders from David Steel to Nick Clegg, but for possible extinction. Yet Brexit, along with Tory and Labour divisions on the issue, has driven a Lib Dem revival. In the local elections they turned years of reverses around, with more than 700 new councillors. In the Europeans they did even better, claiming 20% of the vote nationwide and beating Labour and the Tories into third and fifth places. Next month, they hope their able Welsh leader Jane Dodds will capture Brecon and Radnorshire in a byelection. In one national poll this week the Lib Dems were neck and neck with the Tories in first place. Several prominent health warnings are necessary at this point. Lib Dem support remains short of 2010 election levels, let alone those of 1983, when the party’s forerunners took 25%. The recent turnaround is still embryonic. Electoral politics are very volatile. The four-party battle in England and Wales may not last. In Scotland, the SNP has new momentum. It would be false to imagine that the incremental strengthening of the Lib Dems from 1974 to 2010 has calmly resumed after a difficult decade. But the game is back on. Most of this is down to Brexit. But a lot is also down to Mr Cable. The veteran former trade secretary has been a calm captain in stormy seas. He has kept the party together, overhauled its operations and been clear about the dangers of Brexit. He has seen off the potential challenge from Change UK. He has continued to work the still productive political soil of the middle ground. His reward is the current revival. But now is the right time for new leadership. Politically, little divides the two candidates for the succession. Ed Davey and Jo Swinson both served in government. Both fought their corners in the coalition. Each has had to win back a parliamentary seat they lost in 2015. Each is far more seriously committed to Europe and to prioritising the climate emergency than many in Labour and the Tories. Neither has the charisma of Paddy Ashdown or Shirley Williams. Mr Davey is sometimes a tad more tribal, while Ms Swinson is perhaps more of a pluralist. Each would thus be a plausible leader for new times. But that is where this contest has disappointed more generally. It has been polite, which is good, but it has not been visionary. The liberal centre in Britain and elsewhere – this problem is far from confined to the Lib Dems or to the UK – has not yet produced the strategic response to post-crash populisms of left and right that it should. Nor has it shown the confidence to set out a serious strategy for healing deep Brexit divides. The Lib Dem revival owes much more to Brexit than to a revived confidence in liberal democracy. The task of the next leader will be to ensure that the party confronts both of these challenges. There is more even than Brexit at stake.