Facebook’s proposed digital currency, the Libra, is the latest attempt by a big western technology firm to weaken the reach and power of national governments. The promise is that the company’s billions of users will be able to transfer money to each other as easily as they can send a message on their phones. This probably seems more of a technological miracle in California than it does in the rest of the rich world: Americans still don’t even have contactless credit cards. One model for Libra is China’s WeChat Pay, a mobile payment system that already has more than a billion users. This is hugely profitable and means that the WeChat social network does not have to be funded by advertising. That is not a win for privacy, though: WeChat collects as much information about its users as Facebook does, but this is all at the disposal of the government and everything said on the network is subject to heavy censorship. Obviously, many people would be extremely unhappy to trust Facebook with an even more intimate knowledge of their spending habits than it already has. Although the company now claims that it would never use the knowledge acquired by its money-handling business to increase the efficiency of its advertising business, it made similar promises when it acquired WhatsApp. But Facebook’s ambitions for Libra go beyond a simple electronic payment system, like WeChat Pay or even PayPal. These are all means of transferring existing currencies around the world. Facebook wants to build not only the transfer system, but the currency itself. This will be embarrassing for the company if it fails, and potentially disastrous for the world if it succeeds. One of the most important political developments of the last two centuries has been the slow conquest of money by democratic politics. This may seem a pointlessly contrarian claim when currencies have been so often debauched by politically driven inflation. Even in Britain and the US, the independence of central bankers is thought to be a guarantee that the economy will be run on prudent lines. But the independence of central bankers is never absolute, and they are always aware that they serve national interests. The euro, which provides monetary union in which the currency is managed without any regard to the interest of weaker members such as Greece, shows the dangers to small countries of a central bank that is really entirely independent of political control. These are not technological problems. Money itself is not a technological problem. The backers of Libra claim that a mobile currency will bring into the economy people who do not at present have a bank account, but surveys show the most common reason people do not have a bank account is that they have nothing to put in it. A new electronic currency merely supplies them with the ability not to own another class of asset. In developing countries where mobile payments have taken off, and Kenya is the most popular example, it turns out that this, too, was the result of a political decision to prioritise the interests of a mobile company over those of the banks. The difficulties and apparent inefficiencies of online cross-border payments are the results of political decisions made for perfectly rational reasons. The bureaucratic weight of controls against money laundering is considerable, but those regulations are there to prevent much worse problems. Either Facebook submits to regulation like a bank, in which case it becomes subject to all the same constraints and apparent inefficiencies; or it decides to fight the law – and the law will win.