Buckle in, Britain: it might have been late getting started, but it looks like we’re set for another sweltering summer, with record-breaking highs of 37C forecast for Thursday. By this point, you know the drill: swap the duvet for a sheet (and a shared bed for a single), wear shorts if your employer allows, carry water with you on the train, and get off at the next stop if you’re feeling unwell. The temperature will drop eventually; in the meantime, the spirit is broadly one of keep calm and carry on. We’ve been here before. Last year was marked not just by England’s rocket-fuelled run through the football World Cup, but the concurrent six-week spell from late June to mid-August, when daytime temperatures in parts of Britain consistently topped 30C (86F). Even climate deniers were perturbed. That summer was  the joint hottest on record. But then the mercury dropped, bringing with it relief – from the discomfort of the sweltering heat, yes, but also having to confront the visceral threat of climate crisis. In Britain we are lucky. Our temperate climate has given us the option of ignorance for so long. In Australia, Asia and the Middle East, the apocalyptic vision that the Guardian’s global environment editor Jonathan Watts and I described in our piece on “the city at 50C” is already a reality. Britain is not immune. Exactly one year ago the Met Office issued a heatwave warning on the hottest day of 2018 – but for many, the arrival of autumn quite literally took the heat out of the issue. We can’t afford to let that happen again – to let it keep happening. We cannot slide into record-breaking summer after record-breaking summer, sedating ourselves with Mr Whippy ice-cream, until the crisis reaches a point where it will occur to no one to suggest a lower-tog duvet as the solution. When we talk of these ever-increasing temperatures, we tend to talk of treating the symptoms, not the cause: wear breathable fibres, freeze your water bottle, head to a beer garden. Greenhouse gas emissions from burning fossil fuels, forest destruction and other human activities are trapping heat and putting more energy into the climate system. Hotter air means heatwaves are much more likely. For example, scientists now say the unprecedented heat and wildfires across the northern hemisphere in 2018 “could not have occurred without human-induced climate change”. In Australia, the scorching summer of 2016-17 in New South Wales was made at least 50 times more likely by global heating, linking it directly to climate change. Hotter air can also carry more water vapour, meaning more intense rain and more flooding. Another important factor in the northern hemisphere is the impact of changes in the Arctic. The polar region is heating more rapidly, reducing the temperature difference with lower latitudes. There is strong evidence that this is weakening the planetary waves (including the jet stream) that normally meander over Europe, Asia and North America. When these waves stall, weather gets fixed over regions and becomes extreme. This has been linked to past floods in Pakistan, heatwaves in Russia and drought in California. Most of the planet’s trapped heat goes into the oceans and rising sea temperatures mean more energy for hurricanes and typhoons. Record-breaking cyclones hit Mozambique in March and April. The deluge delivered in the US by Hurricane Harvey in 2017 was made three times more likely by climate change. Rising sea level also means storms cause more coastal damage. Global heating does not influence all extreme weather – natural variability still exists. Carbon Brief analysed more than 230 studies and found 95% of heatwaves were made more likely or worse by climate change. For droughts, 65% were definitely affected by our hotter world, while the figure for floods was 57%. It is now undeniable that global heating is causing more extreme weather. The trouble is – unless you are elderly or otherwise already vulnerable – it is just so easy, even enjoyable, to weather the hot temperatures. You raise your hemlines, you buy a fan, then the temperature drops and the fan goes away until next year. The problem of heat is, to a large extent, swept from view with the change of the seasons (or what passes for them these days). But – out of sight, maybe out of mind, but very much still the backdrop – the problem continues to grow. Even under the most optimistic predictions for emissions reductions – which it is almost unimaginable that we will be able to achieve – we face many more decades of intense heat. Experts say that almost half the world’s population will be exposed to potentially deadly temperatures for 20 days a year by 2100. We reckon with the flicker of this possibility every summer – nearly 700 more deaths than average were recorded in the 15-day peak of last year’s heatwave in England and Wales – yet we are still slow to act to mitigate those of the future. We continue to build housing designed to keep heat in, creating “death traps in hot weather”, and leave cooling measures to those who can afford them. We privatise precious green spaces that help to reduce the impact of heat and we build with asphalt, brick, concrete and glass, which exacerbate it. We have learned to change our behaviour in response to rising temperatures – lingering in the frozen goods aisle of the supermarket, organising our lives around air conditioning – when what urgently needs to change is the structure of society. Not now – but yesterday. Yes, tackling wider climate change by reducing emissions should be the pre-eminent priority. But – in the knowledge that heatwaves will be worse even under the (unlikely) best-case scenario – at the same time we need to be making practical, structural changes to ease the impact of prolonged periods of extreme temperatures on our systems and society. Introducing measures to protect against overheating in planning regulations would be an obvious step, as would protecting access to green spaces, if not increasing their number. An analysis today from the Office for National Statistics found that there was more concrete than greenery in the average urban residential garden, inevitably compounding the “heat island” effect. For that to happen, we need to keep heat front and centre, even when the weather is cooler; and we must recognise that it can’t be left to individuals to find ways to cope. The issue may recede with the seasons, but it is not going to go away. Look to Asia, Australia and the Middle East for a glimpse of what the future might hold – we may reflect on this period and wonder why we did not act while the sun merely shone. In the meantime, recognise this heat for the harbinger that we know it to be. Feel the sweat drip off your elbows, the heat pummel your skin. It may be uncomfortable now, but it can’t be simply endured for ever. • Elle Hunt is a commissioning editor for Guardian G2