The resignation of Sir Kim Darroch followed the failure of the likely next prime minister, Boris Johnson, to say he would support him staying in post – despite being given repeated chances to do so during his TV debate with Jeremy Hunt. As the current Foreign Office minister Alan Duncan put it, by six times refusing to back the ambassador, Johnson had thrown him under a bus. Without the backing of the president of the US or his future boss, Darroch naturally concluded he had no future as an interlocutor between London and Washington. He realised, in the words of a friend, that Johnson had left him no option. There will now be white hot anger across the Foreign Office and in parliament – not just at the leaker and Trump, but also at Johnson. Whatever sanctimonious expressions of regret he mouths, and however much he blames the leaker, King Charles Street knows the Conservative leadership candidate effectively sacked Darroch on the orders of the president. Strenuous efforts were made in London to remind Darroch he had the backing of the current prime minister, as well as the current foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt. But Darroch, keenly aware of the importance of the special relationship, something to which his career had been dedicated, decided he could not afford to become an obstacle to its continuance. His resignation means the malicious leaker has got his or her way. It was pretty clear from the outset that the political purpose of the leak was to get Darroch removed, and replaced by a true Brexiter of the kind Nigel Farage, and now apparently Johnson, believes is necessary if the UK is to extract maximum political and economic value from Brexit. It was also clear that, despite the Foreign Office’s protestations, Trump was determined to blackball Sir Kim. He was not just struck off the dinner guest list for the visit of the emir of Qatar, a second meeting with Wilbur Ross did not go ahead. Darroch excluded himself from a meeting between the trade secretary, Liam Fox, and Ivanka Trump to avoid any embarrassment for the president’s daughter. It will be fascinating to see whether Theresa May acts quickly to appoint Darroch’s successor. Tempting as it might be to foil the leakers, and install a career civil servant, it is probably irresponsible to pre-empt Johnson. The UK ambassador to the US needs the confidence of his prime minister. Ever professional, the diplomatic service will swing behind Johnson when he reaches Downing Street. But he has revealed himself to be a shallow man willing to take advantage of an illegal leak to sack a man who had dedicated himself to public life. Evasion of personal responsibility is already becoming the defining negative feature of his candidacy. Johnson will go through the doors of Downing Street at some point this month smiling and wanting to be loved, but many will instead see him, as one interviewer, Eddie Mair, described him, as “a nasty piece of work”. In the words of the chairman of the foreign affairs select committee, Tom Tugendhat, a former army officer: “Leaders stand up for their men. They encourage them to try and defend them when they fail.”