What a positive piece by Margaret Rooke (Cori Gauff isn’t the only fantastic teen, 8 July). It’s sad the way society scoffs at teenagers and rather strange how adults are becoming increasingly frightened of them. The modern British teenager is a very different animal to the one earlier generations recognise from their own misspent youth and, because any misunderstood system looks chaotic from the outside, it seems to me the reason mainstream media portrays British youths as amoral and superficial “snowflakes” is because their behaviour seems inexplicable. In the late 20th century, teens rebelled against their parent’s generation. In the 21st century, many teens simply ignore the rules that they feel have no bearing on their lives. But instead of existing outside the system, they look beyond it, and what we see today is the child’s response to an adult world they reject. Perhaps the teenager as we know it no longer exists. In its place is a bafflingly complex array of disparate groups, struggling to make sense of the world around them and inventing their own system of codes, values and mores in the process.Emilie LamploughTrowbridge, Wiltshire • I wanted to thank Rachel Carrell for her article (Some say children are in crisis. But this could be the generation that saves us, 10 July, theguardian.com), for changing the story about young people. I am a clinical psychologist and I work with children and young people. I would love the dominant story about young people to change from “young people are awful and scary” or “young people are under stress and to be pitied” to the one Rachel is telling here: “young people are passionate and powerful and are our hope”. I have struggled recently with breakfast-table rage – flicking through news headlines and being by turns disgusted, annoyed, frustrated, saddened or even grief-stricken by what seems to be happening in the world. But I have felt paralysed. I have gone on marches and signed online petitions, but at no point have I truly believed I was going to have a significant impact. Young people look at the world and think “yep, we can change that”. Social media has given them a sense of connectedness and power. You just have to look at what is happening with Greta Thunberg and the climate change protests or the protests after the Stoneman Douglas high school shooting in the US to see their capacity to make things happen. Thank goodness for a generation that don’t feel my paralysis in the face of what seems like overwhelming stress. Let’s start telling each other, and young people themselves, stories about what they can achieve, what they care about, what they can change and just how utterly fabulous they are.Dr Helen CareWitney, Oxfordshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition