More than 30 whistleblowers including current Labour members of staff will submit evidence to the equalities watchdog about antisemitism in the party, the Guardian understands. The revelation comes after eight former members of staff went public alleging consistent interference in the disputes process by senior Labour aides in a BBC Panorama programme. Labour has complained about the programme to the highest level of the BBC, claiming staff were disaffected and motivated by political opposition to Jeremy Corbyn.The Jewish Labour Movement revealed on Thursday it had detailed witness statements from 30 former and current Labour members of staff that it was planning to submit to the Equality and Human Rights Commission, which is investigating Labour’s handling of antisemitism in the party. Several more whistleblowers are understood to have approached the group since the programme was aired on Wednesday night. A spokesman for the Jewish Labour Movement said: “The testimonies of whistleblowers confirm what we have suspected for some time. The culture and scale of antisemitism within the party has been perpetuated and exacerbated by those at the very top. Those responsible must be held accountable.”JLM said it had begun collecting statements since September 2018 to refer to the EHRC.The group, which is the party’s oldest and only official Jewish affiliate, said it wanted to pay tribute to those who had come forward, particularly four who had already broken non-disclosure agreements. Two major public furores about antisemitism occurred in 2016, with Labour MP Naz Shah apologising for an antisemitic Facebook post, and former London mayor Ken Livingstone making remarks about “the Israel lobby” and Hitler supporting Zionism in broadcast interviews that eventually led to him quitting the party after a lengthy disciplinary process. A report that year by Shami Chakrabarti exonerated the party of widespread antisemitism but reported an 'occasionally toxic atmosphere'. Matters escalated in 2018 when it became evident that the party was receiving more and more complaints, to the extent that there was a backlog of disciplinary cases. Jeremy Corbyn apologised that April for hurt caused to the Jewish community by problems in the process and pointed to only 0.1% of members being under investigation for alleged antisemitic comments. But the party was also mired in a row about whether to adopt the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance (IHRA) definition of antisemitism, which it ended up ultimately approving. Then accusations of political interference in the complaints process by aides close to Corbyn began to emerge earlier this year, which the party strongly denies. The resignations of some MPs and peers over antisemitism in February 2019 alarmed many Labour colleagues. Then Chris Williamson, a Labour MP and ally of Corbyn, caused an outcry for saying that the party had been 'too apologetic' about antisemitism complaints. However, many of his supporters in the party backed a campaign saying he had been vilified and badly treated. Then came the announcement that the Equalities and Human Rights Commission was placing the party under formal investigation over antisemitism. In a July 2019 programme, eight whistleblowers spoke to a BBC Panorama documentary, with some saying they felt there was political meddling from Corbyn’s office in the process for handling antisemitism complaints. Seumas Milne, one of Corbyn’s closest aides, told officials the party was 'muddling up political disputes with racism' and must review processes. Jennie Formby, the general secretary, was accused of attempting to interfere in who sat on a panel examining the case of Jackie Walker, a high-profile activist who was eventually expelled from the party. Labour strongly denied the allegations of political interference, and came out on the offensive, accusing the BBC of bias and calling for the documentary to be pulled. A Labour spokesman said the party had fully answered “a number of questions” put to it by the programme, and had also sent 50 pages of documents in response. The complaints to the BBC had been made “at various levels, including the director general”. Rowena Mason, Deputy political editor “In the face of legal action, they have demonstrated bravery and integrity in abundance. We’d urge any party officer or staffer, past or present, to come forward now, and tell us and the EHRC what you know,” the spokesman said.One source suggested the Panorama documentary contained “around 5%” of the detail that had been collated to submit to the EHRC. The EHRC launched a formal investigation into whether Labour “unlawfully discriminated against, harassed or victimised people” from the Jewish community in May, saying it had received a number of complaints about Labour’s handling of allegations. The party has said it will cooperate fully with the investigation but rejected any suggestion that it did not handle complaints “fairly and robustly, or that the party has acted unlawfully”. A number of other former and current members of staff are expected to approach the EHRC directly, rather than through JLM’s formal submission. Others may be compelled to come forward. A senior Labour source said they believed evidence given by those who were called by the EHRC could be the most damaging. “The documentary will prompt many more people to come forward, or to speak freely if they are compelled to give evidence to the EHRC,” the source said. “It hit home when the whistleblowers said how when you try to do something about injustice but can’t, you start to feel complicit. “Many of us are from trade union backgrounds, we know the Acas guidance about what it means when so many employees are off with sickness. There are far more senior people who have not come forward, who have also signed NDAs, but who could be compelled to talk by the EHRC.” The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) was formed in 2007 to promote and uphold equality and human rights laws across England, Scotland and Wales. It bought together the work of three previous bodies -the Commission for Racial Equality, the Disability Rights Commission and the Equal Opportunities Commission. The Commission's role includes enforcing equality legislation on 'protected characteristics' - age, disability, gender, marriage, pregnancy, race, religion and sexual orientation. The EHRC's powers range from simply providing advice to organisations, to holding inquiries to ensure that equality laws are enforced and to work towards ending discrimination and harassment. Ultimately the EHRC can take organisations to court in order to force them to comply. Labour’s deputy leader, Tom Watson, said he and the shadow cabinet had been denied access to information on the scale of the problem and the party’s official response to the investigation by the equalities watchdog. The deputy leader said he could not assess whether Panorama exaggerated the scale of antisemitism in the party because he was unable to find out how many complaints had been made. “I’ve been told by the general secretary that I’m not legally responsible for dealing with outside regulatory bodies,” Watson said. Members of Labour’s governing national executive committee raised serious concerns at a meeting on Tuesday that party chiefs had not shared the submission to the EHRC investigation with its ruling body. The submission was to be coordinated by Labour’s in-house counsel Gordon Nardell, but the barrister quit last week after just one year in post to return full-time to his chambers, Twenty Essex, which said it was “delighted” to welcome him back full-time from August. “The party has not grasped the consequences how serious this investigation is if Labour is found guilty, there is no concept of the extremely severe ramifications of that decision,” one source close to the NEC said. “At the NEC meeting, neither the EHRC investigation nor Panorama was on the agenda. There was no time to discuss it. “This is an extremely serious thing, we are effectively the trustees of the party, and we are being left entirely in the dark about how we respond to this.” The body does not have the power to fine or prosecute individuals but it could create a legally enforceable action plan for organisations and make recommendations, if it finds against Labour. Keir Starmer, a shadow cabinet member, said the party should show it was ready to “throw open the books and say you have got access to anything”. NEC members intend to raise the matter again at the meeting of the equalities committee next week and again at a full meeting the following week. A Labour spokesman said: “The Labour party is fully committed to the support, defence and celebration of the Jewish community and implacably opposed to antisemitism in any form. Our records show that after Jennie Formby became general secretary, the rate at which antisemitism cases have been dealt with increased more than fourfold.“Complaints about antisemitism relate to a small minority of our members. We have robust procedures for dealing with such complaints, which we are continuing to improve and we are cooperating fully with the EHRC.”Sam Matthews, Labour’s former head of complaints, told Sky News the EHRC would be able to pinpoint those responsible for allowing the issue to escalate, with powers that former staffers would not have. “While I can provide testimony, all the EHRC can do is use their powers to get and reach into the Labour party servers and to Unite servers ... to find if this has happened,” he said. “The EHRC have the power to find it and they absolutely need to.”Matthews, one of the former staffers who also spoke to Panorama, said he believed the process could ultimately end up in court. “I think that where the EHRC get to is ultimately a process that they are going through at the moment but it could end up there,” he said.