It was just another Manic Monday, in that once again the men got a better display on the show courts than the women. The day in the Wimbledon fortnight where every singles competitor in the fourth round plays, both men and women; it has become a battleground for equal representation in the sport. The Tennis Podcast recently calculated that only once in the tournament’s history – one heavily rain-affected year some decades ago – have more women played on Centre Court than men on Manic Monday. It was more of the same as Johanna Konta found herself sandwiched between Centre favourites Rafa Nadal and Roger Federer. Meanwhile the women’s No 1 and top seed, Ashleigh Barty, was forced to slug it out with Alison Riske on No 2 Court before the big courts had even begun. Barty lost in three sets to Riske in an engrossing match and was very diplomatic afterwards. “Scheduling is very difficult,” she said. “Court two is a beautiful court. The surroundings change but, for us, the tennis court is always the same size.” Nicely done, but there were others who aired a different view, including the Hollywood A-Lister Rebel Wilson. On No 2 Court to watch the epic between two Karolinas, Muchova and Pliskova, the Diary approached her on a break in play and asked for her thoughts on the scheduling. “Poor Ashleigh, she’s an amazing player and I don’t understand it”, she said. “She’s the No 1 seed, so why is she on court two?” Wilson suggested that sometimes the matches on the biggest courts might not actually provide the best contests. “I’m out here watching [Muchova v Pliskova] because I know I’m going to see a great game,” she said. “Some of these men’s matches are over before they start.” By coincidence, just as Wilson was speaking, Rafael Nadal was wrapping up his straight-sets victory over João Sousa on Centre Court. There is no doubt Rafa is box office and the wishes of TV companies are among the factors taken into consideration by the All England Club when it comes to scheduling. But there is surely an argument, as Wilson suggests, that watching a tighter contest may actually be better entertainment, certainly for those watching in the stadium. So during his post-match press conference the Diary put it to Nadal that he should have swapped with Barty and, well, it didn’t go ideally: The Diary: “Do you think there was an argument that Barty’s game should have been on Centre Court?” Nadal: “But can we predict the future or not?” The Diary: “She’s the world No 1.” Nadal: “I am the world No 2 and I won 18 grand slams.” [laughter] The Diary: “So that’s a no?” Nadal: “My answer is not no or yes. In the world of tennis today, honestly, my feeling is today I am little bit more than Ashleigh Barty, even if Ashleigh Barty is the first player of the world and she already won in the French Open and she is playing unbelievable good. Every day is a decision. We cannot create polemics about that. Court No 2, OK, they have to make decisions. Today they probably decided that. They have other girls playing on the Centre Court now.” It feels like the problem has not quite been put to bed just yet.