Joe Marler and Danny Cipriani have been included alongside four uncapped players in England’s official preliminary training squad for this year’s Rugby World Cup in Japan. Eddie Jones has named Lewis Ludlam, Willi Heinz, Ruaridh McConnochie and Jack Singleton in a 35-strong list but has omitted the full-back Mike Brown and the scrum-half Dan Robson. Marler announced his retirement from Test rugby last September for family reasons but the Harlequins loosehead prop has now rescinded that decision and is available for World Cup selection. “I saw Joe during the Barbarians’ week and he indicated that he had a desire to come back,” said Jones. “We have since had a couple of chats and we have given him the opportunity to do that. Now it is up to him to show us what he has got.” Cipriani has kept his place in the training squad despite the return of those Saracens and Exeter players who have sat out the two previous training camps. He now has to convince Jones to retain him in the final 31-man squad to be announced next month, with competition for places starting to intensify. In addition to Brown and Robson, there continues to be no room for the experienced Dylan Hartley, Chris Robshaw, Danny Care and Richard Wigglesworth in addition to younger candidates such as Alex Lozowski, Alex Dombrandt, Ollie Thorley and Ollie Devoto. Instead Jones has opted for the New Zealand-born Heinz as his third scrum-half ahead of Robson and Wigglesworth and has named the Saracens-bound Jack Singleton as a third hooker and Bath’s fleet-footed McConnochie in the back three ahead of Brown. Northampton’s Ludlam has propelled himself in front of Robshaw, Dombrandt, Don Armand and Dave Ewers, among others. George Kruis (Saracens), Jack Nowell (Exeter Chiefs) and Mako Vunipola (Saracens) have not been included in the squad but will continue their rehabilitation in camp and are still being considered for selection. “We can’t wait to have the full squad in place and to have players competing for those 31 places,” said Jones. “It is a process of building the team up, building the cohesion, the tactical understanding of the team and our adaptability. We will need to get those things right to win the World Cup, and that is our aim.” Once the players reassemble in Teddington on Sunday, Jones will turn his attention to making his final picks. “World Cup selection is a four-year process,” he emphasised. “We have looked at it carefully and tried to build up a squad that has enough experience, attitude and energy to be winners. I think we have that. In the process, we have left out some players who can feel unlucky. For those guys who have missed out, the door is never closed but they have just got to be ready, as you never know when the opportunity comes.” England are due to play warm-up internationals against Wales on 11 August and Ireland on 24 August at Twickenham and Italy (6 September) in Newcastle as well as an away fixture against Wales on 17 August in Cardiff. Forwards: Dan Cole (Leicester Tigers, 85 caps); Luke Cowan-Dickie (Exeter Chiefs, 11 caps); Tom Curry (Sale Sharks, 10 caps); Charlie Ewels (Bath Rugby, 10 caps); Ellis Genge (Leicester Tigers, 9 caps); Jamie George (Saracens, 37 caps); Maro Itoje (Saracens, 27 caps); Joe Launchbury (Wasps, 58 caps); Courtney Lawes (Northampton Saints, 71 caps); Lewis Ludlam (Northampton Saints, uncapped); Joe Marler (Harlequins, 59 caps); Ben Moon (Exeter Chiefs, 8 caps); Brad Shields (Wasps, 8 caps); Kyle Sinckler (Harlequins, 22 caps); Jack Singleton (Saracens, uncapped); Sam Underhill (Bath Rugby 9 caps); Billy Vunipola (Saracens, 41 caps); Harry Williams (Exeter Chiefs, 17 caps); Mark Wilson (Sale Sharks, 13 caps). Backs: Danny Cipriani (Gloucester Rugby, 16 caps); Joe Cokanasiga (Bath Rugby, 4 caps); Elliot Daly (Saracens, 30 caps); Owen Farrell (Saracens, 70 caps); George Ford (Leicester Tigers, 55 caps); Piers Francis (Northampton Saints, 4 caps); Willi Heinz (Gloucester Rugby, uncapped); Jonathan Joseph (Bath Rugby, 40 caps); Jonny May (Leicester Tigers, 45 caps); Ruaridh McConnochie (Bath Rugby, uncapped); Henry Slade (Exeter Chiefs, 22 caps); Ben Spencer (Saracens, 3 caps); Ben Te’o (unattached, 18 caps); Manu Tuilagi (Leicester Tigers, 32 caps); Anthony Watson (Bath Rugby, 33 caps); Ben Youngs (Leicester Tigers, 85 caps). In camp for rehabilitation: George Kruis (Saracens, 32 caps); Jack Nowell (Exeter Chiefs, 33 caps); Mako Vunipola (Saracens, 53 caps).