Name: Motsi Mabuse. Age: 28. From: She was born in Mankwe, a small settlement that was at the time part of the nominal Republic of Bophuthatswana, and was absorbed into South Africa. She’s a dancer? Correct. She was expected to become a lawyer and join the family law firm, but the pull of the dancefloor proved too strong, and the bar gave way to the cha-cha-cha. And now she’s on Strictly. She is, but hey, you’re supposed to ask the questions and I’m supposed to answer them. Yeah, but everyone knows. She has been on before, many times. She’s one of the pro dancers, recently with Graeme Swann, the cricketer, and she was runner-up with somebody off Hollyoaks a while back ... Er, no. The name’s familiar though. Because you’re thinking of her sister, Oti Mabuse. Oooh, now Motsi’s joining the show, that’s nice, bringing sibling rivalry to the dance floor, a bit of pasa doble trouble ... Yes, but Motsi’s not going to be dancing Hang on, you said she was also a dancer. She is, you might know her from being a pro on the German show Let’s Dance. But for the BBC she’s replacing Darcey Bussell ... As a judge? No way! But isn’t her sister going to be there as a pro, competing with Huw Edwards or whoever it turns out to be? Yes. Oti will be judged by her elder sister. That’s terrible, like Jo Johnson turning up at the QEII Centre to find out his brother has been made ... No, it’s not at all like that, and we don’t want any of them in here, thanks. It’s more like Serena Williams coming out on to the court and finding Venus in the umpire’s chair. Are there any winners? Serena, almost certainly … oh I see, in this, no. If Motsi holds up a big fat 10, it will obviously be seen as nepotism. And if it’s a one, it will be because Oti pulled the arm off Motsi’s favourite doll when they were kids in Pretoria or something. I wonder if the Bible has anything to say on the matter? Not keen, as it happens. From Romans 14:10 – “You, then, why do you judge your brother or sister? Or why do you treat them with contempt? For we will all stand before God’s judgment seat.” And Oti, has she anything to say about her sister coming to judge? She’s less bothered. She tweeted: “Yayyyy!!!! Da da da dadada daaaaa- da dada da da”. Do say (as Motsi did): “I am absolutely overjoyed to be joining the Strictly judging panel.” Actually, don’t – zzzzz. Don’t say: “That’s a zero from me, little sis, hahahahaha.” Actually, do.