As Bastille Day dawns on Sunday, French cycling fans and media could look back on something that has become increasingly rare in recent years: an opening week of the Tour de France in which a Frenchman had won a key stage and twice taken the yellow jersey with true panache – step forward Julian Alaphilippe. They could also savour a set of overall standings where a home-bred star, Thibaut Pinot, looked like a serious contender for the final victory. That sense was reinforced after Saturday’s stage to Saint-Étienne where Alaphilippe attacked together with Pinot on the final climb to regain the yellow jersey he had lost on Thursday’s finish at La Planche des Belles Filles. Pinot, meanwhile, gained 28sec on the defending champion Geraint Thomas to move into third overall, reflecting the image of Thursday that here was a man riding into his best form. The image of the pair crossing the line together was set to make the front pages across France on 14 July. Alaphilippe’s accession to the yellow jersey was just the latest episode in a meteoric rise that has taken the 27-year-old from Saint-Amand-Montrond in France’s centre to No 1 in the world rankings since his breakthrough season of 2016. He is a punchy, nervy little man who seems to exhibit one nervous tic after another as he races. In temperament he resembles Bernard Hinault – impulsive, aggressive – rather than the far more calculating Jacques Anquetil. But, unlike Hinault, his trademark is a punchy uphill acceleration rather than the sheer brute strength that was the Badger’s hallmark. However, like Hinault, he seems to make moves and win races for the sheer uninhibited bloody hell of it, a welcome development in a professional cycling world where obsession with detail and defensive racing has become the norm. It is a style that took him to a truly stellar 2018, with two stage wins in the Tour, victory in the Flèche Wallonne and San Sebastián Classics and triumph in the Tour of Britain, which gave UK fans a chance to witness his unique style. This year, he has added the Strade Bianche and Milan-San Remo. Again, like Hinault, he is a rider who performs all year round; he will start as a favourite for the world road race championships in Yorkshire in September. It is 20 years since the Tour de France recognised a truly malign landmark: the first race since the war without a stage win for a home cyclist. It is 30 years since the last Tour de France when a Frenchman truly looked like a potential winner on the final weekend, when Laurent Fignon lost the most suspenseful finish in the race’s history, to the American Greg LeMond, by a minuscule eight seconds. By the 1980s, French domination in the Tour was expected; not unreasonably for a nation that had won it 20 times since the early 1950s. France had produced five champions of stature and longevity: Louison Bobet, Anquetil, Raymond Poulidor, Hinault and Fignon; the latter’s retirement from the 1990 Tour marked the beginning of an existential crisis. In France’s collective sporting psyche, the Tour came to resemble Wimbledon in English minds: a major event that the host nation had invented but could no longer win. The constant comparisons with the golden age before Fignon’s defeat bore echoes of the English obsession with the 1966 World Cup. It was all exacerbated by the Tour’s mutation into a televised soap opera of epic scale, with every emerging French rider breathlessly touted as a possible Tour winner; every trip-up on the road to failure blown infinitely out of proportion. The Tour’s immovable date in July meant that Bastille Day became an annual trial, when France’s cyclists would desperately try to live up to the media hype and would usually fall embarrassingly short. The 1999 Tour marked the nadir of French fortunes, but the years since the close of the Lance Armstrong era have seen a consistent upturn. That began with Thomas Voeckler’s lengthy – and hugely popular – spell in the yellow jersey in 2011 and continued with Pinot’s mountain stage win at Porrentruy the following year at the tender age of 22. In 2014, he finished third overall and with Jean-Christophe Péraud second to Vincenzo Nibali, there were two Frenchmen on the podium for the first time since Fignon and Hinault in 1984. Since then, however, in spite of a prestigious stage victory at L’Alpe d’Huez in 2015, Pinot has struggled to mount a sustained challenge in the Tour, with French hopes largely resting on the slender shoulders of Romain Bardet, who finished second and third to Chris Froome in 2016 and 2017 respectively, but does not look like this year’s man after a poor showing on Thursday. Pinot turned to targeting the Giro d’Italia, largely to escape the relentless media attention that the Tour entails. He has been plagued by ill health and gained a reputation as a man who can catch any virus that might be doing the rounds. Alaphilippe has also had his issues – glandular fever, a knee operation – but he seems physically and mentally more robust than Pinot, whose display of frustration during a cobbled stage in 2015 remains a defining image. When the tide runs his way, Pinot looks more than strong enough, as he did at the end of last year when he won two stages in the Tour of Spain and the Giro di Lombardia. So far in this Tour it has all gone his way. While Bardet’s AG2R squad flopped, the Groupama-FDJ team performed above expectations in the first Sunday’s team time trial, putting him on the front foot immediately, and this was followed by a strong showing behind the victorious Alaphilippe in Épernay, where he gained five seconds on Thomas. Slender pickings, but it gave him an advantage. His young, talented climbing teammate David Gaudu is also in sparkling form. With his parents looking on, the sheer brute force Pinot displayed on his local finish at La Planche des Belles Filles would not have disgraced Hinault. If he keeps that up he could press Thomas hard in the next 10 days, even if he does not manage to replicate the Badger’s success in 1985, the last home winner of the Tour.