The modern-dress mechanicals look ready to rave in Sean Holmes’ over-excited production at Shakespeare’s Globe, London (★★★☆☆). Jocelyn Jee Esien sets the tone for this evening of chaos as a rocket-fuelled, party-starter Bottom. As she makes a case for taking all the roles in the play within the play, she rattles with infectious comedy. I want to give her all the parts on stage. The ravers clearly slipped something to the design team. The fully populated stage looks like the clean-up operation after Pride. Bafflingly, fairy queen Titania lives in a flower-laden recycling bin, her fairies resemble the results of a hurricane in a craft show, and Bottom’s ass is a papery rainbow piñata. The direction is sometimes scatty and the fairy scenes feel like filler, rushing through the words in favour of visual spectacle. Because king of the fairies Oberon has no discernible motive for setting off the night’s chain of events, decisions seem inconsequential and the resolution of the second half feels as though it is taking exasperating detours. But this production belongs to the lovers. It’s already a sunny day when Lysander’s woodland wooing raises the temperature, Ekow Quartey deft at leaping between silly and sexy. The ricocheting relationships between the quartet are a pleasure to watch, their humour easy and passion intense. The sharing of Puck’s character between cast members is a nice touch, too, the impish part played by whoever wears a name-labelled T-shirt. As the final speech is divided between the cast and they collapse to the Globe’s wooden boards, you get the sense of wired teenagers needing to sleep off a particularly wild weekend. Across town at Regent’s Park Open Air Theatre, this comedy of errors takes a much darker turn. Director Dominic Hill draws out the hatred in the play as if he’s mining for gold. Kieran Hill’s Oberon is vile and controlling, with Myra McFadyen as Puck sitting on his knee like a ventriloquist’s doll. While the Globe’s Oberon seemingly has no motive, this production (★★★☆☆) uses Rachael Canning’s creepy puppet child to coax out his self-righteous reasoning for wanting to humiliate Titania. The lovers’ fight is tougher here, too; far more violent than funny. Lysander starts to strangle Hermia to prove his love for Helena, where usually his words (“What, should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?”) are an empty threat. This gravity lends a different perspective to the play’s end; with the wrong spells righted, the shell-shocked lovers in mud-stained pyjamas don’t immediately leap into each other’s arms. Their actions are weighty and not easily forgotten. While the tone is too heavy to let humour shine through, it is an impressively unforgiving interpretation, and one that ultimately, and rightfully, favours female voices. Putting everything else aside, this production should, if nothing else, be seen for the fairies. Emerging like splinters from beneath the set, the hulking arachnid creatures are terrifying. Hunched on tilted stilts, they converse in sign language, stalking the lovers who swipe at the air around them as if walking into cobwebs. Canning’s design is exquisite and the performers sublime, as they manage to find moments of cheekiness within the rigid limbs. As night swells over the park, Ben Ormerod’s aurora-like lights create a leafy-fingered dusk. Mischief is resolved and the inquisitive fairies sink back into the reed beds. Later that night, I wake thinking a pair of them are lurking at the bottom of my bed. There’s nothing there. It was but a dream. • At Shakespeare’s Globe, London, until 13 October; at Regent’s Park Open Air theatre, London, until 27 July