Andrew Strauss, England’s former director of cricket, has urged the game’s powerbrokers to learn from the mistakes of the past and capitalise on England’s World Cup success, declaring: “This has to be the start of something bigger.” Strauss left his job at the England and Wales Cricket Board last October but not before laying the foundations for England’s white-ball resurgence, namely deciding to stick with Eoin Morgan as captain after he had led the team to a humiliating first-round exit at the 2015 World Cup in Australia and New Zealand and then appointing a coach in Trevor Bayliss who advocated an attacking, expressive style of play that has characterised the team’s transformation over the past four years. The 42-year-old has a different perspective on life since losing his wife, Ruth, to a rare form of lung cancer last December. The second day of next month’s second Ashes Test at Lord’s will be turned red in Ruth’s memory and to raise funds for the foundation set up in her name. Strauss, a former Middlesex opener, was back at his old ground on Tuesday to drum up support for that day as well as offer his thoughts on the legacy the World Cup can offer English cricket. As a member of England’s fabled 2005 Ashes-winning side and the captain who led the Test team to No 1 in the world in 2011, Strauss knows how the highest of highs can be followed by a dramatic crash. “We have made mistakes in the past,” he said. “We’ve won Ashes series and got to No 1 in the world and thought that was the end in itself. We have to find a way of making this a launchpad for something bigger and better and that is a huge challenge. “This is a really good opportunity to learn from what’s been before, in 2005, from a playing perspective [or] what happened to us in 2011 … this isn’t the end, it can’t be the end. This has to be the start of something bigger.” Sunday’s dramatic World Cup final win against New Zealand was the first cricket to be shown live on free-to-air TV since the 2005 Ashes. Strauss, unsurprisingly given his ECB links, is backing the new 100-ball competition that starts next year, part of which will also be free to air on the BBC, as the vehicle for capitalising on the World Cup euphoria. “What you don’t want is for this to be a high-water mark and everything drifts back again,” he said. “The Hundred is the best opportunity the game has to really engage the people that tuned in for the first time for that Lord’s final and make them more than just casual fans.” Ben Stokes was England’s hero at Lord’s, completing his redemption story from the Bristol brawl that led to him missing the 2017-18 Ashes series in Australia – and have to clear himself of a charge of affray in court last summer – to a World Cup winner. Strauss, the man at the helm when the ECB decided to make Stokes unavailable for selection for six months following Bristol, has not been surprised by the all-rounder’s response since. He said: “I just remember going down to the police station [in Bristol]. I spent a long time with Claire, his wife, waiting for him and what struck me as soon as he came out was actually his character. Because he stood up and said: ‘I’ve got this horribly wrong. I apologise sincerely for what I’ve done here.’ From that moment on, I thought this was going to be a good thing for him. “I think what we’ve seen is some of those rough edges just smoothed a little bit over the last 12 or 18 months without him losing that incredible desire and competitive streak. It’s an easy story to say what happened in the World Cup final is redemption for him. I just think it was one of English cricket’s talents showing what he can do on the greatest stage.” Strauss has warned Stokes that coping with the level of fame he will now encounter will be his biggest challenge – just as it was for Andrew Flintoff after the 2005 Ashes. “What is going to be hard for Ben going forward is the levels of adulation he’ll receive,” Strauss said. “I think that was a burden for Freddie – he often lived up to it and that was great but increasingly you are under more and more pressure to be the man every time you play and that is a big burden.” Stokes was not even picked for the last World Cup and Strauss admits his anger at England’s performances during that tournament sparked the white-ball revolution that reached its high point last weekend. “I was genuinely angry by what I’d seen,” he said. “The same mistakes made in the two previous World Cups that I’d been involved in, and prior to my time as well, were being made again. “Picking Test players. Playing a conservative brand of cricket and trying to justify the unjustifiable. I still remember my quotes from the 2007 World Cup that two threes are as good as a six. That was trying to justify what you just couldn’t justify. To me, and this was before I was appointed director of cricket, we just could not do this again.”