As an outdoor swimmer and swimming coach, Rowan is often found on the side of Clevedon Marine Lake giving guidance to all ability levels. She is on the Board of Trustees for Marlens, the charity that looks after the Marine Lake and a member of the South West Seals winter swimmers. “Not renowned for its swimming, the Somerset coastline is characteristically brown and turgid. Clevedon has a historic bathing tradition – the famous Long Swim is now in its 91st year – while Clevedon Marine Lake has just marked its 90th birthday. Swimming from Clevedon beach feels like being part of the town’s fabric. You can only swim here around high tide but the joy of this small window is that all of Clevedon’s sea-swimming community comes together. Clevedon has one of the highest tidal ranges in the world, never letting the silty sea bed settle and this makes conditions variable. Depending on conditions and tide, you can swim under the pier’s legs or around its end. You will always come out smiling.” Refuel Survived the silty swim? Get the most epic bowl of porridge, a decent bacon sandwich or, of course, cake at Scarlett’s, just by the pier on Alexandra Road. Swimming and documenting beautiful places is Anna’s job: as a photographer she has swum across Scotland snapping other swimmers. She is well known in her tribe, the Wild Ones in Edinburgh. They swim every Sunday at the local beach Wardie Bay. Taking The Plunge: The Healing Power of Wild Swimming for Mind, Body and Soul by Anna Deacon and Vicky Allan will be published in November 2019 by Black & White Publishing. “I have swum in some extraordinary places but my favourite is closer to home, Gullane. The beach is on a stunning piece of coastline than runs from Edinburgh to the Borders. There are beaches after beaches but Gullane has everything: it stretches on for what seems like miles, there are amazing rockpools, sand dunes to run down, secret caves to explore and, best of all, beautifully clear sea. There have been dolphins spotted and, sometimes, minke whales have made an appearance.” Refuel Seek sustenance in Drift, an old shipping container perched on the headland with a view over to Bass Rock, huge windows and brilliant cakes. You might not know her name but you may have heard about the St Ives Mermaid: Laura Evans. She swims daily, often found leaping off the harbour wall or washed up with her tail at beaches around the Cornish town, delighting children and adults alike. “West Penwith – from Porthmeor Cove to Nanjizal – is my favourite stretch of coastline. The landscape seems to change as you round every headland: from granite formations to lush greenery surrounding old mining ruins. There are secluded coves and tidal pools, meaning you are spoilt for choice when it comes to seeking a swim and more often than not you will have it all to yourself. I love Porth Nanven, also known as Cot valley and Dinosaur Egg Beach; it’s named due to the sea turning the granite into ovals.” • Laura has recently founded a new St Ives Swimmers group – why not join them if you’re staying nearby? Refuel After seeking dinosaur eggs, carry on down the South West Coast Path to Sennen Cove and grab a pint at sunset in the Old Success Inn. Jane is a member of the Alnwick Sea Swimmers and swims all seasons in the North Sea off the Northumberland coast. She tries to go daily and often organises longer-distance swims from the Farne Islands or to Holy Island. From the mainland to Holy Island is just under a mile in distance but challenged by strong currents, so Jane organises support for those who wish to swim the stretch. “I am incredibly lucky. The stretch of coastline I swim is mostly in an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. White sandy beaches, clean water, wildlife – and mostly free parking! The beaches are often deserted and I often have the company of seals, birds and occasionally dolphins if I’m really lucky. Among my favourites is Football Hole, one of Northumberland’s secrets. It is a bit of a walk but no one else is ever there. I mostly swim parallel to shore but, when the tides permit, I swim down the River Aln. My absolute favourite place to swim is off the Farne Islands.” Refuel Exploring the coastline on an empty stomach is a mistake – enjoy the local sausages in the Northumberland Full English at the Salt Water Cafe, Beadnell – worth a detour off the A1. Kent Sea Swimmers covers a huge stretch of coastline, dipping at 11 bays and beaches from Seasalter to Hythe. Anthony joins at least every other weekend, and all year around. “Tankerton offers grassy banks full of beach huts, which make it one of the most attractive places to look back to from the sea. At high tide, the water is a good swimming depth without being too far from the shore. At low tide, the sea goes a long way out and you can walk out to a Tudor shipwreck or along The Street – a shingle spit that stretches far into the sea. If it’s rough then you know it is and when it’s calm, as it often is, then it doesn’t throw any surprises at you. There is a current to swim against but it pulls you along the beach rather than out to sea. This means you can swim with it, at speed, or challenge yourself against it, which makes it all the more fun!” Refuel After swimming against the current, have breakfast at the Seaview Café. It opens early on a Sunday and it is right on the seafront. Colin has recently become the first man (the first person was a woman) to swim a solo crossing of the Big Minch, the sea between the Outer Hebrides and Scottish mainland. He runs the Hebridean Sea Swimmers group and swims in the sea two to three times a week. “My favourite place to swim on the Isle of Lewis is Giordail beach in the village of Tolsta. It has a host of different formations along the coast, including the old pier and a waterfall. There’s also sea stacks to swim around, a natural arch and a tunnel to swim through – although you really need a local swim guide to show you how to find them safely, as the coastline is rugged with not many exit points.” Refuel Take your own hot drink but stop off at the Blackhouse Bakery for freshly made and tasty bakes. Colin recommends the pie! Lisa’s favourite time of day to swim is at sunrise before work, swimming with a group of sea lovers comprising a combination of breaststrokers to serious head-down channel swimmers. She used to swim daily but now swims as much as possible since becoming a mother. “Southwold is my favourite beach by far as this is now my home and has been for the past four years. As soon as I moved here I was swimming most days along the beach. Eventually, I was joined by other swimmers and Suzie’s Beach Café became our HQ. It’s fabulous swimming to the pier, looking back at the town in all kinds of weather conditions, measuring our distance by the number of groynes or crow’s nests we have swum past.” Refuel Made it to the pier? Grab a coffee and bacon roll in Suzie’s Beach Café – or, if an afternoon swim is more your thing, the scones are amazing. Marie set up the Brompton Belles & Beaux Dippers so she could sea-swim daily, close to home and with others. They swim in a small cove called Jenny Watt and out to Belfast Lough. Marie goes out with the dawn swimmers – in the dark come winter. “The north coast is known as the Causeway Coast, it is where I learned to swim, in a sheltered bay called Cushendun. It is in the heart of the Glens of Antrim and is a quiet spot with the sounds of sheep and the lapping of waves. At one end of the sandy, kelp-strewn beach lies the red pudding stone cave/arch favoured by geologists and at the far end the dramatic headland leading towards Torr Head.” Refuel Sea swimmers run the Coffee Cure cafe near Jenny Watt Cove, but if you’re visiting Cushendun, duck into Mary McBride’s for a Guinness and locally sourced grub. Cheryl is known locally for her cafe at Lligwy Beach but recently has put the spot on the map since founding a swimming club. They meet every Wednesday and Sunday and often take new recruits out to introduce them to the joy of the sea. “Lligwy is shallow shelving with golden sand and is usually sheltered from the typical south westerly-prevailing wind. Although, if a northerly system blows through it can get rather bouncy, creating waves to play in. We frequently swim with inquisitive seals – there is a colony of Atlantic greys on a rocky outcrop a mile or so from the beach. We swim along the shoreline often in clear, blue water. Spring is my favourite time when the terns and gannets are diving all around us.” Refuel Swim with the Lligwy Beach Cafe Swim Club and then dive into the cafe for hot chocolate, chat and cakes baked by Cheryl’s daughter. The Rocky Road is epic. Swimming group, Beyond the Blue, was founded by Sally almost six years ago, and she and her party swim all year round from Shore Road near Sandbanks. In winter they share the cost of a beach hut and can be found huddled around a kettle after cool dips. “Shore Road is my favourite. A lovely sandy beach where getting into the sea is easy, no steep gravel slopes or rocks once you are in. Of course, there are many amazing places to swim all along this coastline: Studland, Chapman’s Pool, Kimmeridge, Worbarrow Tout, to name a few – especially for the more adventurous.” Refuel Head to the Middle Beach Cafe, which provides great food and views across the beach. The cooked breakfast here is perfect after a morning dip. • Read the Outdoor Swimming Society’s tips for safe summer swimming here. Looking for a holiday with a difference? Browse Guardian Holidays to see a range of fantastic trips