The contest to select Britain’s prime minister has moved into its final and most critical phase. Last week, the 160,000 Conservative members who will be making this choice on behalf of the nation received their ballot papers – some more than one, a farcical error that if left unrectified will undoubtedly call into question the legitimacy of the process. The question they face: Boris Johnson or Jeremy Hunt? The question the 99.7% of voters who have no say are left with is: beyond Brexit at any cost, what on earth is the modern Conservative party for? As the contest has unfolded, the party has continued its quest to cannibalise itself through Brexit. There may be differences between Hunt and Johnson in terms of demeanour. But in the effort to chase the votes of the tiny, unrepresentative sliver of the electorate that is the Conservative party membership, both men have moved definitively towards sacrificing the two long-standing creeds of British conservatism – the exercise of fiscal responsibility, and the conservation of the union – on the altar of a no-deal Brexit. This paper has been a staunch opponent of the austerity imposed on the country by successive Tory chancellors. George Osborne and then Philip Hammond have delivered expensive tax cuts benefiting businesses and more affluent households to the tune of billions of pounds a year, while implementing cuts to tax credits and benefits that have left many low-income families thousands of pounds a year worse off. Services for the most vulnerable children and adults have been left damaged as councils have seen government grants slashed by almost half. The priority for any new prime minister should be undoing these benefit cuts and increasing spending on social care, the NHS and schools. Instead, Johnson and Hunt have both made huge spending commitments. Johnson has pledged an expensive tax cut worth £3,000 a year to those earning more than £80,000; Hunt has said he would further cut the corporation tax rate despite it already having been slashed by a third since 2010. Both have promised a hotchpotch of spending measures, including on defence and policing, that are designed to attract the votes of members rather than constitute a responsible strategy to undo the dreadful impacts of a decade of austerity. Neither candidate has made clear how they would fund these commitments. Unionism has always been a fundamental tenet of the Tory party; its official title is the Conservative and Unionist party. Yet in recent years, Conservative politicians have acted as if they have no care for the union at all. As Gordon Brown has argued, the spectre of Brexit means it has never been more at risk. The 2016 referendum was always going to place it under great strain, given greater support for the EU in Scotland – which voted Remain by 62% to 38% – and the fact that the absence of a border in Ireland is contingent on both Ireland and the UK being a member of the single market and customs union. But the red lines unnecessarily adopted by Theresa May early on in her premiership, which would have dragged Scotland out of the single market and customs union without the consent of the Scottish people, and her pretence for months that a technological solution to the Irish border question could be imminently found, have increased that strain immeasurably. In so openly contemplating crashing out with no deal, both Johnson and Hunt are treating the wishes of the people of Scotland and Northern Ireland with contempt, and are making the breakup of the UK more likely. A no-deal Brexit would provide further succour to the Scottish independence movement; in one poll last month, 49% of Scots said they supported independence, but this increased to 53% if Boris Johnson were prime minister. One strand of the pro-unionist case in 2014 was economic: those arguments ring hollow in the face of an economically catastrophic Brexit that Scotland didn’t vote for. Polls suggest that the rise in support for independence in recent months has occurred almost wholly among those who voted for Remain, or who didn’t vote, in 2016. In Belfast last week, Hunt and Johnson offered scant reassurance about the implications of their Brexit policies for Northern Ireland, which has been engulfed in political crisis since the collapse of power sharing more than two years ago. The economic upheaval of a no-deal Brexit may necessitate the reimposition of home rule, which would be hugely destabilising to the delicate equilibrium of the Good Friday agreement. Add in the inevitable need for a border in the case of no deal, and it is far from inconceivable that as well as posing a risk to the peace process, no deal might sufficiently shift public opinion to require a border poll on Irish reunification, as set out in the terms of the Good Friday agreement. All the polling evidence suggests that Conservative members will deliver a healthy majority for Boris Johnson, a man who has a long track record of misleading voters with impunity. He has misled the country about the implications of a no-deal Brexit, about the prospect of Turkey joining the EU, and about how much leaving the EU would free up in spending for the NHS. This is not a man fit to be prime minister. But the Tory membership don’t seem to care; one recent poll suggests that they would be happy to countenance significant economic damage and the breakup of the union in order to see Brexit happen. Boris Johnson being handed the keys to Downing Street is the likely conclusion to a chapter of Tory party history that has seen it captured by a small group of Eurosceptic fanatics, who have no claim to represent the nation. And it would undoubtedly mark the start of an even more toxic and turbulent period for Britain.