England’s cricketers will share £3.2m if they emerge victorious from Sunday’s World Cup final against New Zealand. But for Trevor Bayliss, the head coach, it is the chance to inspire a future generation of players that represents the true prize. Bar Liam Plunkett, who at 34 is the oldest in the pack, and Jofra Archer, the youngest aged 24, the remainder of Eoin Morgan’s expected starting XI were all in their teens during the heady summer of 2005 in which England broke Australia’s stranglehold with the most famous Ashes series win in recent times. Bayliss was coaching New South Wales at the time but has heard his current players talk about the impact Michael Vaughan’s side had on their careers. And with the World Cup final being shown on free-to-air after Sky struck a deal with Channel 4, the Australian is aware of the potential impact it could have. “There’s a number of the players in this team who were young when that Ashes series was happening and it inspired those guys to greater things,” Bayliss told BBC 5 Live on Friday. “Getting to the final is something we set out to achieve four years ago. It feels great now we have a chance to fulfil their dreams.” With such lofty aims, it is slightly tawdry to talk money but the sums are not insignificant. The ICC boosted its prize fund for this year’s tournament, with England already guaranteed to split £1.6m after hammering Australia by eight wickets to seal their place at Lord’s – figures that will be doubled by overcoming New Zealand on the day. This pot is expected to be divided by the squad with a pro-rata element that reflects their appearances, while there are win bonuses for the players and coaches from the England and Wales Cricket Board to be factored in as well. Bayliss, who stands down at the end of the summer, is understood to be in line for a substantial sum on top of his reported £400k salary should they go all the way. Paul Collingwood, one of his assistants, has a unique personal incentive too, with nine years as the only England men’s captain to lift a global trophy – the 2010 World Twenty20 – seemingly long enough. “I don’t want to have that tag. I don’t want to be the only England captain to do it,” said Collingwood. “There’d be no greater feeling for me than to see Eoin with that trophy. Nobody deserves it more. It would be a perfect ending to this journey.” Collingwood’s advice to the players is to remember their opponents will be just as nervous – he detected this from Australia’s Michael Clarke at the Kensington Oval back in the day – but beyond this, the former all-rounder says the current players need few tips, such is their belief at present. He added: “These guys are a breath of fresh air in how they go about their cricket. The message in this environment is to go out with pure freedom, no restrictions. We want them to feel like they’re playing in the backyard, that’s when you love cricket the most. You’re playing with your friends, your brothers, your sisters – you’re not thinking about consequences. “You can sense over the last three games that mojo is back. It’s powerful when you see that in a team. It puts the opposition under pressure.” England are expected to have a full squad from which to pick their XI, with the medical staff happy that Jonny Bairstow did not tweak a groin against Australia and opting against a scan. His opening partner, Jason Roy, flirted with a possible suspension after a significant show of dissent when given out in the match but instead received a fine and demerit points on his record. The umpires with whom he remonstrated, Kumar Dharmasena and Marais Erasmus, have since been appointed for the final.