Ivanka Trump’s prominent role at the G20 summit over the weekend, and her presence at the Korean demilitarised zone with her father, has inspired a slew of parodies under the hashtag #unwantedivanka. Following an awkward encounter in Osaka, in which Trump appeared to muscle in on a conversation with world leaders, the president’s daughter and senior White House advisor has been photoshopped into significant moments in history, ranging from the signing of the US declaration of independence to the Japanese surrender at the end of the second world war. The flurry of #unwantedivaka tweets came after a callout on Twitter from US journalist Erin Ryan. One tweet placed the former fashion entrepreneur at the Yalta peace conference alongside Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin. Yalta pic.twitter.com/cnFi4YxtPz Another tweet pictured her standing alongside Martin Luther King. She was also photoshopped beside Colin Kaepernik kneeling during the national anthem, at Prince Harry’s wedding and in the White House situation room when Osama Bin Laden was captured. Others showed her on set of the television show Friends, crossing Abbey Road with the Beatles, on stage with Beyoncé and as the titular character in hit 80s movie ET. pic.twitter.com/Xf9OmalmYN #UnwantedIvanka pic.twitter.com/iLrLwU3pT3 Ivanka Trump’s appointment to her father’s staff in 2017 raised eyebrows because of her apparent lack of qualifications to be a senior presidential adviser. In April Donald Trump confirmed he had considered naming her to head the World Bank, and also said he thought she would have been a great UN ambassador. “She’s a natural diplomat,” Trump said. “She would’ve been great at the United Nations, as an example.” Ivanka’s presence at the weekend of international set-piece events came under fire from New York Democratic congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, who said it “hurts our diplomatic standing”. Her criticism followed the release of a 19-second video of Ivanka Trump appearing to try to join a conversation between French president Emmanuel Macron, Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau, International Monetary Fund director Christine Lagarde and British prime minister Theresa May. Before the US presidential party left South Korea, Ivanka Trump was once again in the spotlight, pictured addressing US troops at a military base. As her father called her up to the stage with the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, he quipped that they were “beauty and the beast” and that Ivanka would “steal the show”. “What a beautiful couple,” Trump said.