Out of context, most of the things we do seem mad. I just voluntarily ate a combination of sugar, cocoa solids, milk solids and emulsifiers that made me happy at the time but I knew would make me sad later. Then I went for a run that made me unhappy at the time but I knew would make me happy later, because it would allow me to pretend I had not eaten a combination of sugar, cocoa solids, milk solids and emulsifiers. Then I spent 10 minutes painting my nails with more-or-less toxic chemicals so they would be nicer to look at during my day of typing and give the illusion that I was intending to go out tonight. An alien beamed down without any preparatory lectures on human foibles, biology, psychology or grooming rituals would be foxed. Adnan Sarwar’s documentary about the whys, wherefores and growing controversy around male circumcision (I had an extended metaphor about pulling back the foreskin of the issue to examine the sensitivities beneath, but decided in my infinite professionalism to set it aside) posed the question of when context should be allowed to make sense of a procedure that seems, on the prepuce of it, very odd indeed. BBC One’s A Cut Too Far? (I assume The Unkindest Cut of All? was rejected for begging the question) didn’t mention the standards of care applied in earlier times or in other places now, but here in the UK the removal of baby boys’ foreskins involves a local anaesthetic in the infant groin then a few minutes of snipping away round a metal cap to protect the head of the penis, before dressing the wound that usually heals within a week or so. It is an important rite in the Islamic and Jewish religions, marking the child’s entry into the faith. The infant Sarwar, born to Muslim parents, was circumcised as a matter of course and didn’t give it a thought until he was in the showers after PE at his school in Burnley and noticed the difference between him and his Muslim peers and their non-Muslim ones. Is it a depredation? An assault? An act of love by parents, a handing down of a tradition so significant it amounts to a gift? We wouldn’t sanction it between adults without consent – why are babies different? As a lawyer specialising in the field pointed out, we normally give children more rights than grownups because they are that much more vulnerable to decision-makers on their behalf. Not in this case. Legally, parents can only consent to operations in the best interests of a child. Does induction into a faith and culture count? There are those who will say that of all the things to justify taking a knife to a child’s nethers, a belief in an invisible friend in the sky is not one of them. Sarwar rightly didn’t dwell on this but got stuck into meatier questions, highlighting how love, religion and law intersect and the ability individuals and countries have to resist, interfere with and circumscribe their demands. As well as talking to men who felt they had been harmed (physically, as well as emotionally, in the case of one victim of an operation that went badly), he spoke with Muslim and Jewish leaders and scholars to interrogate the scriptural basis of the practice (greater in the latter faith than the former) and delineate the cultural significance around it. And whatever your feelings about the subject, it was such a rare and welcome sight to see people sitting and talking frankly about religious matters without anger or hostility, but interest, patience and nuance. It was a tiny oasis in an earth scorched by manufactured media outrage and it would have been lovely to linger longer and drink deeper there. Likewise with psychotherapist and Jewish feminist Dr Jenny Goodman, who has been taking issue with circumcision in her community for three decades and declined to have her own son undergo it when he was born 20 years ago. She considers it an issue of children’s and mothers’ rights; to be required to deny the maternal urge to protect your newborn, she points out, is profoundly disempowering. Uncircumcised boys remain Jewish in law and in practice, so why cleave to what for at least half the population is an unnatural practice? But she opposes banning it in law. Change, she says, has to come from within – otherwise antisemites and Islamophobes will surely use changes in legislation to fuel their tanks and only create greater suffering overall. A Cut Too Far? raised a plethora of fascinating questions and if it didn’t – couldn’t – come up with any answers, it still stood out as an open-minded, generous-hearted look at an underexamined subject. And touched, occasionally, with grace.