The National Theatre has become embroiled in a bitter war of words after a group of lesbians was refused service in its Green Room bar in the run-up to London’s Pride celebrations. The women and their supporters claim their treatment at the hands of staff, who called the police, was a response to their campaigning stance in the gender-identity dispute. Other witnesses in the bar have described their behaviour as disruptive. The small group, who arrived with placards, included Anne Ruzylo, a political activist and former member of the Bexhill and Battle Labour party, who on Friday night was one of those who complained on Twitter. Ruzylo, who was wearing a T-shirt bearing the slogan “Lesbian: a woman who loves other women”, tweeted that staff at the Green Room had “called the police to have women and lesbians removed because they don’t like the T-shirts we are wearing”. On Friday night the theatre said on Twitter that it “respect[ed] and value[d] our trans staff, company and audience members. As such, if the behaviour of visitors impinges on their ability to feel supported and safe, we will take action.” Last night, Lisa Burger, the joint chief executive of the National Theatre, said in a longer statement that the women had provoked “a series of disturbances” which “culminated in abusive behaviour towards our staff”. “While investigations into the incident are ongoing, multiple witnesses corroborate that a group who attended the Green Room restaurant on Friday 5 July were ultimately asked to leave the premises as a result of a series of disturbances,” she said. “These began with their refusal to put placards out of sight that featured messages which upset other customers and contravened our visiting policy, and culminated in abusive behaviour towards our staff. The clothing, gender or sexuality of the group was not a factor in the decision, which was reluctantly taken on the basis of the group’s behaviour and what was said. “The National Theatre must be an inclusive place for everyone, and that means asking visitors to conduct themselves in a way that respects that principle.” Ruzylo has been approached by the Observer for comment.