When Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic step on to Centre Court on Sunday to contest the Wimbledon men’s singles final for the third time in six years two Spaniards back in the Balearics will pause to wonder might have been. Although there was little in the end that Roberto Bautista Agut – late for his stag party in Ibiza – could have done to stop the Djokovic train in the first semi-final on Friday, he did take a set off the world No 1, just as his compatriot from Mallorca briefly had Federer in his tight grip. As Nadal said after Federer had won 7-6 (3), 1-6, 3-6, 6-4, “I had my chances. He played little bit better than me. Probably I didn’t play as good as I did in the previous rounds, so he deserves it.” The key at the start was the tie-break. It was Federer’s sixth shootout win over Nadal from seven on Centre Court. “It came from a good game plan,” Federer said. “I served well on top of it.” It was the 40th match of their 15-year rivalry and the first here since 2008, when Nadal won a final that scaled the heights of greatness. This did not match that. How could it? They are 11 years older, with a combined age of 70, and there is a limit to how much even these very special players can stretch their genius. As Nadal said of Federer: “He is always able to do the most difficult things easy. He’s able to move inside the court quicker than anyone. He puts pressure on the opponent all the time because he has the ability to take the ball earlier than anybody else.” As for their special relationship, he thinks there is life in it yet. “We are not done, so ... things continue. Of course we know that every time there are fewer chances to play against each other in these important matches. I am sad to lose because that was another opportunity. But I have to accept it was not my day. And I know chances are not forever. Last year I had chances here [in the semi-final against Djokovic]. I had another one today and I was not able to convert.” Even diminished by age, however, they still are better than the young contenders who fell like leaves from a tree in the first week, and all the others who clung to their dreams in the second. It is fitting Djokovic stood with them in the last four. Between them they have not only won the last 11 majors, but 15 of the last 17 Wimbledon titles and 50 of the last 58 grand slam titles. It is always mind-boggling to comprehend that dominance. On a mild Friday afternoon, with a wisp of wind to soothe nervous brows (and that was just in the paid seats), Federer led them out to thunderous applause, each wearing a white bandana, like a pair of old hippies who might have been otherwise sitting in Hyde Park waiting for the arrival of Bob Dylan and Neil Young. They would make some sweet music of their own soon enough. Federer deserved his win. He out-served the Spaniard, with 14 aces to three, tucked him up on the baseline to stifle his attacking instincts and held him off in a stirring finish when Nadal saved four match points. That was one of two dramatic passages of the semi-final. The first was the inexplicable collapse by Federer in the second set, after he had hung on to win the first in a tie-break. In 37 minutes the Swiss looked every day of his 37 years and Nadal needed to do no more than stay focused to level at a set apiece. About the time Neil Young was warming up the oldsters in Hyde Park, with Dylan to come, Federer and Nadal settled down to play out their symphony of pain. Each Nadal hold felt like the last note of lament. Nearly three hours after they had started in sunshine, Federer served for the match in shadow, a metaphor for their careers. Federer clipped the line with an ace, leaving Nadal with one challenge. Federer lost his third and last challenge at 30-all. Federer made an utter mess of a back-pedalling smash and Nadal had break point – then dumped the simplest of backhands. Federer angled a backhand volley for a third match point – and, after an agonisingly long rally, Nadal kept it alive. Federer aced for a fourth match point, nicking the back line. Nadal hit crosscourt to extend the drama. Federer fashioned a fifth match point off a mishit return. Nadal’s last shot, a weary backhand long, brought it to a close, and the place went crazy, as it always does. In their pomp they met here three years in a row, Federer winning in 2006 and 2007, Nadal one of the greatest finals of all time, in 2008. And here they were, in their 40th contest, 15 years after their first, still arguing on court in the nicest possible way about who was the better, who was the best of them all. As Federer said after the 16th win of their rivalry: “Always cool to play Rafa here, especially after so long. It had everything. I’m glad the match is over. He’s serving bigger, so we have fewer rallies. He’s got such easy power, to kill any point. Everyone has less time on the ball these days. That’s been the big difference from 11 years ago. “It gave me a huge boost for the final. It will down to who’s got more energy. There are no draws in our sport. It’s brutal at times. Age kicks in. I know it’s not over yet. One more.”