A hospital has paid the estate of astronaut Neil Armstrong $6m in a confidential agreement to settle allegations that post-surgical complications led to his death seven years ago, according to court documents. The 2014 settlement went to 10 relatives of the space explorer who made history 50 years ago by becoming the first man to walk on the moon. They included Armstrong’s two sons, sister, brother and six grandchildren, according to documents filed with the Hamilton county probate court in Cincinnati, Ohio which became publicly available on Tuesday. Armstrong’s widow, Carol, did not receive any money in the settlement. Armstrong’s sons, Mark and Rick, contended care provided by Mercy Health-Fairfield hospital in Ohio cost their father his life, according to the New York Times. The 50th anniversary of Neil Armstrong‘s first steps on the moon was celebrated on Saturday. He died on 25 August 2012. A motion made in September 2014 to seal the settlement said the hospital and its caregivers stood by the treatment they provided. “However, the hospital, on behalf of itself and the healthcare providers, agreed to a confidential settlement of $6m to avoid the publicity the estate might have initiated on behalf of certain members of the family if settlement had not been reached”, the document said. Maureen Richmond, a hospital spokeswoman, declined to offer specifics on the matter, saying she was unable to discuss any individual’s care. In an email statement to Associated Press, she added: “The public nature of these details is very disappointing both for our ministry and the patient’s family who had wished to keep this legal matter private.” Messages were left for Armstrong’s widow and sons, and for Wendy Armstrong, Mark’s sister and a lawyer involved in motions to seal the settlement. Carol Armstrong told the New York Times she signed off on the settlement in her role as executor but received no part of it. Neil Armstrong was admitted to the hospital in August 2012 for vascular bypass surgery, according to a 24 September 2014 motion filed by Carol Armstrong seeking to have the settlement approved. “He underwent the cardiovascular surgery, but post-surgical complications arose and he subsequently died,” the motion said. Most of the settlement, about $5.2m, was split between Armstrong’s sons. The astronaut’s brother and sister each received $250,000, and six grandchildren each got $24,000. Attorneys’ fees of $160,000 were awarded. 