As Jeremy Corbyn mooched through the sunlit atrium of Westminster’s Portcullis House on Tuesday lunchtime, he looked as though a weight had been lifted from his shoulders. An hour or so earlier, he had emailed every Labour member, detailing the party’s new “settled position” on Brexit, which will see the leadership demand a referendum on any new deal the next PM manages to secure – and campaign for remain. “Jeremy’s a lot happier. He thinks with patience we’ve got to the right position,” said one sympathetic shadow minister that afternoon. At that day’s shadow cabinet meeting, both sides of the Brexit divide, from Keir Starmer to Ian Lavery, had signed off on the policy. Corbyn’s restive deputy, Tom Watson, was the lone dissenter. The Labour leader and his inner circle hoped the shift would help to calm the civil war that has raged in his party for months – and whose frontline had come dangerously close to his own door. In particular, they were keen to prevent Watson from driving a wedge between Corbyn and the remain-supporting membership. But the truce was to be short-lived. Just 24 hours later, Corbyn’s team was under pressure once again, as the BBC Panorama documentary about the handling of antisemitism cases hit the screens. Even before the programme was aired, Labour’s official press operation went on the offensive against the seven whistleblowers who gave evidence on camera. “These disaffected former officials include those who have always opposed Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership, worked to actively undermine it, and have both personal and political axes to grind,” Corbyn’s spokesman said. Ruthless counterattack is a characteristic tactic of the committed cadre who surround the Labour leader, including his chief of staff, Karie Murphy, and the executive director of strategy and communications, Seumas Milne. It has served their political project well in the past, not least during the “chicken coup”, in the summer of 2016, when scores of frontbenchers resigned en masse, to little or no effect, and Owen Smith launched his ill-fated tilt at the leadership. They are a tight-knit group, who spent many years banished to the fringes of Labour politics. Corbyn’s better than expected performance at the 2017 general election, after a campaign punctuated by joyful mass rallies, appeared to vindicate their belief that the British public was tired of the fraying consensus, and ready for a decisive shift to the left. And after Labour achieved the biggest increase in its share of the vote at any general election since 1945, the 2017 campaign also drove out any lingering sense on the right of the party that Corbyn was a temporary aberration, whose fellow travellers would soon be banished. Instead, his project of transforming the party surged ahead, with more supporters elected to the party’s ruling national executive committee (NEC), and the sympathetic Jennie Formby chosen as Labour’s general secretary – the party’s most powerful official. Some Labour insiders claim that, as the Brexit battle has raged in recent weeks and months, the siege mentality that characterised the early period of Corbyn’s tenure has returned. “They’re back in the bunker,” said one staffer this week. Corbyn’s inner circle had already come under increasing scrutiny in recent months. With pressure mounting to shift the party’s position – in particular after the party polled just 14% in May’s European elections – even some of Corbyn’s closest allies, including Diane Abbott and John McDonnell, had become exasperated. They blamed, at least in part, what they saw as the committed Euroscepticism of Milne and Murphy, as did many of the leftwing MPs who formed the campaign group Love Socialism Hate Brexit, in a bid to amplify the remain message in their party. “Seumas and Karie will brook no deviation from the true path of Brexit,” one shadow cabinet member told the Guardian at the time. Another claimed: “Karie thinks a referendum is all about giving in to Tom Watson.” McDonnell, the Labour leader’s closest political comrade, had come to fear that party morale was threatened by the continued attempt to play both sides of the Brexit divide – despite the genuine fears of those MPs who feared backing a referendum would annihilate Labour’s support in leave-voting areas. Labour sources insist that Corbyn was clearly signalling the direction of travel – but waiting until a consensus could be built across the party before any formal shift was made. And they dismiss the concerns about Milne and Murphy’s role as just the latest version of the “good king, bad advisers” trope that has dogged Corbyn throughout his tenure. After last week’s shadow cabinet meeting the Brexit divide has been healed for now, but it could well erupt once again in the run-up to a general election. Richard Burgon, the shadow justice secretary, who had been doubtful in the past about the merits of a referendum, said: “I think the main thing is that Jeremy wanted to build a consensus – and he has done.” But he made clear that Labour could still enter a general election in the coming months offering to negotiate its own Brexit deal. As well as niggling fears about the political influence of Corbyn’s advisers, there are also concerns about reports of Murphy’s untrammelled control over LOTO – the “leader of the opposition’s office” – and the wider party. Several party staff loyal to Corbyn have told the Guardian that anxieties about a domineering management style have been aired at trade union meetings – though a simmering pay dispute has now been resolved. Murphy’s friends insist she is simply an effective manager who gets things done. Two incidents in particular following the drubbing in the European elections raised eyebrows, too. The first was the abrupt expulsion of Tony Blair’s spinner Alastair Campbell, for admitting that he had voted Lib Dem – a decision formally taken by Formby, without consultation with Corbyn or any other politician. Corbyn’s team blame Campbell – alongside another ex-spinner, Ed Miliband’s former adviser Tom Baldwin – for popularising the phrase “the four Ms” to describe Milne and Murphy, together with the Unite general secretary, Len McCluskey, and the union’s chief of staff, Andrew Murray. The quartet is perhaps the closest thing Labour has to the “chumocracy” of David Cameron’s Notting Hill set. Murray, a Communist party member until Corbyn won the Labour leadership, is a longstanding friend of Milne’s, currently seconded part-time from Unite to LOTO. Murray’s daughter Laura was recently appointed as Labour’s head of complaints, after working in LOTO. (And one of Corbyn’s sons, Seb, works for another powerful Labour M, John McDonnell.) Murphy is a close friend of McCluskey’s, and Labour frontbenchers sometimes regarded her as a proxy for him – though her main role is as Corbyn’s enforcer and gatekeeper. McCluskey has frequently infuriated Labour frontbenchers with offstage interventions, particularly on Brexit – though he was fully signed up to the collective trade union position that paved the way for the Brexit compromise this week. Two major public furores about antisemitism occurred in 2016, with Labour MP Naz Shah apologising for an antisemitic Facebook post, and former London mayor Ken Livingstone making remarks about “the Israel lobby” and Hitler supporting Zionism in broadcast interviews that eventually led to him quitting the party after a lengthy disciplinary process. A report that year by Shami Chakrabarti exonerated the party of widespread antisemitism but reported an 'occasionally toxic atmosphere'. Matters escalated in 2018 when it became evident that the party was receiving more and more complaints, to the extent that there was a backlog of disciplinary cases. Jeremy Corbyn apologised that April for hurt caused to the Jewish community by problems in the process and pointed to only 0.1% of members being under investigation for alleged antisemitic comments. But the party was also mired in a row about whether to adopt the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance (IHRA) definition of antisemitism, which it ended up ultimately approving. Then accusations of political interference in the complaints process by aides close to Corbyn began to emerge earlier this year, which the party strongly denies. The resignations of some MPs and peers over antisemitism in February 2019 alarmed many Labour colleagues. Then Chris Williamson, a Labour MP and ally of Corbyn, caused an outcry for saying that the party had been 'too apologetic' about antisemitism complaints. However, many of his supporters in the party backed a campaign saying he had been vilified and badly treated. Then came the announcement that the Equalities and Human Rights Commission was placing the party under formal investigation over antisemitism. In a July 2019 programme, eight whistleblowers spoke to a BBC Panorama documentary, with some saying they felt there was political meddling from Corbyn’s office in the process for handling antisemitism complaints. Seumas Milne, one of Corbyn’s closest aides, told officials the party was 'muddling up political disputes with racism' and must review processes. Jennie Formby, the general secretary, was accused of attempting to interfere in who sat on a panel examining the case of Jackie Walker, a high-profile activist who was eventually expelled from the party. Labour strongly denied the allegations of political interference, and came out on the offensive, accusing the BBC of bias and calling for the documentary to be pulled. A Labour spokesman said the party had fully answered “a number of questions” put to it by the programme, and had also sent 50 pages of documents in response. The complaints to the BBC had been made “at various levels, including the director general”. Rowena Mason, Deputy political editor The second recent incident that sparked alarm even on the left of the party was the abrupt ditching of Emily Thornberry from her customary role as Corbyn’s deputy for PMQs, after she infuriated Corbyn’s office by launching an outspoken critique of the party’s Brexit position on live TV just after the EU election polls closed. Journalists were told she was attending the D-day celebrations, but in fact she did not travel to France until later on that Wednesday, and was sitting on the front bench to watch Rebecca Long-Bailey make her debut at the weekly joust. Party sources now insist they simply wanted to highlight the importance of the climate crisis, which lies in Long-Bailey’s brief. But the move allowed Theresa May’s deputy, David Lidington, to quip: “Anybody who outshines the dear leader at the dispatch box risks being airbrushed out of the politburo history at the earliest opportunity.” Long-Bailey, the shadow business secretary, was widely regarded as having performed well. Indeed, rumours immediately began swirling that Corbyn’s advisers were beginning to peer over the shoulder of the 70-year-old leader and line up Long-Bailey as an ideologically amenable successor, to continue the leftwing project – Corbynism after Corbyn. One shadow cabinet ally of the Labour leader claimed: “Jeremy won’t hear a word against Seumas and Karie. He says he needs them and they are loyal to him. Neither is true.” As the ugly issue of antisemitism rears its head once again, and with a general election perhaps just months away, loyalties on all sides are likely to be tested to the limit in the weeks ahead.