Spoiler alert: this recap is for people watching The Handmaid’s Tale, series three, on Channel 4 in the UK.June has run-ins with her various female alliances this week as Serena still doesn’t seem to have chosen a side and her shopping partner, Ofmatthew, looks to be on the turn following the news that her period is late. On the way back from shopping, June finally boils over in the face of her partner’s devout diatribe about praying for Luke’s soul. “Bite me,” she says to the smug cow who will always use piety to get a dig in. Serena is invited to sit around the table this week as the commanders discuss the abduction of baby Nicole. Fred even makes a special effort to let her speak, but ultimately he’s using her longing for the baby to draw her back into the fold. When Fred presents Serena with the baby’s latest medical report – “She has a tooth” – he knows he is torturing her but feigns surprise when she gets upset. “I just want this to be over,” says Serena. Just her separation from her baby? Or the whole damn shooting match. The scene where June talks to her husband on the phone for the first time after their long separation, my heart was in my throat. The sheer power of Elisabeth Moss damming up her character’s emotions behind those eyes and that stiffened jaw is breathtaking. When the call ends, he is bent double with grief. She doesn’t flinch, just stares straight ahead. She doesn’t even take the handkerchief Joseph offers her but asks to be excused. When Mrs Lawrence later says it must have been hard for her, it’s the first emotionally honest thing anyone says to June this episode.Mrs Lawrence and June talk about Joseph’s true character. Is there any good left in him? She comforts the commander’s wife, telling her that whatever sliver of good is still there, she should grab hold of it. In the cellar, June goes through a box of old cassettes and puts one in the player. Serena’s trip to Canada comes at a crucial time in her relationship to Fred and her own faith. It is only just believable that, given the chance to defect again by that nice Canadian who approached her in the bar on her last trip, she would say no. I almost shouted at the television during that scene, where she runs into the airport bathroom to change back into her Gileadian turquoise. The baby she thinks of as hers is right there and she knows Fred doesn’t love her. Her faith in the regime has taken such a beating. What does she have to go back for? Somewhere deep down, she must still believe in what they’re trying to do. Her meeting with Luke and Nicole is understandably frosty. Her “God bless you,” is met with an instant “Fuck you” from June’s stricken husband. “You’re never going to be anything to her,” spits Luke as Serena sobs quietly and explains that she wanted a better life for the baby. Against his better judgment, Luke lets Serena hold her and, for a moment, she is in heaven. For all her faults, she does genuinely love that child. Later, we see the package from June has somehow made it to Luke, despite Serena forgetting to give it to him. He finds a Walkman and plays Leo Sayer until it suddenly cuts out to reveal June’s voice. We see her in the cellar talking to the tape recorder. She tells him that he should move on with his life because she had a relationship with someone else, Nick, and she doesn’t know if he’ll be able to forgive her. But Nicole was “born out of love”. Which is worse? Your wife being institutionally raped and having a baby, or falling for someone else and having one consensually? “I’m not the woman you remember,” she tells him. His heart is breaking. “This is all for her,” she says of Hannah. He sobs in the snow. In an apparent switcheroo, June is taken from the supermarket to a secret location where she finds she must take part in Fred and Serena’s broadcast – an appeal for the return of baby Nicole. Despite her promises of help, Serena is still driven by a selfish need to get the baby back and June is devastated. She seethes in the background as Mr and Mrs Waterford present a united front. Luke and Moira watch their TV in horror. Blessed be the fruit. May the lord open. Leo Sayer’s You Make Me Feel Like Dancing comes out of the cassette player June listens to in the basement. An unlikely choice for this week’s recall to a happier time, but it kind of works. Later, the Lawrences are spinning Nick Lowe’s Cruel to Be Kind and nodding along gently on the sofa while June smirks behind the door. I love Joseph’s taste in old music. U2’s Sunday Bloody Sunday bangs out the episode accompanying a now obligatory closeup of June’s furious face. • Commander and Mrs Lawrence have an awkward exchange where he compliments her hair. His character is still making little sense to me. No idea who he is. • Wasn’t sure of Ofmatthew’s reaction to her own pregnancy. Instead of radiantly smug, she seems deeply unnerved. Where is this going? • How did Luke get the package? Would Serena really have posted it to him? Sent it via the resistance? Baffled. Answers on a postcard.