Your article “Rebirth of the cool: Streaming helps jazz reach new audience” (29 July) was a welcome note of optimism. But there are two caveats. Streaming as a marketing tool allows jazz musicians’ to be heard by new audiences but the downside is that for the jazz musician to earn the national average wage of £27,600 in 2015 terms, they would have to have their music streamed 38m times – if you are Ed Sheeran, earning $6.6m from “Shape of You”, this is not a problem as it took 1.318bn streams to do it. But in a world where people are getting used to cheap or free music, streaming poses a problem of endemic proportions for jazz. There is also a major problem for the jazz musician with the “value gap”, which is the disparity between the value that upload services such as YouTube takes out from music and the revenue that is returned to the music community. The second caveat is the notion of the “product life cycle”, which helps understand the patterns of reinvention and renewal in jazz – where this creativity will lead to in the jazz musician’s career path and how they are supported and sustained. Renaissance, revival or reemergence, the music will look after itself. It is the infrastructure that needs to be developed and kept in constant repair.Chris HodgkinsWest Ealing, London • The Guardian rightly reports that jazz is enjoying a fresh wave of popularity, fuelled by the extraordinary creative diversity of its artists and the increasing accessibility of the music through streaming and adventurous new clubs and promoters. Why then did last Saturday’s northern edition of the Guide list just five jazz concerts across the whole of northern England and Wales (and that five included a folk duo whom not even the venue is marketing as jazz)? Yet in my homepatch of Tyneside alone I know of 14 gigs in the current week, and this is a quiet period as some clubs begin a summer break. The same, I’m sure, will be true of other towns and cities across the region. While it would clearly be unreasonable to expect every gig to find its way into the Guide, the continual shrinkage in the jazz listings seems perverse. Could it be that the Guardian regards jazz as a source for occasional news stories (and perhaps an obituary when the musician concerned is safely dead), but in respect to its existence as a live, cultural force, it can continue to be pushed aside to the narrowest of margins?Paul BreamWallsend, North Tyneside • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition