For years it was one of Yorkshire’s unsung treasures, attracting 100 visitors “on a good day”. Now, after starring in a BBC One series that has transferred stateside, a manor house near Halifax has been so inundated with tourists that it is extending its opening hours. Visitor numbers at Shibden Hall in the Calder valley have trebled to 300-400 a day since Gentleman Jack began being broadcast on the US network HBO on 22 April. The Grade II-listed former home of the 18th-century lesbian diarist Anne Lister has attracted visitors from the US. Six million weekly viewers tuned in to watch the eight-part series in which Suranne Jones played Lister, known for her coded diaries charting the course of her romantic encounters and often described as the “first modern lesbian”. Calderdale council, which owns Shibden Hall, hopes newly extended opening hours will be in effect from 23 August, and will include Friday openings. The council has also teamed up with the show’s costume designer, Tom Pye, to display outfits at Bankfield Museum in Halifax until 26 October – including the top hat worn by Jones in the series. “The impact was immediate, with visitors travelling from as far as the USA to see the historic hall where Anne Lister lived, and the many other great things that Halifax and Calderdale have to offer,” said Susan Press, Calderdale council’s cabinet member for public services and communities. The council held events for local businesses before the series aired to increase their knowledge of Lister, and created a “Gentleman Jack branding toolkit” to help firms “maximise the benefits”, said Press. Gentleman Jack’s 1830s street scenes were filmed in and around Halifax and Bradford, including Wakefield Gate and Wainhouse Tower and the local watering holes the Lord Nelson Inn at Luddenden and the Fleece Inn at Elland. Scenes set in Scotland were filmed in Ripponden, a village near Halifax where Sally Wainwright, Gentleman Jack’s writer, spends half her time. Brought up near the Shibden Hall estate, she also spotlit the Calder valley in the BBC One series Happy Valley and the Bafta-winning Last Tango in Halifax. It isn’t the first time Halifax has been touted as a culture mecca: last year BBC 6 Music named it the “Shoreditch of the north”, thanks to its burgeoning craft beer, music, and artisanal pork pie scene.