'Here’s to the new century,” says Sam Carne, raising a glass during dinner at Trenwith. “What do it hold for us?” And here’s to the new series of Poldark and what it holds for us, it seems, is more of the same. So here’s Ross Poldark looking pensive and tousled; here’s George Warleggan being vile (“Why should we pay more for labour when we can get it for less?”). Here are the sweeping shots of Cornwall, and some peasants about to start rioting. Poldark is about to take on – again – a lost cause that will pit him against the establishment, but which he will predictably win. And there cannot be a single Poldark fan who didn’t smile when panto servant Prudie uttered her catchphrase “’T’int fair, ‘t’int right!”. We’d waited all episode for it, and she delivered right at the end. None of this is a bad thing. There’s something deeply comforting about it all – it’s as cosy and familiar as a candlelit supper at the Nampara kitchen table. This is the fifth and final series of Poldark, or so they say. There are more Winston Graham novels, set later, so the makers haven’t ruled out a return, but this could be in years to come. Instead, writer Debbie Horsfield has departed from the books, and there’s a lot to tie up. Will Valentine ever find out about his true father? Will a Poldark mine ever turn a profit? Will Morwenna ever recover from her torturous first marriage? But this is Poldark, so there’s still time to cram in a few outlandish new plots. In what may come to be seen as actor Aidan Turner’s audition tape for James Bond, Poldark is being recruited. “His Majesty’s government,” says a shadowy figure, Wickham, in a box at the theatre after Poldark foils an assassination attempt on the king, “can always find a covert role for a person of your talents.” But we’re jumping ahead too quickly – a familiar feeling for Poldark fans. The episode opened in flashback to Virginia in 1781, with our captain lying, bloody-faced, amid slain British soldiers. So that’s how he got the scar on his cheek. And that’s how he meets Dwight Enys, the decent but drippy army surgeon who becomes his best friend. Their commanding officer is Ned Despard (a real historical figure; so is Wickham). At home in Cornwall – it’s now 1800 – Despard’s wife Catherine arrives on the early coach from London with a letter from her husband, begging Poldark to help get him out of jail, where he has been imprisoned without trial. “He said I should warn you, if you take on his case, it may be the rashest thing you ever do.” She knows how to play him. There is a conspiracy against her husband, involving new villain Ralph Hanson, a colonialist mahogany trader who wears the kind of black leather gloves that make even the kindest person look like a murderer. He is furious that Despard, the governor of Honduras, was giving land to formerly enslaved people, and tries to ingratiate himself with the soon-to-be-knighted George Warleggan. But all is not well with George – after the death, last series, of his wife Elizabeth, he sees and hears her everywhere. Episode 1Episode 2Episode 3Episode 4Episode 5Episode 6Episode 7Episode 8 Episode 1Episode 2Episode 3Episode 4Episode 5Episode 6Episode 7Episode 8Episode 9 Episode 1Episode 2Episode 3Episode 4Episode 5Episode 6Episode 7Episode 8Episode 9Episode 10 Catherine, or Kitty, is a great addition – a former slave who also really existed – played with elegant defiance by Kerri McLean. “She is a remarkable woman,” says Despard to Poldark, who visits him in prison. I’m hoping for great things. “Ask yourself, what is it that corrupts the milk of human kindness, turns the just and tender-hearted into vile rapacious brutes?” she says to the rapt crowd at an abolitionist meeting. “It is the single-minded pursuit of profit. How long can this continue?” Try 200 years later, Kitty. With the demise of Elizabeth, a woman constrained by her time though not that interested in challenging it, it feels as if this series might focus more on the proto-feminist women still standing. As well as Kitty, there is new peasant agitator Tess Tregidden, and Hanson’s rebel daughter Cecily. And of course the enduringly no-nonsense Demelza who, in this episode, saves her family from their burning cottage after someone firebombs it. The story gallops along like Seamus the horse on a Cornish clifftop. It’s all faintly ridiculous, but I couldn’t imagine it any other way.