As the US columnist Frank Bruni has noted, Ivanka Trump’s gauche intrusion at last weekend’s G20 summit of global leaders in Japan added a new dimension to Take Your Daughter to Work Day. It was not an entirely positive learning experience for Trump, who was cold-shouldered by Emmanuel Macron and Christine Lagarde in icy French fashion. She was also mercilessly mocked on social media, where she was Photoshopped gatecrashing the Yalta conference with Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin and joining the first moon walk. The more serious objection to Ivanka Trump’s presence in Osaka is that she is both unelected and unqualified. Yet if recent surveys of international opinion are any guide, the bigger problem is the behaviour of people who are elected to public office and, despite much evidence to the contrary, claim to be fit to lead. A Pew global attitudes poll in April of 27 countries found that 61% believe elected politicians do not care what ordinary people think. In the US, only 17% of Americans wholly trust their government to do the right thing. The clear message from May’s European parliamentary elections was that confidence in mainstream politics has crumbled. The yearning for change is palpable. In Germany, a poll last month showed the Greens ahead of Angela Merkel’s CDU-CSU alliance for the first time. In France, 69% of voters say they believe both the national and European political systems are broken. Last week’s divvying up of top EU jobs behind closed doors will not have changed their minds. Deep dissatisfaction with politics as usual has encouraged the emergence around the world of a new wave of anti-establishment populists and “non-politicians” whose main and often only claim to office is that they are different from those who went before. That may be true, but not in a positive way. Their behaviour frequently demeans the positions of responsibility they hold, mortifies their countries, and betrays the people who backed them. This is not change for the better. On the contrary, it further erodes confidence in democracy. What, for example, does Matteo Salvini, Italy’s far-right interior minister, think he is doing when he abuses Carola Rackete, the captain of a rescue ship, as “a rich and spoilt German girl”? Salvini was infuriated that, rather than leave 41 migrants to drown in the Mediterranean, Rackete brought them safely to shore in Lampedusa. His racist and slanderous attacks have encouraged death threats against Rackete and undermined Italy’s justice system. Salvini is a national disgrace. Or what did Rodrigo Duterte, who also pledged a fresh approach when elected Philippines president, imagine would happen after he unleashed death squads against drug dealers? Up to 20,000 people have died since 2016. The most recent is a three-year-old girl, Kateleen, killed last week in a police shootout. Asked about her death, a presidential crony, Ronald dela Rosa, said: “Shit happens.” Life is certainly different – and shorter – under Duterte. Like Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro and other reckless demagogues, the only change he brings is for the worse. For sheer mind-boggling idiocy, Donald Trump, the ultimate self-styled mould-breaker, takes some beating. His decision last week to turn Independence Day celebrations into a self-serving, militaristic reality show was a national embarrassment. As Trump preened and spouted about his own and America’s greatness, thousands of migrant children were held in inhuman conditions on the Mexican border. Like Salvini, he, too, is a disgrace. However, last week’s prize for the most ridiculous conduct in public office goes to Nigel Farage, Ann Widdecombe and the other Brexit party boors who turned their backs on the European parliament’s opening ceremony in Strasbourg. They shamed themselves and they shamed Britain. This is not the revolution they promised. This is mere loutishness.