Pre-season friendlies throw up plenty of unusual fixtures but not many people would expect to find Kuwait’s national football team in leafy Berkshire. But on a warm summer’s evening on the banks of the Thames there they were. Kuwait, who reached the World Cup finals in 1982, were up against Maidenhead United of the National League. Al Azraq (the Blue Wave) have also played Hungerford Town and Marlow in preparation for the West Asian Championship in Iraq next month and the 2022 World Cup AFC preliminary ties, in which Australia, Taiwan, Jordan and Nepal are Group B opponents. One match of their tour remains, a training game against a mix of Aston Villa’s first team and reserves on Thursday, after the friendly at Queens Park Rangers last Saturday was cancelled because of a “misunderstanding”. Kuwait beat Marlow and Hungerford but lost 1-0 against Maidenhead, all under the watchful gaze of their Croatian head coach, Romeo Jozak. “My initiative was to make a good strong camp and the federation came up with the idea to play in England,” says Jozak, who wanted to test his young players in new conditions and against playing styles they may encounter in future. “England is the cradle of football. When they said England, I said ‘yes’ right away.” Kuwait chose not to play QPR after arriving at the Championship club’s training ground to discover they were to face a far younger team than they had expected. “It’s just a matter of the cultural respect and a mutual understanding,” says Jozak, though he describes it as “not a big deal”. A year into a two-year contract Jozak hopes to lift Kuwait from their current Fifa ranking of 156. World football’s governing body banned the tiny Gulf nation from 2015 to 2017 citing government interference but ended the suspension after noting that the “Kuwait parliament has adopted a new sports law”, which it said complied with its statutes. The scale of Jozak’s task was apparent last October when Kuwait were beaten 4-0 at home by Australia in a friendly. “It was one month after I took over the team and even at that stage I said it wasn’t realistic,” the 46-year-old says. “We lost that game because we had a couple of bad luck moments. But Kuwait is not the team it was a year ago. We’re going to be definitely stronger. I have a good feeling and I’m happy that we’ve been a team so long now and I’m expecting an interesting situation in the [World Cup] group.” Injury forced Jozak into early retirement as a player. He then spent time getting qualified on and off the pitch. Not many coaches hold a doctorate in kinesiology but Jozak, who speaks Spanish, German and English, plays down his academic achievements. “I always wanted to have a scientific confirmation about what I think, what I know, what I’m going to teach and propose,” he says. “Yes, I do have a PhD and they call me Dr Romeo, Dr Jozak. I don’t call myself that way; it’s just one asset. I am proud of that because it was not easy to finish – it was tough alongside a career, with a family, with three kids.” Early in his coaching career with the Croatian Football Federation, Jozak worked with many talented youngsters but the rise of three of them – Luka Modric, Mario Mandzukic and Vedran Corluka – would pleasantly surprise him. “I’ve seen all these guys when they were like this,” he says, holding out a hand to show their height as children. “They were short but they were growing. I remember Corluka was 14, Luka was 14, Mandzukic was 13 … Luka himself when you see him at the age of 17, young, short, skinny, a guy who was full of passion, full of drive, full of aspiration to make something. Me as a young coach, I wasn’t sure he was going to make it. Yes, he was smelling something good and I’m happy to be part of that now when I see them on the big scene. When I saw them in [the 2018 World Cup in] Russia, I had goosebumps. “Those little guys were still … ‘Coach, can you tie my boots ?’ or something. Now you see them like that. When we see each other now, it’s a feeling you can’t even describe. We’re in touch, I hear from Luka, we get along very well, we do keep in touch. They have their families; there is still a mutual respect. I’m still in a way the coach to them.” Jozak would love to unearth similar talent in Kuwait but the absence of a professional league is a worry. “Most of the players are, let’s say, artificially professional because they’re getting paid, they’re training, but still not officially professional. So for the future of Kuwait football, I think that would be a huge asset to me.” He has nevertheless identified emerging talent. “I think a couple of them have potential to go out of the Kuwaiti league to the stronger leagues, like Saudi Arabia, even the European leagues. But I do have three players I like; I think they have the potential to play at the higher level, in England even.” He describes managing Kuwait as “an honour” and says: “I’ve adapted. We have a good connection, we have a good chemistry, which I think is very important in a national team. We’re rising, we’re maturing, we’re getting better and better.”