I have been in hospital in Redditch all week. My dad has not been well and I am proving myself to be a loyal but not especially competent carer, lacking as I do patience, bravery and basic organisational skills. Most of my experience of hospitals has been restricted to the big teaching institutions, such as King’s College and University College hospitals in London, and the Queen Elizabeth in Birmingham. I have friends who trained and work in these places, and several others who have been treated in them. I suppose if I had driven past the Alexandra hospital in Redditch at any time I would have sniffed at it. Who would want to work in a hospital like that? Who would want to be treated there, for heaven’s sake? I pulled into the car park on Monday carrying my casual prejudices along with my dad’s pyjamas. The building is somewhat unprepossessing, tucked away near the fringes of the new town sprawl. As far as I could see, there were no parts of it named after famous alumni. There were no oil paintings, busts or statues of eminent physicians and surgeons who have plied their trade here. A sure sign of clinical mediocrity, I would have thought. But, having spent a few long days here, I have come across several people – clinicians, cleaners, whatever – who I would happily chisel statues of with my own bare hands, if I only knew how. I have no idea how the Alexandra rates in terms of facilities, waiting times, outcomes and whatnot, but I do know I wouldn’t have Dad anywhere else. There is a self-help book you may have come across called The Subtle Art of Not Giving a F*ck. I understand the point the book makes, but this place has made me want to write a different one called The Absolutely Critical Importance of Giving a F*ck. I am generally in awe of doctors’ expertise, with all their great learning, but to see how they really, actually care trumps the exam passes every time. Is their capacity to care examined? Does it wane in time? Can it be learned in the first place? And then there are the nurses who I must be spooking, as my eyes follow them around the ward all day, slack-jawed in wonder and admiration at their energy and quite relentless compassion. Time after time I hear them asked by patients to do things to which my response would certainly be: “Really? Do I have to? Honestly, I’d rather not, if it’s OK with you.” But they smile, chirp an improbably cheery “Of course!” and get on with it. Next to most beds sit friends and relatives, just being there. A patient across from us on the ward has had his wife by his side all day every day, radiating quite unspeakable tenderness. Hearing me praise the nurses, she just looked round, smiled and said: “You’re a bloody brown nose, you are.” And with that, she turned back to her bloke. As I was fighting the parking ticket machine last night, an old woman smoking in a wheelchair next to it said: “Oh, sorry bab, you won’t get no joy out of that. It’s buggered.” Even she seemed to genuinely care. It’s not for me to advise Worcestershire acute hospitals NHS trust on its branding, but I have a suggestion for the sign at the entrance: Alexandra hospital – where everybody definitely gives a f*ck. It seems to me everything would be so much easier for all concerned at the hospital if most of the patients weren’t so hard of hearing. All day long I see – and hear – nurses and doctors trying to convey pretty critical information with plainly limited success. Obviously, on wards with several beds the medics can’t holler at their charges loudly enough for them to hear without everyone else in the ward – and other wards, and long corridors – hearing too. And most patients are too polite to seek clarification, for fear of taking up any more of the doctors’ time. Hearing aids are obviously one answer, but in my family’s experience it seems you need to spend a fortune to get anything decent, and we all live our lives with a discordant symphony of bleeps, squeaks and whistles singing in the background. Learning some sign language would help, but that requires both speaker and listener to have the same level of competence. I often wonder why lip-reading classes aren’t compulsory – and free – for everyone on, say, their 55th birthday. It’s not the whole answer, but what harm would it do any of us? We are all heading toward some level of deafness, after all, so let’s get ourselves ready for it in every way we can. Thanks to the internet, I have already made a start on this project here on ward six lunatically mouthing away at my iPhone, attracting pitying looks from patients in the beds opposite. It passes the time. This sitting-by–a–hospital–bed business is like what soldiers say war is all about: hours of tedium punctuated with occasional moments of terror. I’ll mouth that to the head nurse when she next comes past. She’s sick of the sound of my voice anyway.