“The deaf don’t believe in silence,” proclaims a supplementary note in Ilya Kaminsky’s Deaf Republic (Faber, £10.99), shortlisted for this year’s Forward prize for best collection. “Silence is the invention of the hearing.” Falling somewhere between poetry collection and morality play, this unusual book’s episodic vignettes form a narrative that explores how we think about silence – as rebellion, but also as fearful failure to act: “We lived happily during the war / and when they bombed other people’s houses, we / protested / but not enough”. Kaminsky, who lost most of his hearing at the age of four, left the former Soviet Union as a teenager and was granted asylum in the US; his tale of upheaval in an occupied territory speaks to our current political anxieties. But Deaf Republic imaginatively succeeds through its use of deafness as extended metaphor, when voices clamour and truth becomes “fake news”. Like the townsfolk he writes about, who invent a sign language as a riposte to atrocity and unrest, Kaminsky’s fluid yet fragmented verse drama is a novel response to conflict and miscommunication, hoping for peace rather than “silence, like the bullet that’s missed us”. Also on the shortlist is another collection that approaches divisive politics with humanity and warmth: Vidyan Ravinthiran’s The Million-Petalled Flower of Being Here (Bloodaxe, £9.95). Formally assured but far from formulaic, this book of sonnets for the poet’s wife is testament, at its best, to the ways in which poetry can reach from the particular to the universal. Moving and inviting in their conversational ease, Ravinthiran’s sonnets stretch from the grounding details of life for a mixed-race couple in England today – “over the years we’d find the money / but in that area no one smiled at us” – to thoughtfully touch on themes of identity, class, work and community. If references to the Tough Mudder endurance event, Super Mario and Brexit seem strenuously current, they also authenticate poems that manage to be both hard‑thinking and sensitive, wondering at “the ways we love and hurt one another”. As the sea cockle depicted on the book’s cover suggests, Isabel Galleymore’s Significant Other (Carcanet, £9.99), on the Forward shortlist for best first collection, worries at both human and non-human relations. Attentive to the natural world through imagistic lyrics – a robin “a road sign / with a fire warning / in its breast”; crickets exploring “an astronaut’s grasp of gravity” – these abundant poems recall the work of Jen Hadfield and Alice Oswald. But Galleymore can also be distinctive. “Choosing” is the book’s manifesto piece, exalting the “eight million differently constructed hearts” of Earth’s species, and yet it is the quieter poems that resonate. “A Stranger” takes the past felling of elms on a road as a metaphor for our human love: “an old yawn in the earth” that is “easy to walk past”. The Hillsborough disaster remains the worst tragedy in British sporting history, claiming the lives of 96 football fans in a human crush in Sheffield. Yet it was the subsequent collusion of government, police and media in wrongly blaming the fans that has made it a shameful national wound that refuses to heal. A second inquest in 2016, nearly three decades after the event, finally vindicated the victims and their families, and it is from the eyewitness testimony of those whose lives were variously and irrevocably changed that David Cain’s debut Truth Street (Smokestack, £7.99), also on the first collection shortlist, emerges. Creating a verbatim verse drama from the accounts of fans, relatives, police and others, Cain allows the plain poetry of witness to speak for itself. “Their dad was not a hooligan, but a hardworking family man,” recounts one speaker. “They only went to watch a game of football.” Truth Street is a vital artistic contribution in helping us to understand the complexity of everyday lives behind newspaper headlines and convenient lies. • Ben Wilkinson’s Way More Than Luck is published by Seren. The Forward winners are announced in October.