For all the tension, there was never a moment in Saturday’s King George when I really believed Crystal Ocean was going to win it. I think that’s how it was for most observers and it has fed into our collective response to the race; he has been acknowledged for his part in making a thrilling contest but the pile of bouquets thrown in his direction does not compare with the floral mountain being heaped up in front of Enable. This is, of course, terribly unjust because, as Talking Horses regulars know only too well, he was carrying 3lb more than her. According to the official BHA scale, 3lb equates to two lengths in mile and a half races. On the bare facts of Saturday’s result, Crystal Ocean is a marginally better horse than Enable. Perhaps she’d have found more if required in the closing stages; her jockey made less use of the whip than his. But I reckon that, all other things being as they were on Saturday, Crystal Ocean would have won that race at level weights. Setting such provocative thoughts to one side, let’s take a moment to weigh up Crystal Ocean and ensure that he gets his due, despite the indignity of defeat. Since the race, I’ve seen people referring to him as a “Group Three horse” as a means of insisting on the superiority of their heroine. These people should ask themselves if they really have any natural fondness for horses, because he is undoubtedly a magnificent beast. Crystal Ocean has run 16 times and never finished worse than third. Yes, he has failed in four of his five attempts in Group Ones but only one of those was an emphatic defeat. He was beaten just half a length in the Leger and has been held at bay by a neck in the King George for the past two years. Ah yes, the Leger of 2017. Crystal Ocean couldn’t beat Capri that day but it’s worth listing some of those who finished behind him in one of the best runnings of the Doncaster Classic: Stradivarius, Rekindling (who won the Melbourne Cup next time), Coronet and Defoe. Like many a Sir Michael Stoute-trained horse before him, Crystal Ocean has toughened up with age. His Royal Ascot defeat of Magical was impressively game and his appetite for a battle shows no sign of losing its edge. Only when he trailed Cracksman by six lengths last year could you say he’d had an off day. The four best runs of his career yielded Racing Post Ratings of 129, 128, 128 and 127. Enable’s top four have been 129, 128, 127 and 126. Like it or not, Enable fans, they’re practically as good as each other and, not to come over all Kevin Keegan, I would love it, love it if they both showed up in the Arc. I think his owner will, in the end, prefer to send him somewhere she isn’t running. But if Crystal Ocean runs at Longchamp, then she’s got to go there and do something. We’re back on the bread and butter, for one day only before Goodwood starts, but there’s plenty of flavour in the card at Ayr. Obviously, there’s Land Of Oz (3.00), a well-bred Sir Mark Prescott horse who started handicaps on a low mark and, surprise, surprise, won such a race at the second attempt. The extra distance will help and these mostly older horses will have their hands full trying to contain him, which is why he’s even-money. There’s 14-1 available about Royal Shaheen (4.30), down from the early 40-1. He comes from the Alistair Whillans yard that had nary a winner between January and the start of this month but has had four (including one over jumps) in the past fortnight. We haven’t seen Royal Shaheen since mid-June and the stable’s fortunes have revived considerably since then. He’s 5lb below the mark from which he made all to win this race last year. A couple of excuses could be made for the Chester defeat suffered by Luzum (3.30) last time and he still looks well treated. I’ll chance Mick Easterby’s runner at 8-1. Jackamundo (4.00) takes on a Godolphin favourite and perhaps he’ll be outclassed but odds of 4-1 understate the chance of this progressive type who is two from two since being stepped up to this distance on softish ground. You can get 11-4 about Nigg Bay (6.50) at Ffos Las, from the Johnny Levins yard that has won with its last three runners and has a 27% strike-rate in Britain. This one had just a head in hand, as it were, when he scored on his British debut at Ayr three weeks ago but he’s only been raised 3lb and the runner-up has since won twice. Later on the card, Craneur (8.00) may be worth a look at 2-1. He put up a career best at Salisbury last time when run out of it close home by Hydroplane, another Sir Mark production who has since won twice more. Ayr 2.00 Makyon 2.30 Sienna Dream 3.00 Land Of Oz (nb) 3.30 Luzum 4.00 Jackamundo 4.30 Royal Shaheen 5.05 Jacob's Pillow Newton Abbot 2.15 Parody 2.45 Fifty Shades 3.15 Chapmanshype 3.45 Teaser 4.15 Ourmullion 4.45 As You Like 5.15 Josie Abbing Windsor 5.00 Aria Rose 5.35 Bright Red 6.05 Smokey Bear 6.40 Mukha Magic 7.15 Typhoon Ten 7.50 Molls Memory 8.20 Mums Hope Ffos Las 5.10 Delachance 5.45 Berlin Tango 6.15 Young General 6.50 Nigg Bay (nap) 7.25 Dell' Arca 8.00 Craneur 8.30 Cuttin' Edge