An earlier, more miserable, version of this column started by saying that my son’s birthday fell on the hottest day of the year. This is true, and, in many ways, provided for a decidedly suboptimal experience. In our infinite wisdom, we’d planned to have a party in a park that was near enough to our house to be walkable but which, in 34C heat, was now becoming a slightly daunting trip. None of this was helped by all the stuff we carried, me with two huge bags-for-life filled with toys and party bits, while my wife, her father and sister, hauled blankets, treats and the cheapest gazebo we could find. We looked for all the world as if we’d just dismounted some battered old donkeys bearing pots and pans by their sides. Because heat makes me dramatic, within minutes of leaving the house I had started to fear this trip would end with my withered lungs ejecting out of my mouth so that their last dusty breaths would be as external organs. Once on the bus I forced us all to get, I suffered the curse of prayers answered, upon remembering – eight years into my London residence – that TFL’s lack of air-conditioning had left us sealed inside a giant metal tube, in heavy traffic, within licking distance of 80 other ill-tempered, overheated humans. By the time we got to the park I was seeping like a trodden sponge. Drenched, I set about assembling the gazebo, which started off looking like one of those hazmat tents you see at crime scenes, but quickly transformed into one of those hazmat tents you see at crime scenes, only covered in bunting and balloons. More than once while being erected, a mess of ropes, pegs and tubing threatened to twang out fists and twat nearby sunbathers in the head. It was, in short, the perfect combination of stresses and failures for any sad-sack columnist who makes his living cataloguing his own inadequacies as a parent. Which is why, just this once, I feel dutybound to resist that urge since I spent the entire day watching my son smiling and eating cake, so I was as happy as I’ve ever been. As he finally enters single digits, I find myself marvelling at the joy I could take from a day that involved a 5am start, the heaving of goods, un-air-conditioned travel, and the forced assembly of a recalcitrant gazebo. I hope this sense of exaltation wears off slightly so I can return to whinging about the smaller things, but for now I’ll toast the fact that, with one year under my belt, the joy I get from being his dad is not just that grand, cosmic sense of fatherly love Facebook is currently exploiting to sell me funeral insurance, but also the simpler appreciation for the everyday toil and drudgery I so often decry. And if that doesn’t make for a happy birthday, I don’t know what does. Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeats