What have they done so far? Nowhere near enough. Teenage striker Gabriel Martinelli has arrived from regional football in Brazil and is expected to need some adaptation and development time. David Ospina has departed for a modest fee. What do they still need to do? Lots. They are chasing width, defensive reinforcements and a box-to-box midfielder but so far negotiations are proving troublesome. Equally key is the need to shift unwanted players – also troublesome. Budget this summer £40m. Amy Lawrence What have they done so far? Been busier than anyone and will soon have spent the best part of £100m. Seven players and counting have signed, reflecting the desire to strengthen a squad that has just won promotion but also fill the many gaps left after a clear-out at the end of last season. Jota, Anwar El Ghazi, Kortney Hause, Matt Targett, Ezri Konsa, Tyrone Mings and Wesley are the new arrivals … so far. What do they still need to do? Douglas Luiz is poised to join from Manchester City and Björn Engels, the Reims defender, could well follow. Budget this summer Approximately £100m. Stuart James What have they done so far? Eddie Howe has freshened up his back line by again dipping into the Football League to sign the young and versatile defenders Lloyd Kelly, 20, and Jack Stacey, 23, who will compete for the left-back and right-back berths respectively. Fringe players Tyrone Mings, Emerson Hyndman and Connor Mahoney have departed. What do they still need to do? The key will be holding on to their indispensables: Callum Wilson, Ryan Fraser and Nathan Aké. The No 1 shirt remains fairly open; Jack Butland is among the goalkeepers of interest while Artur Boruc has signed a new contract to take him beyond his 40th birthday. Budget £20m. Ben Fisher What have they done so far? Another summer, another club-record fee, with Leandro Trossard an £18m arrival from Genk. Brighton hope the Belgian winger, who scored 17 goals in all competitions last season, will provide further firepower. They have also bolstered their defence with the signing of the talented 22-year-old centre-back Matt Clarke, who was a big hit at Portsmouth. What do they still need to do? With Bruno retiring, links to a loan move for the Chelsea defender Reece James make sense. Keeping Lewis Dunk will be crucial, especially if Graham Potter plans to, as expected, play with a three-man defence. The highly rated Ben White has joined Leeds on loan. Budget £20m. BF What have they done so far? More than this time last year. They have brought Jay Rodriguez home from West Bromwich Albion and signed Erik Pieters from Stoke as cover for Charlie Taylor following the departure of left-back Stephen Ward. Peter Crouch and Jon Walters have both been released. What do they still need to do? Not too much unless Aston Villa succeed in buying goalkeeper Tom Heaton or big offers come in for the teenage winger Dwight McNeil. Sean Dyche is reasonably happy with the balance of his squad. Budget this summer Without sales, up to £20m. Paul Wilson What have they done so far? Their only ‘new’ incoming business was Mateo Kovacic’s move from Real Madrid, given Christian Pulisic joined back in January, but they have secured Ruben Loftus-Cheek to new terms. Significantly, though, they have sold Eden Hazard as well as some fringe players and agreed a deal that will take Álvaro Morata to Atlético Madrid permanently at the end of the season. What do they still need to do? They cannot make any further signings given their transfer ban but assessments will be made on which players will depart on loan. Budget this summer Not really applicable. Dominic Fifield What have they done so far? Sold Aaron Wan-Bissaka to Manchester United for around £45m, parted with a few experienced squad players under freedom of contract (Jason Puncheon, Julián Speroni and Bakary Sako) and recruited Stephen Henderson from Nottingham Forest as third-choice goalkeeper. What do they still need to do? Deflect Arsenal’s interest and somehow appease Wilfried Zaha to stay, and secure Luka Milivojevic to new terms. Jordan Ayew is close to signing permanently from Swansea, but the club will still strive to secure a new right-back, striker and a creative forward. They will need many more if Zaha does leave. Budget this summer The money raised through Wan-Bissaka’s sale, and the leeway granted to the wage bill by the flurry of quieter departures. DF What have they done so far? Turning André Gomes’ loan spell into a permanent stay was a priority for Marco Silva and achieved with minimum fuss for a reasonable fee. Jonas Lössl has also arrived on a free from relegated Huddersfield as backup to first-choice goalkeeper, Jordan Pickford. What do they still need to do? Turn Kurt Zouma’s loan spell into a permanent stay or, if Chelsea refuse to sell, secure another central defender. “After that position we have three or four more [areas] to strengthen,” said the Everton manager at the weekend. A message to the board if ever there was one. Budget this summer Not as substantial as previous summers and there is a need to reduce the wage bill. Andy Hunter What have they done so far? Some impressive business, most notably the club-record signing of Youri Tielemans from Monaco for a fee of around £40m. Tielemans, who was superb on loan last season, appears to be a real coup for Leicester. They have also signed Ayoze Pérez from Newcastle for £30m to add more goals to the team and paid Luton £6m for James Justin, a highly rated 21-year-old right-back. What do they still need to do? Hold on to Harry Maguire, which will be easier said than done, and find homes for a number of out-of-favour, highly paid fringe players. Adding another midfielder is also a possibility. Budget this summer Approximately £100m. SJ What have they done so far? Very little from a position of strength as European champions. Liverpool invested heavily last year – on new faces and new contracts for existing stars – and have so far concentrated on young talent such as 17-year-old defender Sepp van den Berg and 16-year-old Harvey Elliott. What do they still need to do? There are no glaring weaknesses to address in a team that gathered 97 points plus the Champions League last season although defensive cover is required, especially if Dejan Lovren departs. Budget this summer Last year’s world record profit was reinvested in Jürgen Klopp’s squad plus the new £50m training complex under construction in Kirkby, but the manager will be backed if his first-choice targets become available. AH What have they done so far? Triggered Rodri’s €65m release clause to take the 23-year-old defensive midfielder from Atlético Madrid. Decided Leicester City’s £75m-plus valuation of Harry Maguire is too much (for the moment). What do they still need to do? Resolve the Maguire/centre-back situation following Vincent Kompany’s departure. Budget £150m. Jamie Jackson What have they done so far? Began promisingly with the signing of two 21-year-olds: pacey winger, Daniel James, who cost £15m from Swansea City; and Aaron Wan-Bissaka, a swift right-back for £45m from Crystal Palace. What do they still need to do? Buy a centre-back – Harry Maguire is the prime target – and solve the Paul Pogba headache: there is less than four weeks left of the window so, if he is to leave, Ole Gunnar Solskjær needs to find a replacement quickly. The same equation is true of the wantaway striker Romelu Lukaku. Budget £100m plus funds generated from any player sales. JJ What have they done so far? Precisely nothing on the incoming front, having been without a manager since the departure of Rafa Benítez. New signings are said to be in the pipeline once the vacancy has been filled and straightaway the new manager must set to work replacing goalscorers Ayoze Pérez and Salomón Rondón and out-of-contract midfielder Mohamed Diamé. What do they still need to do? Find out how much money is available for strengthening. The £30m raised from the sale of Pérez could double if Sean Longstaff joins Manchester United, but that does not mean the new manager will be granted a war-chest and free rein. Budget Possibly £30m. Even Mike Ashley must realise players need to be replaced. PW What have they done so far? An understudy for Teemu Pukki has arrived in the shape of Swiss forward Josep Drmic. There is also competition for Tim Krul in goal with the signing of long-standing Schalke No 1 Ralf Fährmann. Norwich have also taken Manchester City’s Patrick Roberts on loan, the winger having previously starred for Celtic What do they still need to do? Top targets are a first-choice defensive midfielder, and cover for youngster Max Aarons at right-back. But there remains expectation that another forward may yet be acquired and Hull’s Jarrod Bowen and Málaga’s Javier Ontiveros have been linked. Budget this summer £35m. Paul MacInnes What have they done so far? Luke Freeman arrived from QPR for a club-record fee in excess of £4m and then the Blades broke their transfer record again for the Preston forward Callum Robinson. Phil Jagielka has returned on a free, 12 years after he departed the club for Everton. Ravel Morrison has been on trial. What do they still need to do? More firepower remains key with Brentford’s Neal Maupay and Swansea’s Ollie McBurnie the top targets – both would cost in excess of £10m. Goalkeeper Dean Henderson is set to return on loan from Manchester United and further midfield options are needed, with Nottingham Forest’s Ben Osborn and Coventry’s Tom Bayliss on the radar. Budget Not huge. Chris Wilder will probably have to break the club’s transfer record again over the summer but he will be shopping in League One and the Championship. John Ashdown What have they done so far? They have made the loan of Danny Ings from Liverpool permanent and added Che Adams and Moussa Djenepo – two attacking players that fit the Ralph Hasenhüttl prototype, being young, fast, intelligent and comfortable with a high-pressing style. They have recouped £14m by selling Matt Targett to Aston Villa. What do they still need to do? Hasenhüttl is likely to add a couple more but he could be more active with outgoing business. The club will listen to offers for Fraser Forster, Wesley Hoedt, Jordy Clasie (who will return to Holland), Mario Lemina, Sofiane Boufal, Charlie Austin and Guido Carrillo. Budget The club’s Chinese owners oversaw a profit on transfers from their first three windows. Balanced books are their rationale. David Hytner What have they done so far? They have made a good start, signing Mauricio Pochettino’s No 1 target – the midfielder Tanguy Ndombele – for a club-record £55m and also adding the winger Jack Clarke, although he has been loaned back to Leeds. What do they still need to do? Pochettino wants to add the Fulham left-sided player, Ryan Sessegnon and, ideally, an attack-minded midfielder but much will now depend on generating funds, meaning that the situation of the wantaway midfielder, Christian Eriksen, is pivotal. While Eriksen is in limbo, so are Spurs. Budget See above. They have already more than spent it. They could raise further funds by selling Toby Alderweireld and/or Kieran Trippier. DH What have they done so far? The only senior signings are the 38-year-old goalkeeper Heurelho Gomes, not exactly a new face but certainly a popular one, who was convinced to postpone his retirement for a year, and the 29-year-old centre-back Craig Dawson, who arrived from West Brom for a fee of about £5m. There have also been a handful additions to the development squad, including the former Arsenal defender Bayli Spencer-Adams and the 19-year-old Leeds striker Sam Dalby. What do they still need to do? The priorities at the start of the window were to augment central defence and to add pace and width in attack. Further defensive signings are possible but the focus of late has been on Ismaïla Sarr, the 21-year-old Rennes winger. Sarr is reportedly willing to join, though a fee has yet to be agreed with his club and the player’s participation with Senegal at the Africa Cup of Nations has complicated the transfer. Budget £40m Simon Burnton What have they done so far? Pablo Fornals was an exciting addition – the attacking midfielder joined for £24m from Villarreal and helped Spain win the Under-21 European Championships last month – but all was quiet until Marko Arnautovic kicked up another stink and forced a move to Shanghai SIPG. What they need to do? Sign a striker. The sale of Arnautovic leaves a gaping hole up front and there is growing anxiety after Maxi Gómez snubbed them to join Valencia. West Ham have since turned their attention to Eintracht Frankfurt’s Sébastien Haller and have also been linked with a loan move for Gonzalo Higuaín of Juventus. Budget £45m. Jacob Steinberg What have they done so far? On the face of it very little. There is an argument that Raúl Jiménez and Leander Dendoncker are new signings (listed as such on the Premier League website), but it was April when Wolves triggered a pre-agreed option to make the Mexican’s loan permanent, and there was an obligation to buy in last summer’s loan agreement for the Belgium international. Either way, Nuno Espírito Santo, the Wolves manager, wants to bring in up to four new players. So far, an inflated transfer market has left the club frustrated. What do they still need to do? Add quality to a thin squad that will be stretched by Europa League participation. That said, Nuno prefers to operate with only 18 first-team players. Another striker and centre-back would seem to be priorities. Budget Hard to say, approximately £60m. SJ