Jeremy Corbyn is owed an apology, and when he meets Mark Sedwill, the head of the civil service, he will presumably get one. Senior civil servants are not supposed to gossip to journalists, which means that whoever supplied Saturday’s Times with comments about longstanding rumours of the Labour leader’s supposed physical and mental unfitness to become prime minister simply doesn’t have a leg to stand on. Downing Street’s unexpectedly strong intervention in Corbyn’s defence, with No 10 arguing that it would “be inappropriate and unacceptable for comments of this sort to have been made or briefed to the press”, underlines how seriously the concept of political neutrality or civil service willingness to serve without judgment is taken. But let’s clear about what Sedwill should, and should not, be clamping down on here. Rumours have been flying for months not only about Corbyn’s physical health, which the leader’s office categorically denies, but more broadly about his intellectual capacity; his ability to master an endless series of complex briefs and take timely decisions on difficult issues, while simultaneously managing a sometimes fractious party and dealing with whatever unexpected crisis blows up. Some of that speculation has centred unfairly on his age, but some has more to do with the way he has led his party to date. Corbyn is absolutely entitled to expect civil servants picking up on this gossip – and unless they were living under a rock, nobody working at Westminster could have missed it – not to make it public, especially where it is ill-founded. But expecting civil servants, thinking ahead to the possibility of dealing with a new boss, not to discuss between themselves something that journalists and MPs have been privately discussing all summer? That would be not only impossible to enforce, but as a broader principle potentially dangerous. Take Corbyn out of the equation for a moment, and there is a wider question here about how government machines should in general respond to the prospect of being run by a democratically elected person about whom they nonetheless have some legitimate concerns. For years, British civil servants have watched the current White House struggle with the ethical and constitutional dilemmas thrown up by working for a president who was the choice of the people but is arguably wholly lacking in the qualities needed for the job. By autumn, Whitehall could find itself serving a new Conservative administration whose stated objective is a no-deal Brexit regardless of the consequences – or even, following a referendum, conceivably for a government with a democratic mandate to pursue one. If so, there will be sleepless nights ahead for some of those whose job is to follow political orders regardless of any personal misgivings. Civil servants do have some powers to resist decisions they believe to be dangerous for the country – in extremis, they can ask ministers to formally instruct them to follow any directive breaching legal regularity, propriety, value for money or feasibility – but those safeguards are limited. It is not inconceivable that Brexit will test them to breaking point. Would we expect civil servants not to discuss this behind closed doors, too? None of this justifies attempting to sway the results of a pending general election, or for that matter an internal party election. (If you think Westminster isn’t also alive with chatter about the impact of Boris Johnson’s divorce and new relationship on his judgment, some of it doubtless as ill-founded or coloured by ideological hostility as anything said about Corbyn, then think again). But scurrilous gossip doth not by itself a coup in the planning make, and while Sedwill should apologise unreservedly for private conversations becoming public, it would set a dangerous future precedent to apologise for such impure thoughts being voiced in the first place. Those who seek ultimate power can expect to face impertinent, even unreasonable questions, and they can also expect conclusions to be drawn from the way they respond. The stakes are simply too high now for it to be otherwise. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist