England have announced their intention to have fun at this World Cup, and now – for a few days at least – they truly can. This defeat of Jamaica here in Liverpool has effectively secured them a semi-final spot, in their first of this week’s matches. For Jamaica, however, it was almost certainly the end of the dream – after their surprise defeat to South Africa on Sunday it will be the first time since 1995 that they have not made it into the knockout rounds. That is a major blow for a team who came into this tournament ranked second in the world and with great expectations of their first trophy in 15 attempts. Still, their captain, Jhaniele Fowler, took a deep breath and a philosophical stance. “We’re devastated, we’re disappointed because we wanted to go further,” she said. “But what can we do? We’re not going to kill ourselves.” Jamaica went toe-to-toe with England throughout the first half, pulling back every time their opponents began to pull away. They even held the lead, briefly, in the second quarter, in a game where bodies regularly bounced off each other and fell to the ground – especially around England’s shooting circle, where Jamaica’s prodigious young defender Shamera Sterling tried to make life hard for the veteran combination of Jo Harten and Helen Housby. An even more crucial fight was happening at the other end, where Geva Mentor took on Fowler. If England’s goalkeeper – the best defender in the world – could not keep her rival away from the posts, then no one could. At 6ft 6in, Fowler is always an imposing figure on court in most games although it is also fair to say she is not a player who exerts unnecessary energy. While Mentor fluttered around her, or flew out of the circle to effect flying intercepts on an unsuspecting wing defence, the Jamaican waited patiently. Under the posts, however, she is a stone-cold killer. Her arm reached so close to the net that she popped balls in as if she was casually putting cans away on her kitchen shelf – and yet she could still seem unhappy with the result. She said afterwards that if she looked frustrated, it was at herself, but that was surely a kindness to her teammates. She did not miss a single shot – 43 in total. Jamaica were always on the fightback, having started scrappily, but England were making their own mistakes and by the end of the first quarter there was just a goal between the sides. It was only after half-time that Jamaica’s defence began to crumble against England’s relentless midfield pressure, Serena Guthrie hassling Nicole Dixon at centre. Harten paid tribute to Sterling, the 24-year-old who has become famed in the game for her intercepts, but England handled that threat well and there were few of her tricks on display. Instead, it was Harten who pulled off magical feats, popping up in spaces that had not existed seconds previously as if she should be accompanied by a puff of smoke. Guthrie, the England captain, said: “If we’d lost to Jamaica the pressure would have been on. We now can afford to do things like rest people, mix up combos and work on some new things.” She barely needed to add that they also plan to enjoy the tournament more. Northern Ireland began their second round with their second close defeat in two days, after Malawi closed them out with an impressive display in the final 15 minutes of a tough-fought game. Northern Ireland came into this tournament ranked one place above Malawi, and twice they had their opponents within two goals, clawing back a nine-goal deficit in the third quarter. But wayward shooting cost them against a team that was not missing – their comparative averages of 74% and 92% was the ultimate difference between the sides. Dan Ryan, the coach, said his side would keep their disappointment in perspective and that Northern Ireland had “showed a sense of character” after an emotional two-goal defeat to Zimbabwe on Sunday. “It was about how you show up and stand up. We rode a contest against a great side. We needed to tweak a few things, but it was about a response and we responded beautifully.” There was disappointment, too, for Scotland, who lost to South Africa – who remain unbeaten in this tournament – by 28 goals. The Thistles have struggled to find consistency in their play and on Wednesday face Jamaica, who will be playing for pride, and their stated goal of a top-eight finish is ebbing away.