New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern will raise the deportation of Kiwis from Australia on character grounds when she meets Scott Morrison, saying the issue was having a “corrosive” effect on relations between the neighbouring countries. Ardern was due to hold talks with the Australian prime minister on Friday morning and the issue will be discussed alongside terrorism, trade and the Pacific step-up. But her plea is likely to fall on deaf ears, after the home affairs minister Peter Dutton defended the deportation policy and the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, said Labor “[hasn’t] argued for change in this area”. “We have seen cases where there is also almost no connection of an individual to New Zealand who have been deported,” Ardern told reporters in Melbourne on Thursday. “I consider that to be a corrosive part of that policy. And it’s having a corrosive effect on our relationship.” The 2014 changes to Australian law mandated the automatic cancellation of a visa for anyone sentenced to 12 months or more in jail. In the past five years more than 4,000 people have been stripped of their Australian visas and returned to their country of birth, regardless of how long ago they left. New Zealanders have made up the vast bulk of the deportations. On Friday Dutton said “we need to stand up for Australians and the New Zealand prime minister is rightly doing that for her people”. “But where we have Australian citizens who are falling victim in certain circumstances where people are sexually offending against children for example, we have had a big push to try to deport those paedophiles and people who have committed those crimes,” he told Channel Nine’s Today program. Albanese said “the balance is essentially right but it is legitimate if there are issues for Jacinda Ardern to raise those with Scott Morrison”. “We don’t want to see this to be a partisan debate. New Zealand is a very good friend of Australia.” Ardern received a rock star welcome from a packed Melbourne Town Hall where she delivered an address on why good government matters on Thursday evening. During her speech, she said politicians should not be stoking a climate of fear and hate. “We have choices as politicians in a political environment, you can either choose to capitalise on that fear, stoke it and politically benefit from it,” she said. “Or you can run a counter-narrative, you can talk about hope.” During the address she reflected on the importance of building consensus in politics. “To be truly transformational in government you have to build consensus. People have to actually decide what you’ve done should stick, otherwise it’s gone,” Ardern said, adding she hopes her government can build a lasting legacy on reducing child poverty and action on climate change. Asked what it will take to get meaningful global action on climate change, Ardern responded: “a visit to the Pacific islands”. “If you visit Kiribati or Tuvalu, it is real. This is not a hypothetical. The changes they’re seeing in their natural environment are happening now.” Ardern was reluctant to offer Australia any advice on its journey towards Indigenous constitutional recognition because she said New Zealand had an imperfect record when it came to the Māori people. “We’re not ones to lecture,” she said. The 38-year-old leader lamented there were too many Māori children in state care and adults in prisons. “That really is an acknowledgement of the failings in our system, we need to address that, acknowledge that and change that. It’s taken us too long to date,” she said. Ardern was widely lauded for her empathy following the Christchurch attacks in March. She brushed off the international attention her behaviour garnered, telling the audience, it was a very Kiwi response and she was mirroring exactly what was happening all over the country. “I was saddened by it, it shouldn’t have been noteworthy,” she said. It’s understood the prime minister’s schedule won’t permit her to take time to see the mural in Brunswick, which depicts the iconic moment she hugged a Muslim woman. https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2019/apr/10/liberal-party-facebook-ads-falsely-claim-labor-wants-to-tax-cars