ITV is to air two series a year of Love Island as the broadcaster looks to bolster declining TV ad revenues with a winter version of the hit reality show. The broadcaster, which reported a 5% fall in total advertising revenue in the first half of 2019 to £849m, said that from 2020 an additional series of of the show would be broadcasted during the British winter. The first winter edition of Love Island will be filmed in a villa in South Africa and is scheduled for broadcast early in 2020. The original summer series will continue to be filmed in Europe. Carolyn McCall, ITV’s chief executive, gave short shrift to questions about whether ITV should be expanding the series after the deaths of former contestants Mike Thalassitis and Sophie Gradon. McCall told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that it was a “strange” topic to bring up, saying there was an almost two-year gap between their appearances on the show and their deaths, in which time they did “lots and lots of other things”. She said: “Anyone who takes their life, it is a terrible thing. Mind and the Samaritans tell the media constantly not to simplify links and I’m afraid that’s what the media does. I think it is a strange thing for you to bring up, to be honest.” When pushed further she inquired when the reporter was going to ask about the company’s financial results, which were published on Wednesday. When questioned about The Jeremy Kyle Show, which was cancelled after the death of a contestant who had failed a lie detector test, she said: “I haven’t got the time this morning to explain the reasons behind cancelling The Jeremy Kyle Show.” In ITV’s half-year results, McCall credited Love Island, which is the most popular on TV among the 16- to 34-year-old demographic most valuable among advertisers, for beating forecasts of a 6% drop in total advertising revenue. ITV’s share price rose more than 6% after news of the better-than-expected performance. “ITV delivered another good viewing performance in the first half of the year,” McCall said. “Online revenues grew strongly, up 18%, despite tough comparatives, with Love Island providing a strong finish to the half. This was reflected in better-than-expected total advertising revenue.” Love Island, which is having its viewing figures yet, with more than 5 million watching each episode, has proved to be commercial gold for ITV, with Uber Eats paying £5m to sponsor the show, more than double the previous sponsorship deal. In addition to TV advertising, a dozen commercial partners were involved in the last series, spanning product placement, brand licensing, podcast sponsors, in-store branding and exclusive product lines and merchandise. “Love Island has proven yet again to be the perfect format that engages younger audiences,” said Paul Mortimer, the head of digital channels at ITV. “In response to this viewer appetite, a new batch of young singletons will deliver some highly anticipated post-Christmas romance and drama from our new and luxurious location.” Overall viewing figures across all of ITV’s channels, and its catch-up and on-demand service, ITV Hub, fell 5% year on year. Viewing figures for the same period last year were bolstered by the football World Cup. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or emailjo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found atwww.befrienders.org.