With reference to Max Rushden’s article on the lack of free-to-air coverage and its effect on grassroots cricket, with which I wholeheartedly agree, I can tell you of one area where the sport is thriving (Tactical toilet breaks and apple on willow: what free-to-air cricket could inspire, 12 July). I am chair of England Seniors Cricket and in the last 12 years we have grown from eight teams to 84 county teams, at 60+ and 70+ level, with each team playing a minimum of 12 games each season. In the last few weeks the over-60s have hosted a very successful 60+ Ashes tour with our Australian counterparts (which England won), and also played several matches against a visiting Pakistani 60+ team. We also hold the 70+ Ashes. In November, England 60+ head to Australia for a five-week tour with the aim of retaining the Ashes. Sadly, when we are encouraged to continue to play sport and keep fit for as long as possible, all this goes on with no funding from the England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB) or anywhere else. Being self-financing means that several of our best players could not afford to come on the Australia tour. It would certainly be preferable to take the best possible squad rather than those senior cricketers who can afford the trip. Nevertheless, I am delighted to report that at this level the sport thrives.Clive RicksCumnor, Oxfordshire • Max Rushden might have also recognised that Sky Sports’ agreement to show the World Cup Final as a one-off game on free-to-view could be seen as a token offer and marketing ploy. It is ironic that free-to-view ball-by-ball coverage has been available in most participating countries but not in Britain, the host country. Surely this should have been a requirement. As a consequence, in stark contrast to the women’s football World Cup which drew record viewing figures, this has been a World Cup of missed opportunities for the ECB in attracting future generations of fans and potential players, as well as giving pleasure to sections of society who love cricket but cannot afford Sky, including those on pensions and low incomes.Mike SteinPudsey, West Yorkshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition