Those who Labour’s high command refers to as “outriders” have been out and about on Twitter, busily doing precisely what a memo of “guidance” suggested they should: seeking to counter the BBC Panorama investigation of Labour antisemitism. Most viewers, though, may well have a very different reaction to what they saw on the programme – which was a group of young, committed servants of the Labour party so distressed by what they witnessed being done by the top brass of the party they loved that they were driven to despair, depression and, in the case of the onetime head of disputes, Sam Matthews, contemplation of suicide. Perhaps, at last, Labour party members will find this too much to stomach. Perhaps those who were not moved by the testimony of Jews; who dismissed Jewish anxieties about antisemitism within Labour as lies, as smears, as “mood music”, as attempts to weaken Jeremy Corbyn; who believed Jews, uniquely among ethnic minorities, could not be trusted when pointing out the racism they faced – perhaps those people will listen instead to the voices of the whistleblowers who, showing great courage, spoke to Panorama. Team Corbyn want to cast those people as embittered former employees with a political axe to grind, but they hardly looked or sounded like that. They included people who had come to work for Labour in the Corbyn period, who indeed had voted for him as leader, and who were nevertheless appalled by what they saw: the vile abuse directed at Jews; the meddling from the top; the failure to show zero tolerance of antisemitism; the extraordinary leniency granted to those guilty of egregious racism. Labour’s reaction to this programme has been emblematic of its entire approach to this problem: seeking to attack the motives of the messenger rather than to confront the message, seeking, as Matthews told the BBC this morning, to “diminish and deny” the scale of the problem. Well, that might be enough to deflect a single TV documentary. But a statutory investigation by the Equality and Human Rights Commission is under way, which has much, much more information. No doubt, when the time comes, there’ll be an effort to cast the EHRC as biased and Blairite, but it won’t wash. People can see with their own eyes the reality, which is a Labour party with a serious racism problem. The only ones who can’t see it are those who would prefer to look the other way. • Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnist Wednesday’s Panorama kicked off with a useful reminder of how Labour’s antisemitism problem all began – patient zero was Ken Livingstone and his horrible comments about Hitler and Zionism – but also how easily it all could have been avoided. That’s important at a time when the entire issue has become so toxic and mired in the gaslighting of Jewish people, cynical misrepresentation and endless political point-scoring. Much of the information contained in this documentary, a painful and depressing watch, is already known. But the power of the programme was in the telling of the story, by former staffers overwhelmed by the scale of the problem and political interference, alongside Jewish Labour members agonisingly recounting their experiences of antisemitism in the party. What was new – and shockingly sad – was the revelation by some former Labour staffers of the emotional distress caused by handling this issue in this climate and the impact it had on their mental health. Unfortunately the narrative voiceover of the programme revealed an unsophisticated, inaccurate comprehension of antisemitism and the left, suggesting it as somehow wired in to an anti-imperialist worldview, or the result of reading too much Marx. This is not just wrong, but also undermines serious attempts to analyse the nature and causes of antisemitism within the left and its decades-long blind spot over the issue. Meanwhile, the response from the Labour party, framing the issue so heavily in factional terms, is demonstrative of the deeper problem all along: that it has become engulfed in a political fight, an attack line in this battle rather than a serious issue in and of itself. Hopefully the Panorama show, with its spotlight on Jewish experiences of antisemitism within Labour, will serve to highlight the nature of the issue – a culture inside the party that has made it an unwelcoming place for Jewish people for whom it was previously a natural home. • Rachel Shabi is a writer and commentator I’ve had to deal with, and fight, antisemitism all my life. Obviously I take the problem in the party very seriously and Labour must do all it can to tackle the problem. But what was ignored by this one-sided documentary was the decisive action we are taking to tackle it. Since Jennie Formby became general secretary she has doubled staffing resources and the rate at which antisemitism cases have been dealt with has increased more than four-fold. When it comes to dealing with cases and improving procedures, from the left to right, the national executive committee is united in its approach. I found it deeply saddening that the BBC, a public broadcaster with a commitment to impartiality, would commission such a politically motivated documentary into a subject that demands serious and fair discussion. From beginning to end the documentary flouted basic journalistic standards. The emails from Seumas Milne and Jennie Formby were distorted and misrepresented through the programme’s editing and selective quoting. In fact, the evidence shows their clear intent was to speed up processes in the case of Jackie Walker. And, as opposed to seeking to “interfere”, it was only after being asked by a former staffer for his view that Seumas rightly suggested caution about claims of antisemitism being levelled at Jewish people. And while I have deep empathy with the Jewish people featured on the programme, many of the interviewees were former staffers with an axe to grind. Some of them, Iain McNicol for instance, were even the very staffers who resisted implementing Shami Chakrabarti’s recommendations on how to deal with antisemitism, have reportedly delayed action on cases to undermine Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership and left a complaints process behind them that was shambolic and not fit for purpose. They simply do not have any credibility on the subject of tackling antisemitism. I genuinely want to solve this issue, but it becomes impossible when the discourse around it becomes ever more polarised, with some people denying or diminishing the problem while others claim it is an existential threat and cynically use it to attack the Labour party leadership. This leads to combative, entrenched opinions on both sides and only makes it harder to tackle the problem. • Jon Lansman is a member of the Labour party’s national executive committee, and a founder of Momentum The antisemitism crisis in the Labour party has been going on for so long and opinions have become so entrenched, that John Ware’s programme is not likely to have changed many people’s minds. The experiences of antisemitic abuse reported by Jewish interviewees echo others that have been made many times before and will be received as before. Those who think the antisemitism issue has been exaggerated or confected by Jeremy Corbyn’s enemies are likely to continue to think that. But there was something revealed in the documentary that was new, and that should cause even those who are sceptical to think again. The stories from former members of the disputes team were horrible. The visible distress of those who attempted to deal with the problem, but who claimed that their work was repeatedly stymied by the party high command, cannot be dismissed. That the work environment was so bad as to lead to a breakdown, to depression and suicidal thoughts is bad enough; that they had to sign NDAs and have faced subsequent legal threats is inexcusable. Their dismissal by the Labour press office as disaffected opponents with axes to grind is appalling. This is not a problem exclusive to Labour. Many bureaucracies turn inwards when faced with perceived external threats and end up abusing those who are perceived as threats (the Catholic church for one). Yet Corbyn was supposed to represent the hope of a different, better kind of society. The work of building that society starts within the Labour party itself. If the party cannot police itself without displaying the classic symptoms of toxic institutional culture, then what hope remains? • Keith Kahn-Harris is the author of Strange Hate: Antisemitism, Racism and the Limits of Diversity