Frances Barber, 62, was born in Wolverhampton and studied drama at Bangor and Cardiff universities. She began her stage career with the Hull Truck Theatre Company and in 1984 won an Olivier award for her RSC debut in Camille. Her film roles include Prick Up Your Ears, Sammy and Rosie Get Laid and Film Stars Don’t Die in Liverpool. TV credits include Silk, Doctor Who and Mapp and Lucia. She stars in the new Pet Shop Boys musical, MUSIK, which premieres at Edinburgh festival fringe. How are rehearsals going for the Pet Shop Boys musical?I’ve just got back from my first full run-through, doing the whole play in front of Pet Shop Boys. Not in the least bit frightening! Chris Lowe took his sunglasses off, though, which is high praise indeed. The show has been 18 years in the making. How come?I nearly fainted when I realised it had been that long! When we first did Closer to Heaven [the first Pet Shop Boys musical] in 2001, my character Billie Trix was quite minor but as we workshopped it, the role expanded. She’s this old rock chick in the vein of Marianne Faithfull, Anita Pallenberg or Nico. Neil [Tennant] and Chris adored writing songs for her and kept saying we should do a one-woman show. And finally, together with the brilliant Jonathan Harvey who created her in the first place, we have. Last year, they took Jonathan and me to lunch at the Delaunay and went: “Right, it’s now or never. Let’s do this.” How many songs do you perform?Six, four of which are brand new, spanning her music through the decades. It starts off a bit Lotte Lenya, then she leaves Berlin for New York and there’s a song about Andy Warhol’s Factory, a Vietnam protest song, a disco anthem, a torch song, and we end with an uplifting, lighters-in-the-air number. Or phones-in-the-air, as it is nowadays. Jonathan’s script is hilarious. Amid all this doom and gloom, it’s 50 minutes of absolute joy. Were you a Pet Shop Boys fan before you worked with them?Completely. Their music is fantastic and catchy, so I was keen to be involved in Closer to Heaven and we’ve been friends ever since. I went into their studio to record the songs and after we’ve opened, they’re going to put them on Spotify. They’ve worked with Dusty Springfield, Liza Minnelli, Chrissie Hynde, all these iconic songstresses. Now it’s me with my rubbishy old voice. They didn’t have a music stand in their studio, so the lyrics were taped to a mug. That’s how professional I am! You sang on their 2006 live album, Concrete. How was that?I’ve never been more terrified. The secret guests were Robbie Williams, Rufus Wainwright and me. I turned up on my bike and the security staff said: “Where are your people?” I said: “I haven’t got any people!” Robbie had come with a whole posse, Rufus had come with an entourage of 25 and I was just me on a bike. Poor Christian Slater had to strip to the waist and he still had scabs all over him. It was bizarre It’s your first ever one-woman show. How does it differ?I went to see Maggie Smith do hers [A German Life] at the Bridge theatre, which was sublime. When we chatted afterwards, she said it can be lonely and tiring, so we’ll see. Luckily, my mate Ian McKellen is coming up to Edinburgh to do his show, so I’ll be able to hang out with him. He’s threatened to sneak in to see MUSIK but I told him I’ll call security. Have you performed at the Fringe before?Only twice. Way back in 1980 with Hull Truck, which was my very first job, then in 2004 when I did One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest with Christian Slater. We had a traumatic time because poor Christian caught chicken pox, so we had to cancel some shows. When we finally opened, there was a scene where he stripped to the waist and he still had scabs all over him. It was bizarre. You’re politically outspoken on Twitter. Do you get a lot of flak for that?It was OK until Brexit sent everyone mad. I’ve been through the whole gamut of emotions about it myself. My frustration is that we haven’t had an effective opposition. I was part of the Better Together campaign, I went on marches and leafleted. Obviously antisemitism is a huge issue too. Every day I tell myself, “I’m not going to look at Twitter today”, but I’m addicted. It used to make me howl before it became a vile cesspit. Some of the wittiest people I’ve ever come across are on Twitter. I’m still there for the jokes. Is acting becoming too dominated by people from privileged backgrounds?You could get student grants in my day; without those I’d never have been able to become an actor. We need to hear working-class voices and see diverse characters. I get letters all the time from drama students asking for help and I do as much as I can. It’s beholden on us because otherwise, how will new talent come through? How was your involvement with Doctor Who as the villainous Madame Kovarian?Absolutely loved it. I was lucky enough to work with Matt Smith, who was the perfect Doctor. He’s got one of those extraordinary faces that can either be 20 or 200. I’ve still got Madame Kovarian’s eyepatch. They gave it to me as a memento. Ever fancied moving to Hollywood?I did work out there and had a lovely time for two years but I missed home too much. Besides, LA’s a bit boring. Everybody’s on prescription drugs but they frown upon anyone who has a glass of wine. You’re a big Strictly Come Dancing fan. Would you ever compete on it?I originally started watching Strictly because I know Craig Revel Horwood, but it’s so joyful and addictive, I’m still watching 15 years later. Craig did suggest I go on it but you’d be tripping over my dead body before I do that. What else makes you happy when you’re not working?I’ve got wonderful friends so we just tend to go to each other’s houses for dinner. For the last three years, we arrive and vow not to mention the B-word. Within five minutes, we’re talking about Brexit, don’t shut up about it all night and end up depressed. MUSIK is at Assembly Rooms, Edinburgh, 5 to 24 August; Arts theatre, London, 3-7 September