Zack Greinke held the New York Yankees to two runs on two hits over five innings on Wednesday, and that was the good news for the Bronx Bombers when it comes to the veteran pitcher. In the closing minutes of the 4 pm ET trade deadline, the Houston Astros reportedly acquired Greinke from the Arizona Diamondbacks, the second last-minute pitching pickup that shifts the Astros to the favorites to win the American League over the Yankees. The Athletic’s Ken Rosenthal was the first to report the Greinke deal. What’s more, the New York Post’s Joel Sherman reported that the Yankees were in pursuit of Toronto pitcher Aaron Sanchez ... and the Astros got him, too. The Blue Jays also sent pitcher Joe Biagini to Houston with Sanchez, reportedly in exchange for outfielder Derek Fisher. According to multiple reports, the Diamondbacks got four prospects for Greinke: first baseman/outfielder Seth Beer (the Astros’ No 3 prospect per MLB Pipeline), right-handed pitcher JB Bukauskas (No 4), righty Corbin Martin (No 5) and utility player Joshua Rojas (No 22). But the team was able to hold onto its two most prized prospects, outfielder Kyle Tucker and right-handed pitcher Forrest Whitley. Greinke, 35, is in the midst of another stellar season. Before his outing against the Yankees, the right-hander was carrying a 10-4 record and 2.87 ERA. His .943 WHIP is tops in the National League. He has been an All-Star in each of the last three of his four seasons in Arizona. He is 197-122 with a 3.36 ERA in his 16-year career entering Wednesday. Sanchez, 27, was an All-Star in 2016 and led the AL in winning percentage and ERA. He has struggled mightily this season, however, winning just three games while losing a league-worst 14 and sporting a 6.07 ERA in 23 starts. He has a 32-33 career record with a 3.96 ERA. Biagini, 29, is 3-1 with a 3.86 ERA in 49 games out of the bullpen this season, picking up a save along the way. In four seasons, he has a 4.76 ERA in 203 games. He has 22 career starts but 18 of those were in 2017 and none of them came this season. The Astros now have a rotation of Justin Verlander, Gerrit Cole, Wade Miley, Greinke, and Sanchez. Between Verlander, Cole and Greinke, they have three pitchers in the top 10 in the majors in ERA, three in the top five in WHIP, two in the top three in hits per nine innings, two of the top 10 in walks per nine innings, and three of the top five in innings pitched. The Giants have traded former closer Mark Melancon to the Atlanta Braves for right-handed reliever Daniel Winkler and a minor league pitcher. Melancon signed a $62 million, four-year contract with San Francisco in December 2016 but didn’t emerge as the dominant closer he had been in part because of injuries. He had just 15 saves in his two-plus seasons with the Giants. In addition, San Francisco sent right-handed reliever Sam Dyson to the Twins and kept 2014 World Series MVP Madison Bumgarner. The 34-year-old right-hander is 4-2 with a 3.50 ERA in 43 appearances and 46 1/3 innings this season. When the Giants acquired him, Melancon had saved at least 30 games in three straight seasons, recording a majors-best 51 in 2015. He went 47 for 51 in save opportunities in 75 relief appearances last season with Pittsburgh and Washington, Winkler is 3-1 with a 4.98 ERA in 27 appearances this season. The Giants also received Class A pitcher Tristan Beck. The Chicago Cubs acquired outfielder Nicholas Castellanos from the Detroit Tigers for two minor league pitchers. The 27-year-old Castellanos hit .273 with 11 home runs and 37 RBIs for Detroit this season. He’s played third base and in the outfield during his career and has been considered a liability defensively, but Castellanos gives Chicago a productive bat against left-handed pitching. Detroit received right-handers Paul Richan and Alex Lange. Castellanos is tied for the major league lead with 37 doubles. He has a .347 average and a 1.026 OPS this year in 72 at-bats against lefties. The Los Angeles Dodgers added infielder Jedd Gyorko, acquiring him from the St Louis Cardinals for left-hander Tony Cingrani and minor league righty Jeffry Abreu. The Dodgers also receive international cap space and cash considerations. The 30-year-old Gyorko has been on the injured list since 8 June with back and right wrist issues. He’s hitting .196 on the season. Cingrani is also out following left shoulder surgery and hasn’t pitched this season. The Dodgers entered the day with a 70-39 record, easily the best mark in the National League. The Washington Nationals tried to upgrade their bullpen, acquiring relievers Roenis Elias and Hunter Strickland from Seattle and Daniel Hudson in a trade with Toronto. The Mariners received a trio of minor league pitchers from the Nationals left-handers Taylor Guilbeau and Aaron Fletcher and right-hander Elvis Alvarado. Washington sent minor league right-hander Kyle Johnston to Toronto for Hudson, who can become a free agent at the end of the season. Elias has been Seattle’s primary closer for the majority of the season after Strickland suffered a lat strain in the opening week and missed several months. Strickland has appeared in just four major league games this season. Elias has appeared in 44 games and was 4-2 with a 4.40 ERA and 14 saves for Seattle. The 32-year-old Hudson went 6-3 with a 3.00 ERA and two saves in 45 games for the Blue Jays. Milwaukee has acquired left-hander Drew Pomeranz and righty Ray Black from the San Francisco Giants for infield prospect Mauricio Dubon. Also Wednesday, San Francisco obtained second baseman Scooter Gennett from the Reds for a player to be named. Cincinnati will send cash to the Giants to cover part of Gennett’s $9,775,000 salary. Until the Giants recently began winning, there had been speculation for months that left-handed ace Madison Bumgarner the 2014 World Series MVP would be on the trading block, but he is staying put as San Francisco (54-53) tries to contend in manager Bruce Bochy’s final season before retirement. The Brewers were looking to add pitching depth given a decision was expected Tuesday on whether left-hander Gio Gonzalez would need a stint on the injured list after he left his start last Friday against the Cubs with tightness in his pitching shoulder. Pomeranz can work as a starter or reliever. Milwaukee acquired right-hander Jordan Lyles from the Pirates on Monday to boost the rotation. The Yankees got a pitcher at the deadline for one of their Class A affiliates. New York acquired left-hander Alfredo Garcia from the Colorado Rockies for right-handed reliever Joseph Harvey in a deal announced shortly after the 4 p.m. deadline to make deals. The Yankees have been seeking pitching upgrades for the big league club. Garcia won’t be that, at least not this year. The 20-year-old is 2-9 with a 6.28 ERA in Class A. He’s struck out 103 in 90 1/3 innings. Harvey pitched 10 innings out of New York’s bullpen this year as a rookie, posting a 4.50 ERA. The Philadelphia Phillies bolstered their outfield by acquiring veteran Corey Dickerson from the Pittsburgh Pirates for cash and a player to be named. Dickerson, who could become a free agent at the end of the season, hit .317 with four home runs and 25 RBIs for the Pirates. The 30-year-old missed most of the first half of the season with a strained throwing shoulder. The Pirates acquired Dickerson from Tampa Bay on the eve of the 2018 regular season. Dickerson responded by hitting .300 with 13 home runs and 55 RBIs. He also won his first career Gold Glove for his play in left field. Pittsburgh’s fade from contention after the All-Star break and the rise of young outfielder Bryan Reynolds in Dickerson’s absence made him expendable for a team now looking toward 2020 and beyond. The playoff-contending Oakland Athletics have acquired starter Tanner Roark from the Cincinnati Reds, filling out a rotation that also could have left-hander Sean Manaea back soon. Oakland dealt outfield prospect Jameson Hannah to Cincinnati. The Reds are sending Oakland $2.1 million to offset much of the $3,225,806 remaining in Roark’s $10 million salary. The A’s began the day a half-game out of the second AL wild-card spot. Roark lasted a season-low 3 1/3 innings during Cincinnati’s 11-4 loss to the Pirates on Tuesday. He is 6-7 in 21 starts with a 4.24 ERA and can become a free agent after the season. Manaea struck out eight in six innings of a rehab start at Triple-A this week. He’s likely to get one more rehab start before being activated. He had shoulder surgery last September.