Hong Kong awoke to a tense calm on Tuesday morning as clean-up operations were underway to repair damage done by protesters to the city’s legislative council building on Monday night. Debris including umbrellas, hard hats and water bottles were the few signs left of the confrontations that engulfed parts of the Chinese-ruled city overnight after protesters stormed and ransacked the legislature. On Monday night a small splinter group of demonstrators, angry over a controversial extradition bill supported by Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam, stormed the building and raised the territory’s former colonial flag on the 22nd anniversary of its hand back to China. Pictures of former Hong Kong leaders were defaced and protesters sprayed graffiti over the walls. As dawn broke after a night of unprecedented drama, some Hong Kong residents questionedwhy the police had not put an end to the attempts to break through the building’s glass walls earlier in the day, and allowed extensive damage to the interior of the building. “The strangest thing was, police were there all along in the morning, confronting the protestors and standing guard inside Legco. Suddenly they all disappeared late afternoon, leaving an empty Legco wide open for the protestors to enter. Empty fort strategy much?” outspoken democracy activist Denise Ho said on Twitter.She added in a later tweet: “The reason why the protesters have resorted to storming into the Legco, is because of this authoritarian government WHO DOES NOT LISTEN.”At a 4am press conference, Lam said it was “not true to say that the government has not responded,” and doubled down on her stance that suspending the controversial extradition bill that prompted weeks of protest in the city was a “very positive response to the demands that we have heard.” What initially started in early June as protests against a new extradition law have broadened into a pro-democracy movement concerned about the wider relationship between Hong Kong and China and the future for the special administrative region. Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, has offered a ‘solemn’ personal apology for the crisis and also hinted that she had effectively shelved the controversial legislation. However, protesters criticised her as insincere and said she had ignored their key demands. The demonstrations have continued. People have been demonstrating against legal changes that would make it easier to extradite people from Hong Kong to China. Supporters say the amendments are key to ensuring the city does not become a criminal refuge, but critics worry Beijing will use the law to extradite political opponents and others to China. Under the amended law, those accused of offences punishable by seven years or more in prison could be extradited. The government claims the push to change the law, which would also apply to Taiwan and Macau, stems from the killing last year of a Hong Kong woman while she was in Taiwan with her boyfriend. Authorities in Taiwan suspect the woman’s boyfriend, who remains in Hong Kong, but cannot try him because no extradition agreement is in place. Officials have promised to safeguard against abuses, pledging that no one at risk of political or religious persecution will be sent to the mainland. Suspects who could face the death penalty would not be extradited. Hong Kong officials have repeatedly said the bill has not come from the central government in Beijing. However, Beijing has voiced its backing for the changes. Many Hong Kongers fear the proposed extradition law will be used by authorities to target political enemies. They worry the new legislation spells the end of the “one country, two systems” policy, eroding the civil rights enjoyed by Hong Kong residents since the handover of sovereignty from the UK to China in 1997. Many attending the protests said they could not trust China as it had often used non-political crimes to target government critics, and said they also feared Hong Kong officials would not be able to reject Beijing’s requests. Legal professionals have also expressed concern over the rights of those sent across the border to be tried. The conviction rate in Chinese courts is as high as 99%. Arbitrary detentions, torture and denial of legal representation of one’s choosing are also common. After the current crisis, analysts believe the Hong Kong government will likely start a new round of retaliatory measures against its critics while the Chinese government will tighten its grip on the city. Police have said that 32 people have been arrested over the recent demonstrations and five have been charged with rioting, which carries a maximum sentence of ten years’ imprisonment. Six pro-democracy members of the legislature have already been ousted. Lily Kuo in Beijing and Verna Yu in Hong Kong She condemned the “extremely violent” storming of the legislature, which she described as “heartbreaking and shocking”. On Tuesday, Chinese media said called for “zero tolerance” after the protests. “Out of blind arrogance and rage, protestors showed a complete disregard for law and order,” the Global Times, published by the ruling Communist Party’s People’s Daily, said in an editorial. The city’s police chief meanwhile defended the force’s decision to withdraw from the building temporarily, saying they had found protesters tampering with electricity boxes and were concerned that in the darkness there would be more potential for a “wrong move on either side.” The government headquarters complex which houses the legislature remained closed on Tuesday. On social media, protesters attempted to undo the damage to their reputation as peaceful “model protesters,” posting images of undamaged books, artefacts, and even money left for fizzy drinks they had taken out of a fridge. One image circulated of a note in Chinese on a fridge, with the translation: “A note from the protesters. We are not burglars. We won’t take without asking.” At around midnight, police dispersed the crowds, firing teargas at demonstrators. The dramatic scenes came after a peaceful march of half a million people made its way through other parts of the city as its deepest political crisis in two decades showed no sign of abating. Half a dozen pro-democracy and independent lawmakers had earlier scuffled with protesters as they called for calm and pushed against the trolley that was being used to enter the council building. “They simply wouldn’t listen to me,” said Lam Cheuk-ting, one of the politicians. “The movement at large is peaceful, but some young people are overwhelmed by a strong sense of helplessness and they’re emotionally charged.” For the past month protesters have been demanding the withdrawal of a bill that would allow extraditions to the Chinese mainland as anger has grown against Hong Kong authorities and the territory’s chief executive, Carrie Lam. The rallies are the latest manifestation of growing fears that China is stamping down on the city’s freedoms and culture with the help of the finance hub’s pro-Beijing leaders. Although returned to Chinese rule in 1997, Hong Kong is still administered separately under an arrangement known as “one country, two systems”. The city enjoys rights and liberties unseen on the autocratic mainland, but many residents believe Beijing is reneging on that deal. While the recent protests were initially sparked by Lam’s attempts to pass the proposed extradition legislation, the demonstrations have morphed into a wider movement against her administration and Beijing.