The experience was like being taken into a vortex of sound and light with no way out as they transitioned seamlessly between haunting tracks on their most recent album (Free Yourself and Eve of Destruction were especially memorable) to classics like Hey Boy, Hey Girl and Galvanize. They flashed images of both old and new (robotic figures interspersed with black-and-white images) in a hypnotic way, with repetitive elements, so that the audience was truly engrossed and the atmosphere electric. The 3D imagery made you feel as if you were part of it. Light and dark moments in the music and the show took you through a waterfall of emotions, while the beat keept you in ecstasy. A truly unforgettable show, perhaps the best I have seen at Glastonbury. Satya, 26, Gloucester I was really nervous about going to Glastonbury because I’d never been to a festival before – I was there with my parents to celebrate my forthcoming 18th birthday. We waited at the Pyramid stage all day on Friday to see Stormzy, and saw some amazing performances from Bastille and George Ezra. We’re used to watching the headliners on TV so it was quite surreal! I’d decided I wanted to be near to the front for Stormzy but I never thought I’d be so close. His set was absolutely incredible, and all of his singers and dancers were amazing. The highlight of the night – and the whole festival – was when Chris Martin came on for Blinded By Your Grace. It was unforgettable, and I felt like I’d had a real “Glastonbury moment”. Seeing two such different musicians come together really showed me just how amazing the festival is. Megan, 17, Liverpool An old litter-picking volunteer with a white beard, dreadlocks and a Lancashire accent, who introduced himself only as “that guy”, did a short set at the open-mic in Strummerville on Saturday afternoon. He had a drum machine and a bass guitar, with which he played some remarkably funky tunes, before adding his own unexpectedly brilliant vocals, most notably in a song I assume was called Put It in the Bin Please, in which he pleaded with the audience in increasingly irate tones to correctly dispose of their rubbish. We’d only gone up there for a snooze in the shade of the trees but came away with a proper Glasto highlight. Russell Carswell, 32, London Jeff Goldblum’s soundcheck! Warm fuzzy comedy from the king of smooth: guess the animal pattern pants, guess the animal sound, and then the surreal banter with the BBC journalist! When she asks, “When are you going to start?” Jeff casually replies, “Well, I think I already have” to an uproarious, loving crowd. Thanks for an amazing memory Jeff! Gary McKillion, 43, Barnstaple The IICON stage was absolutely incredible. Obviously I loved the music, but I couldn’t believe how amazing the stage design was. It looked like something out of a dystopian future: proper way to listen to electronic music. Zach, 25, Bristol The Killers absolutely smashed it! We’ve seen them several times, including last year at TRNSMT, so I was initially a little underwhelmed when I saw the lineup … But it was their best performance by far, they put so much effort into it and it was flawless. Being our first Glasto with the kids we were fully prepared for meltdowns, but the children (Holly, eight, and Charlie, five) threw themselves into it and didn’t complain once, despite the heat and all the walking. Seeing them dancing their wee socks off at sunset to Liam Gallagher and the Killers made for such beautiful moments. The Kidzfield is a paradise, they got a photo with lovely Dynamo, who completely captured their imaginations! They spent hours doing arts and crafts, going potholing, playing in forts, and getting decorated with rainbows and glitter. They were really on board with the green focus at this year’s festival, even though they are very young, they recognise the importance. Edwina McNulty, Glasgow Seeing Michael Eavis singing Elvis songs on the Avalon Cafe stage was probably the sweetest moment of Glastonbury. In a relatively intimate setting was the man who made this all happen, singing his heart out at the age of 83 and clearly loving every minute of it. It only got better when Emily joined him for a duet of Something Stupid. Neither have particularly brilliant voices but the music world owes them everything. An utterly charming moment. Simon Donohue, 47, Manchester The Acoustic Brass Off on the Truth Stage on Thursday night was an absolute blast, with lots of catchy covers and a great atmosphere. Dat Brass began on stage, belting out Cry Me a River and several other tunes. They then waded into the crowd, where they joined forces with the New York Brass Band for some more fun, playing Thrift Shop and Get Lucky. Double sousaphone equals double fun! Matt, 29, London Frank Turner on the Avalon Stage on Friday night. I’d not seen him live before but the energy and desire to put on a great show were incredible. Jonny Ford, 50, Liverpool This is about my 25th Glastonbury and the highlight this year was wandering around with my 13-year-old daughter, Cliodhna, on Sunday night. We went to the top of the Ribbon Tower in the Park, which I’d never done before. It’s just fantastic. The whole of gorgeous Glastonbury is laid out before you, a million lights twinkling. All three of my kids have been coming since they were little. We all love it and I hope we’re all there next year at the 50th Glastonbury, as I’ll be 50 too. Jane O’Hara, 49, Charlseworth My friends and I agonised over whether to see her or the Cure. Halfway through the first song I knew we’d made the right choice. She is the Glasto performer that 2019 deserves: singing and talking about being an outsider, acceptance, joy, sexuality, confusion. She dazzled with on-point choreography, confidence and pitchperfect delivery. It was theatre, dance and music – a real show, a triumph. It helps that she’s very funny, exudes warmth and can build a rapid rapport with the crowd with her slightly off-kilter English. It was a shame so comparatively few people were there to see it. But it gave the show an intimate feel and even a little space to dance. Andy McGrath, 30, Streatham It was the first time I’ve seen the Cure live – WOW! An amazing performance from a band who showed you really don’t need the bunting and the special guests, just a huge catalogue of amazing songs performed brilliantly by superb musicians and a singer with Robert Smith’s ability to mesmerise. solarevolution Watching Jorja Smith with my 14-year-old daughter, her eyes filled with happy tears as she looked across at me and mouthed: “This is the happiest I’ve ever been.” In front of us were five 21-year-olds from south Wales at their first Glastonbury. They too were teary, hugging us and telling us how much they wanted to bring their daughters to Glastonbury when they were older, saying how wonderful it was to make such special memories. I’d stewarded that day between 3am and 10am and was knackered! But as the sun (finally) began to dip beneath the horizon the world stopped just for a moment and it was the most beautiful place in the world. Sarah Wolf, Frome