Shares in Funding Circle hit a fresh record low on Tuesday after the peer-to-peer lending platform slashed its forecasts for revenue growth in the face of economic uncertainty caused by Brexit. Funding Circle, which links non-bank lenders to small business borrowers, said it was reining in riskier loans, cutting its expectations of revenue growth for 2019 from 40% to 20%. Two-thirds of Funding Circle’s £3.5bn in loans have been made to small British businesses, with most of the rest in the US. Confidence among small businesses borrowers in both countries has fallen in recent months, denting demand for loans. British borrowers face the threat of a no-deal Brexit on 31 October, while in the US Donald Trump’s trade war and apparently slower growth have prompted the Federal Reserve to consider cutting interest rates. Funding Circle floated on the London Stock Exchange in October at a price of 440p a share, propelling it into the FTSE 250 index of mid-cap companies only eight years after it was founded. However, it has endured a torrid time since the initial public offering. Shares on Tuesday fell by as much as a quarter to trade as low as 122p. The company was worth less than £450m on Tuesday, compared to the valuation of more than £1.5bn when it floated. Samir Desai, Funding Circle’s chief executive and co-founder, said: “The uncertain economic environment has reduced demand from small businesses and led us to proactively tighten lending criteria. “As a result, revenue growth will be impacted. We recognise that this is a change from our previous guidance, but we are taking the prudent course of action for the long-term growth and development of our business.” Funding Circle’s revenues for the first six months of the year rose by 30% compared to the same period last year, but profits have so far remained elusive. In 2018 the company reported losses of £49.3m. The company is betting that rapid expansion and investment in automation of the lending process will deliver profits. However, on Tuesday it said it will delay its launch in Canada. Funding Circle’s decision to tighten borrowing standards comes after signs that consumers, who tend to behave similarly to small businesses, are struggling to pay back their loans. Most affected by the changes will be the bottom 10% of its potential business customers, generally those companies which are younger than the 10-year-old average across the platform. Colin Jackson, an analyst at Goodbody, a stockbroker, said Funding Circle’s revenue downgrade was “disappointing” but “not entirely surprising in our view, as the ambitious growth targets set out at the initial public offering were always going to be difficult to hit while also maintaining a firm grip on asset quality.”