I feel for readers who have been missing birds and bats in their gardens (Letters, 28 June). I can’t be sure of the reasons – climate change could, of course, be a factor – but I would like to ascribe the continued presence of both in my garden to the fact that I have never used chemical or other means to get rid of insects. My lack of gardening rigour has meant the garden is slightly messy, so various forms of wildlife have been able find places to live. A hedgehog, badger and fox have all been sighted, and we have often heard, although never seen, a tawny owl.Cherry WestonWolverhampton • Digging patches of my garden over the last few months, I haven’t seen a single worm. Seems odd.Dr Nigel MellorNewcastle upon Tyne • Normally, at this time of the year, my suburban garden would be a haven for slugs and snails. This year, almost none. Is this a gardener’s prayer answered or another sign of the loss of biodiversity because of the climate emergency?Ian DuncanTwickenham, Middlesex • In an effort to save our swifts, nine nest boxes were put up in my city-centre neighbourhood seven summers ago. None have been occupied and the traditional roof sites are no longer in use. Only the odd swift can now be seen where there were hundreds 30 years ago. Woods around Nottingham have few songbirds. Villages have few swallows or house martins. Once common farmland species (corn bunting, yellowhammer, skylark) are absent. Even the Nottinghamshire Wildlife Trust’s reserves have fewer species. Town dwellers may still have garden birds. And some, like jays, long-tailed tits and goldfinches are increasing there, refugees from the hostile rural environment. The decreasing bird population tells a sad tale of our effect on the environment. Early last week on holiday in the Outer Hebrides, I looked down on Castle Bay harbour in Barra to see a single gull drift over the docking ferry.Steve BrazierNottingham • Possibly the reason why Professor Michael Symonds has not seen any bats flying in his garden this year is that they have migrated to the church I help clean to soil the freshly polished brasses.Jane MothSnettisham, Norfolk • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition