Mike Ashley is the Premier League equivalent of Captain Rum – the seafarer from Blackadder who runs his ship in a contrary manner to “all the other captains” – though much as it must depress supporters to lose their leading scorer so soon after a popular manager, the bottom line in Ayoze Pérez’s move to Leicester stands up to scrutiny. Newcastle’s owner knows more about trading than most – he has certainly made plenty of money through his grasp of markets and mark-ups – and, though critics might accuse him of caring for little else, it cannot be denied that raising £30m for a player who cost £1.5m five years ago is eye-catching. The wisdom of selling a striker whose goals helped Newcastle stay up last season is debatable, as is parting with a highly capable manager, though as long as he can continue to buy cheap and sell high Ashley will feel he can see a way through all the protest and predicted poor results. Alan Pardew was in charge when Pérez was signed from Tenerife in 2014 and Graham Carr was still on scouting duty. The talent-spotter responsible for importing players such as Yohan Cabaye, Papiss Cissé and Cheick Tioté did not last long after the arrival of Rafa Benítez, though just for a short while – until supporters began wondering whether Carr ever looked anywhere other than France and Germany, in fact – Newcastle found a way to beat the Premier League’s absurdly inflated prices by finding quality players in unheralded locations. More famously Steve Walsh did the same thing at Leicester a few years later, not only seeing the potential in non-league Fleetwood’s Jamie Vardy but providing the grace notes to a title-winning side by unearthing Riyad Mahrez and N’Golo Kanté from Le Havre and Caen, respectively. Those three together cost Leicester less than £7.5m (Kanté, at £5.6m, was the only one priced higher than £1m) and the two were sold on for a combined £92m. Clearly that is how to conduct football business, especially with the most unlikely of title successes thrown in, yet when Everton asked Walsh to replicate the process on Merseyside both he and Ronald Koeman bombed. Everton had recruited the latter on the strength of progress at Southampton, where in addition to encouraging young players from the club’s academy he had sanctioned the purchase of Virgil van Dijk from Celtic for £13m. When the defender joined Liverpool three years later for an eye-watering £75m, Southampton were congratulated on both their talent-spotting and salesmanship, though Celtic had in fact been just as prescient, paying Groningen a mere £2.6m for Van Dijk in 2013. While Koeman’s knowledge of Dutch prospects undoubtedly persuaded him to take what in retrospect does not appear much of a gamble, it was quickly evident that few scouts from leading Premier League clubs had been keeping an eye on Scottish football. Otherwise they might have spotted Andy Robertson, who became a Champions League winner with Liverpool only after Hull brought him to England from Dundee United for £2.85m in 2014. Even after three eventful seasons on Humberside Robertson was not an obvious target for bigger clubs, though the relatively modest £8m fee that took him to Anfield is now regularly cited as one of the deals of the decade. So will Pérez ever come to be regarded as a bargain at £30m or are Leicester being generous in anticipation of riches from the imminent sale of Harry Maguire? There is no way of knowing for sure; it is all about timing and context. Mo Salah cost Liverpool only £37m, for example, and one doubts whether Pérez will be quite as sensational for a similar price. Yet it is worth bearing in mind that £37m was a record outlay for Liverpool in 2017. While there is undoubtedly a knack to sourcing top-quality players at bottom-shelf prices, sticking one’s neck out and paying over the odds can also be profitable in terms of success on the pitch, as Liverpool found with Van Dijk. Manchester City have just broken their transfer record for the second summer in a row yet, despite a reputation for largesse, they remain a way off any English record and seem reluctant to join a bidding war with their neighbours for Maguire. The £62m needed to meet Atlético Madrid’s release clause for Rodri was far from inconsiderable but Liverpool and Manchester United both have a couple of players who cost more, or at least they do at the moment. That Paul Pogba and Romelu Lukaku could leave Old Trafford this summer for rather less than United paid neatly illustrates the dangers of statement spending. Van Dijk is universally considered to have been worth his whopping price, hence the inflation that has left Leicester rubbing their hands, though not every £75m defender will bed in as smoothly. The success of Maguire’s next move depends to a large extent on which club he ends up joining, although in fairness the England defender has prospered at each of his clubs so far. At Sheffield United, where he started, he was voted player of the year in each of his three seasons. Apparently only Stan Ternent, Hull’s chief scout, was paying attention. If some immensely rich club ends up paying a record fee for Maguire it should bother them a little, although it will probably not, that five years ago the princely sum of £2.5m and a little foresight was all it would have taken.