At the peak of the growing season allotmenteers’ crops are now coming in thick and fast, but you don’t have to have access to masses of space to try your hand at producing homegrown harvests. In fact, even if all you have is a sunny kitchen windowsill there is a large range of edibles that you can get growing right now that will produce enough to transform all sorts of dishes. So here’s a run through of my (mostly) favourite indoor edibles that I am growing right now. While we don’t tend to think about edible species when it comes to houseplants, loads of the fresh spices we use hail from the tropics and despite being impossible to grow outdoors in the UK, are super-easy to grow in pots indoors. A classic example is the curry plant Murraya koenigii from south-east Asia, whose leaves taste like ready-made curry powder. Tracking down the fresh leaves can be incredibly tricky in supermarkets, and even when you do they tend to have lost much of their flavour, so growing your own is really worth the effort. Plants can be treated just like their relatives the citrus, given a bright, warm spot and well-drained soil. And they take pruning really well, so you don’t have to be trepidatious when it comes to harvest time. While many of the herbs traditionally used in Mediterranean cooking, such as rosemary and thyme, don’t usually like the low light combined with higher temperatures of your average kitchen windowsill, basil tends to be a notable exception. Despite its cultural culinary association with all things Italian, it actually hails from the tropical rainforests of India, meaning it has a built-in tolerance to slightly darker, warmer conditions. Rather than the standard supermarket varieties, I would seek out the seeds of “Christmas” basil, a hybrid of the Italian and Thai forms, which has a wonderfully exotic, clove-like aroma. Another option, for fans of south-east Asian flavours, is Vietnamese coriander (Persicaria odorata), also known as rau răm or hot mint. Although entirely unrelated to the real deal, which is really tough to grow indoors, this aquatic plant has a near identical aroma, just far stronger. Why do I say aroma, not flavour? As a life-long hater of coriander, I can barely touch its leaves without recoiling. But if you love that herb, this is the plant for you. You weirdo. Finally, if you have a couple of old cloves of garlic in the cupboard or back of the fridge that are starting to sprout, plant them closely together in a small pot of compost. Within as little as a week they will grow fresh green shoots that can be snipped into dishes just like chives, but with a far more pungent, fresh garlicky flavour. It’s a great way to turn food waste into a homegrown harvest in just a few days even if you have next to no space. You can’t say fairer than that. Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @Botanygeek 