For nearly 30 years the discordant sound that Sunday Telegraph readers heard each weekend was the paper’s columnist Christopher Booker barking up the wrong tree. Booker, the first editor of the satirical magazine Private Eye, took iconoclasm to extraordinary, and frequently eccentric, lengths. In his weekly columns he regularly annoyed and frustrated scientists, climatologists and doctors with his assertions that asbestos was not dangerous, speed cameras caused accidents, fossil fuels were necessary, global warming was a hoax and Darwinian evolution was not proved. But he certainly gave the paper’s readers what they wanted to be told: that bureaucrats and social workers were meddlers, that the European Union was a dangerous and unaccountable bureaucracy and that experts were conspiring to pull the wool over their eyes. That he did so with tenacity, brio and absolute certainty in his own rectitude over the apparent obtuseness of officialdom merely reinforced all their prejudices about the world. He enjoyed the perversity of taking a contrary stance, an outlook that also fuelled his satires. Ian Hislop, Private Eye’s current editor, said that “no one agreed with Christopher all the time, including Christopher himself”. Booker, who has died aged 81, was one of Private Eye’s longest-serving contributors, until earlier this year co-writing jokes for its fake apologies, the secret diary of John Major, the Cameron and Clegg Coalition Academy, The Rev Blair’s St Albion Parish News, the views of the left-wing agitator Dave Spart and the memorial effusions of EJ Thribb (age 17½). Hislop quoted Booker as saying: “I am not going to retire. I am just going to carry on doing this – if I was here to do anything I was here to make jokes about British public life.” Christopher was the son of John and Margaret Booker, who ran a girls’ prep school near Blandford Forum in Dorset. He was educated at Shrewsbury public school, where he first met his future collaborators at the magazine, Richard Ingrams, Willie Rushton and Paul Foot. Spared national service because of poor eyesight, Booker went to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, and read history. After graduation he worked briefly as a journalist for Liberal News, with a freelance sideline writing jazz reviews for the newly established Sunday Telegraph – though he got into trouble for enthusiastically reviewing an Erroll Garner concert that turned out to have been cancelled – before being persuaded to join the others in their attempt to set up a satirical magazine. The first edition, compiled in Rushton’s bedroom, was distributed round the pubs of west London in October 1961, and Booker became its first editor. “My idea was that Private Eye should stand for, its basic role, was to question all the orthodoxies, all the conventional wisdoms, didn’t matter whether they were left, right, smart or trendy,” he told Adam Macqueen, the author of the magazine’s 50th anniversary history. The magazine was certainly part of the swinging 60s culture but it also early developed its scabrous side, laying into politicians and other public figures. Within two years, however, Booker was supplanted in an office coup while he was on honeymoon, as Ingrams and Rushton grew tired and frustrated with his chaotic working practices, temper tantrums and the magazine’s increasing financial difficulties. There were tales of shouting matches and even an allegation that Booker had thrown a typewriter out of the window of the magazine’s office in Soho during one spectacular row, though he always denied it. It took several years for the rift to be healed. At the same time, Booker was writing sketches and jokes for his Cambridge contemporary David Frost on the seminal TV programme That Was the Week That Was. He also became close to the broadcaster Malcolm Muggeridge, who had become an arch moralist, denouncing the 60s and all its apparent decadence. Booker’s contribution to the disillusionment was a book attacking the contemporary cult of youth and social revolution of which he had previously been a part. The Neophiliacs (1966) laid into everything from rock’n’roll to miniskirts. Unsurprisingly Muggeridge, under whose roof the book had been partly written, described Booker as one of the most brilliant young writers of his age. Many more polemical books – and feuds – would follow from his perch at, first, from 1972, the Daily Telegraph, where for a short time he wrote the Way of the World column until supplanted by his arch-rival Auberon Waugh in 1990, and then the Sunday Telegraph. It was in the papers’ pages that Booker was able to give free rein to his determination to go against the grain. His Euroscepticism, if not phobia, developed early, leaving his editor, Max Hastings, to rue in his memoirs that Booker’s fanatical hatred of the EU distorted his journalism. A string of books with titles such as The Mad Officials: How the Bureaucrats are Strangling Britain (1993) and The Castle of Lies: Why Britain Must Get Out of Europe (1996) emerged from his Georgian rectory in Somerset. Many of his stories, such as the allegation that the EU would force owners to pressure-cook their dead pets before burying them, were ludicrous, but they helped to contribute to the pervasive hostility to Europe that fuelled the 2016 referendum result. Characteristically, in March this year, in one of his last columns, Booker castigated the shambles that has resulted: “Even those few of us who have been trying to explain the unrecognised realities of our situation since long before the referendum could not have predicted quite what a catastrophic mess we would end up with … By ripping us out of the incredibly complex system that had so tightly integrated our economy with the rest of the EU we were putting at risk not just a large part of our currently frictionless export trade with the EU itself which provides an eighth of our national income, we were also risking much of our trade with other countries across the world.” Booker’s conviction that climate change was a hoax was another long-term obsession. He described governments’ attempts to reduce carbon emissions as “one of the most expensive, destructive and foolish mistakes the human race has ever made”. His many scientific critics, pointing out that he had no such qualifications himself, were infuriated by the simplistic errors he made and maintained in his analysis, even when they were pointed out to him. George Monbiot, writing in the Guardian in 2011, described Booker as “simply a device to waste as much of other people’s time as possible … a computer programme randomly generating nonsense. It seems almost impossible that one man could make so many superhuman cock-ups.” Exasperated, at one stage the head of the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change sued him over allegations he had made. Such criticism seemed to make little difference to his certainties. A judge upbraided him over his coverage of an abuse case, for relying on a mother’s claim that her child had only suffered mild bruising rather than the broken bones actually incurred. Noting that Booker had not attended the court, Judge Clifford Bellamy said: “To rely uncritically upon what a parent says can lead to reporting that is unbalanced, inaccurate and just plain wrong.” Among his other books was The Seven Basic Plots (2004), a study of the patterns used in novel writing, which criticised authors such as Proust, Joyce and DH Lawrence while praising the films ET and Terminator 2. As a young man, Booker claimed that he wanted to edit a magazine, appear on television and marry an aristocrat’s daughter. He managed all three by the age of 25, though his first marriage, in 1963, to Emma Tennant, the daughter of Lord Glenconner, was brief, as was his second marriage, in 1972, to Christine Verity; both ended in divorce. He is survived by his third wife, Valerie Patrick, whom he married in 1979, and their two sons, Nicholas and Alexander. • Christopher John Penrice Booker, journalist and author, born 7 October 1937; died 3 July 2019