John Major was urged to show “supreme confidence and clear vision” in his doomed bid to secure media tycoon Rupert Murdoch’s support in the 1997 general election, government documents reveal. Murdoch had a half-hour meeting in 1995 with Major at No 10 at a time when his newspapers had been calling for a Conservative party leadership change and giving generous coverage to the opposition leader, Tony Blair. Blair would go on to win the 1997 election with the Sun’s support. Before the 1995 meeting, Major’s press secretary, Christopher Meyer, urged the prime minister to be bold, the newly released documents at the National Archives show. Meyer said: “[Murdoch] does not have much more than half an hour because of another appointment.” He continued: “The signal I am picking up, mainly from the Sun, is that Murdoch has given one of his touches to the tiller. His papers, having campaigned for a change in Conservative party leadership and given generous space to Blair, have started to hedge their bets again. This is particularly evident in the Sun, which continues to give you a good press. “It is impossible to say how long this phase will last. Murdoch’s practice, going back to his earliest days in newspaper publishing in Australia, is wherever possible to come out backing the winning side. As Trevor Kavanagh [Sun’s then political editor] told me the other day, the view in News International is that, while the odds are against your winning the next general election, a Blair victory is by no means a foregone conclusion. “I suggest, therefore, that the impression that you will want to leave with Murdoch, in what may be a short encounter, is one of supreme confidence and clear vision: you know that you can beat Blair and you know how you will do it. We want Murdoch to leave Downing Street convinced that Blair is going to have a real fight on his hands and that the Labour lead could well melt in the heat of your counter offensive.” The meeting between Major and Murdoch was against a backdrop of differences over media policies on digital broadcasting, cross-media ownership and privacy. Murdoch was annoyed about a decision on cross-media ownership which excluded him from owning ITV franchises. The Sun eventually told its readers to vote Labour in the 1997 election, switching sides after more than 20 years of supporting the Conservatives. Its front-page article was headlined: “The Sun Backs Blair.” It said the Labour leader was the “breath of fresh air” that Britain needed, while the Tories were “tired, divided and rudderless”.