This pared-down but polished look, as seen at Victoria Beckham SS19, is perfect when the thought of applying a full face of makeup makes you want to lie down in a dark room. It is minimal on time and effort. Prep by massaging your face with a balm cleanser – it’ll make your skin look alive, as will a touch of concealer, but only apply where needed. Tap highlighter on the cheekbones – avoid the disco ball stuff – apply mascara, a decent lip balm and pretend you woke up like this. 1. Pat McGrath Labs Skin Fetish Sublime Skin Highlighting Trio £45, netaporter.com2. Dr Nima The Ultimate Lip Enhancer Revive Gloss £45, drnimalondon.com3. Giorgio Armani Color Sketcher in Dragee £31, johnlewis.com4. Laura Mercier Caviar Volume Panoramic Mascara £22, spacenk.com5. La Prairie Supreme Balm Cleanser £117, selfridges.com Recently, I worked with a model who had no eyebrows. This was no ailment, mind you. It was ‘a look’. She is one of those rarities who actually looks better without brows. Alas, for most of us, the hackneyed advice about our brows being the ultimate face framers is true. And so we are all obsessed with the shape of our brows, obsessed with getting the perfect brow, obsessed with experimenting with the plethora of brow products on the market that may or may not leave us with brows so thick we may as well stick strips of duct tape above our eyes. However you choose to follow your perfect brow dream – drawing them on daily, microblading yearly, plucking or threading/waxing monthly – it takes skill, time, money and it’s exhausting. Hence, I am in love with this brow gloss. It makes the whole drama of getting decent brows less tedious. And it’s failsafe. The idea is ridiculously simple. Brush on the clear gel and you get enviably groomed, glossy, natural-looking brows. And they stay that way for up to 14 hours. The clear formulation – rosemary oil to encourage growth, jojoba to strengthen, vitamin E to condition – is universal so anyone can use it. Tempted to keep layering it on? Don’t. It will pill. Just one swipe is all you need to get the perfect brows you’ve been endlessly searching for. BBB Clear Brow Gloss, £21 lookfantastic.com Mask the problem From stimulating and cleansing, to hydrating and soothing, whatever your scalp concern Philip Kingsley, the foremost trichology brand, has a mask for it. Philip Kingsley Trichotherapy Scalp Masks, £19, philipkingsley.com Triple treat If you love a multitasker make a beeline for this luxe clay treatment. It triples up as a deep cleanser, an overnight mask and an intense conditioner. And it smells divine. Elemis Frangipani Monoi Hair & Scalp Mask, £33, elemis.com Scalp pal Hair products can strip the scalp’s microbiome, which helps keep scalps healthy, flake free and itch free. This alleviates dryness and irritation and sorts out scalp balance. Living Proof Dry Scalp Treatment, £25, livingproof.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.