Only a tiny number of athletes are so good that they change the way the game is organised. In racing, Arkle is remembered for being so far ahead of his contemporaries that handicappers had to change their approach for races he was due to run in. Alongside him, we can now put Frankie Dettori, who is so talented and so popular that bookmakers have started to change the terms on which they accept wildly optimistic accumulators. Skybet and bet365 have restricted the number of Dettori-ridden horses that can be permed together. Coral accepted Dettori accas on Saturday only on the basis that the final two runners would be paid at starting price, not the morning odds. Other firms have limited stakes. I prefer my bookmakers to be a little braver, bearing in mind that they have been quietly salting away the stakes placed on such wacky bets for decades, but two factors explain why they’re ducking for cover just now. One, it might be 25,000-1 or bigger against Dettori going through the card on a major raceday but an increasing number of punters are throwing a few coins on it, just in case. Two, the Italian is so full of fire at the moment that it could really happen, again. Honestly, would you be surprised if he rode every winner at Newmarket one day this week? It would be impressive, but hardly unexpected, given the way he’s riding. And that’s the point I wanted to make this morning, how astonishing it is that a battered old jockey should be at the peak of his powers at the age of 48. To be as good as he is now, Dettori has overcome not just the effects of ageing but the caprice of fashion. When he came back from his drugs ban in 2013, he was so neglected by trainers and owners that he ended the year with just 16 winners at an 8% strike-rate. Confidence has always been important to him and I don’t suppose he had much of it at that point. How different things are now, with nine winners from 14 rides over the past eight days, in which time he has won the Eclipse, the Grand Prix de Saint-Cloud and the Prix Jean Prat and even found time to nip over to Siena to watch the Palio. Dettori’s strike-rate in Britain this season is 29%. If he can sustain that to the end of the year, it will be easily the best of his career. Some press-room colleagues are striking a slightly miserabilist tone just now, responding to each of his wins by saying how much we’ll miss him, which is certainly true. But let’s not forget to marvel at what’s happening in front of us every Saturday. This rebuilt, revived Dettori is a phenomenon and surely retirement must be years off while he’s riding like this. Even the stewards appear to be in his thrall. With the safety of his fellow jockeys in mind, I do hope there will be no repeat of the interference he was allowed to get away with at Deauville on Sunday. There’s no Dettori today but we do have Nigel Tinkler. At 61, the trainer probably doesn’t celebrate quite like the Italian but he is in similar form, with nine winners at 29% over the past two weeks. I’d very much like him to keep that run going for at least another day, as I fancy both his runners. At Ayr, he fields Hello Girl (2.30), who rewarded market support by scoring at Lingfield nine days ago. That was her first success since 2017 but it was only her second outing since switching yards and evidently a big run was expected. Today’s run has a flavour of ‘after the Lord Mayor’s show’ about it but she’s only 4lb higher, is still in Class 6 company and gets fast ground again. It’s a big field but I’ll cheerfully take 9-2. More speculatively, Linda Perrett’s Retirement Beckons (5.00) could outrun odds of 14-1. He was a close fourth after pulling hard over a mile here in May and this shorter trip should help. At Ripon this evening, Tinkler has a fair chance with the 6-1 Flying Raconteur (7.10), an unlucky third on his handicap debut recently. An hour later, the nap is Sameem (8.10), returning to calmer waters after being well held in the Britannia. He’s nicely treated as the only three-year-old in a winnable race. Ayr 2.00 Saint Of Katowice 2.30 Hello Girl 3.00 Warning Fire 3.30 Venturous 4.00 Wild Hope 4.30 Lever Du Soleil 5.00 Retirement Beckons 5.30 Gunnison Worcester 2.15 Moreece 2.45 Powerful Symbol 3.15 Felicissimus 3.45 Boomarang 4.15 Bannixtown Glory 4.45 Aldrin 5.15 Black Lightning Windsor 5.50 Princess Keira 6.20 Timon 6.50 Izvestia 7.20 Dark Shadow 7.50 Cool Possibility 8.20 King Ademar 8.50 Alnadir Ripon 6.40 My Motivate Girl 7.10 Flying Raconteur (nb) 7.40 Manton Warrior 8.10 Sameem (nap) 8.40 Montalvan 9.10 Stagehand