I like that stewards reports are posted on Twitter these days but some care needs to be taken with the wording, as we learned yesterday when a verdict from Windsor caused understandable outrage. A member of Simon Crisford’s staff was fined £200 for “attempting to kick MOFAAJI in the groin area when leading the colt out of the Stables”. No further detail was offered in the tweet or the full stewards’ report posted online. But when I called Crisford, it became clear there was a lot more to be said. I should say that Crisford had not been at Windsor but had heard of the episode from his staff. R2 @WindsorRaces: An enquiry was held following a report from an Equine Welfare Integrity Officer that she had observed an employee of Simon Crisford attempting to kick MOFAAJI in the groin area when leading the colt out of the Stables. > pic.twitter.com/1qyLPHj629 Mofaaji was a previously unraced three-year-old who was known for behaving badly at home. At Windsor, he became very ‘coltish’, possibly as a result of being stabled near fillies. By the time of the incident, he was threatening to get out of control and was essentially trying to mount the groom leading him up, “climbing all over him” in Crisford’s words. Apparently, a bucket of water over the hind quarters is a sensible way to go in these circumstances. But Crisford’s travelling head man, who has been in racing 40 years, sought a short cut. “He tried to flick with his foot at the tip of Mofaaji’s penis,” Crisford tells me. “He says he was trying to get the horse to draw his sheath back in,” in the hope of getting the horse to calm down a bit. “Obviously, you can’t do that,” Crisford added. “It’s inexcusable and he will be disciplined by me.” But to my way of thinking, there’s a lot of mitigation here that could usefully have been reflected in the tweet from the stewards (and I’m told by the BHA that the stewards were given this same explanation on the day). The unnamed staffer was trying to assert control over a dangerous animal who was liable to hurt someone. This was not the unprovoked thuggery suggested on Twitter. And that £200 fine isn’t to be laughed at, either. I imagine it’s a lot more, as a percentage of this man’s disposable income, than most of the fines levied on trainers for rule breaches. Mofaaji seemingly has ability and was backed down to evens despite his colty behaviour but finished only third. I think we can all guess what kind of operation is on the immediate horizon for him. Two horses with a similar chance line up in the opener at Pontefract, but Scuzeme is 9-2 while Gullane One (2.00) is almost three times that at 12-1. My preference was very marginally for Gullane One before knowing what the odds were, but the disparity in their prices makes him even more tempting. Tim Easterby’s charge beat Scuzeme at Thirsk last month. He’s 2lb worse off for three parts of a length but looked capable of confirming the form, especially on a faster surface, which he gets here. He has since been well beaten at Ayr but that race went wrong from him in the stalls, when his blindfold was late coming off. With cheekpieces on for the first time and David Allan taking over in the saddle, he’s easily worth another chance. There’s an apprentice claimer at Wolverhampton, which may not be music to your ears, but The Groove (2.45) and Georgia Dobie should prove one of the more capable combinations at 15-2. He won a couple of sellers here in February under Gina Mangan and has run a couple of fair races on turf more recently. He comes from the David Evans yard that is normally prolific but hasn’t had a runner for at least a fortnight, so it’s encouraging to see a bit of market interest in him. The nap is Robeam (7.00) in a staying handicap at Catterick. This Richard Fahey three-year-old has been showing promise in marathon races and now gets to take on a pretty modest collection of older horses. He’s 9-2 from the opening 6s. At Windsor, odds of 5-2 look pretty good about Cherry Cola (5.45), a three-year-old filly who has thrived since being upped to middle distances by Sheena West, having been campaigned over six furlongs for another yard as a juvenile. There’s not much doubt that she is still handily treated on a mark of 65, though there are a couple of dangerous rivals and a steady pace might be against her. Pontefract 2.00 Gullane One 2.30 Monoski 3.00 Daffy Jane 3.30 Fayetta 4.00 Raspberry 4.30 Spiorad 5.00 Regal Mirage Wolverhampton 2.15 Leopardima 2.45 The Groove 3.15 Rich Belief 3.45 Sepahi 4.15 You’re Cool 4.45 Moment Of Hope 5.15 Showdance Kid Windsor 5.45 Cherry Cola (nb) 6.15 Dream Kart 6.45 Tomily 7.15 Takumi 7.45 Embour 8.15 Frontman 8.45 Orliko Catterick 6.00 Mia Diva 6.30 Adam’s Ale 7.00 Robeam (nap) 7.30 The Defiant 8.00 Grand Inquisitor 8.30 Arabian Jazz 9.00 I Could Do Better