Lewis Hamilton took pole position for the German Grand Prix as Ferrari’s challenge fell away at Hockenheim. The British driver put in a superb lap but two separate mechanical failures on the Ferrari cars ensured he only had to beat Red Bull’s Max Verstappen, who was second and his Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas, who was third. Charles Leclerc, who had shown the best pace all weekend, suffered a fuel system issue and did not set a time in the final session and will start from 10th. His teammate Sebastian Vettel did not even take to the track at all and will start at the back of the grid. Pierre Gasly was in fourth for Red Bull, with Kimi Räikkönen in fifth for Alfa Romeo. Mercedes had not been on top in any of the practice sessions and Ferrari genuinely looked to have the quicker car in Germany but they were unable to exploit it. By the time Hamilton came to the sharp end of qualifying both the red cars had fallen away. The British driver grasped his chance as he has done repeatedly this season. He set the quickest time on his first hot runs in Q3 with a 1min 11.704sec. It proved to be enough, neither he nor any of the other drivers could better it on their second runs. The lap was superb, a full four-tenths clear of Verstappen, the only question it left was whether it would have been good enough to deny Ferrari. Hamilton however will not be overly concerned with what-ifs, he believed it would have been competitive but what mattered that he again ruthlessly took his opportunity. Vettel’s car suffered a problem with the airflow to the turbo in Q1 and although the mechanics tried to work on it they could not put the car out on track and he was unable to set a time. “I don’t know what happened, something was broken with the turbo,” he said. “It’s bitter for us. The car feels great and we have missed a big opportunity here.” Leclerc made it through to Q3 but then could not leave the garage and although the team worked on the fuel system problem he had to climb resignedly from his car. Hamilton’s 87th career pole position is his fourth this season but only his third at the German Grand Prix, a race he has won four times. Should he do so again on Sunday he will become the most successful driver at the German Grand Prix with five wins, one more than Michael Schumacher’s previous record. At their home race Mercedes are running a new white livery to celebrate 125 years of motor racing since what is considered to be the first race held in 1894 from Paris to Rouen. The white gives way to the traditional silver at the rear of the car in homage to the legend that the team had scraped off the white paint to save weight from their car in 1934. This will be the team’s 200th Grand Prix entry as a constructor. They have 96 wins, with a remarkable 59 of them scored by Hamilton. He already has seven wins this season and another here will further tighten his firm grip on the title race. Hamilton has five wins from the last six races, which has ensured he has a dominant lead in the world championship. The British driver leads Bottas by 39 points with Vettel 100 points back and 13 behind Verstappen who is in third. Mercedes have won all but one race this season, denied only by Verstappen who took the flag in Austria. Hamilton and Mercedes had expected their car to struggle somewhat in the high temperatures in Germany, as they had in Austria and in practice on Friday Ferrari had the advantage with Vettel quickest in the first session and Leclerc in the second. Yet although the heatwave finally dissipated on Saturday morning, Ferrari still had an edge with Leclerc quickest in FP3. Since the circuit was curtailed from the layout of grand straights disappearing into the forest it presents a far more technical challenge, especially the second half of the lap which should play to the Mercedes strength through the corners. That Ferrari could match them here was encouraging for the Scuderia, while on the opening straights the Ferrari’s power advantage was telling. However when it mattered it was Mercedes who took advantage of Ferrari’s failings. Romain Grosjean was in sixth for Haas, with Carlos Sainz in seventh for McLaren. Sergio Pérez was in eighth for Racing Point with Nico Hülkenberg in ninth for Renault. Antonio Giovinazzi was in 11th in front of the Haas of Kevin Magnussen and the Renault of Daniel Ricciardo. Daniil Kvyat was in 14th for Toro Rosso with Lance Stroll in 15th for Racing Point. McLaren’s Lando Norris went out in Q1 in 16th, with Toro Rosso’s Alexander Albon 17th. Williams brought their first major aero upgrade of the season to Hockenheim and the team were pleased with the results although George Russell and Robert Kubica remained at the back of the grid in 18th and 19th