Steve Bruce has vowed to win over the doubters at Newcastle after admitting he has always regretted turning down the manager’s job the first time he was offered it. The 58-year-old was installed as Rafael Benítez’s replacement on Wednesday as angry fans vented their displeasure at owner Mike Ashley’s running of the club. Bruce never played for the club he supported as a boy and said the chance to take charge was one he could not refuse a second time. Speaking to the club’s in-house TV channel in Shanghai, where he will oversee his first game against West Ham in the Premier League Asia Trophy on Saturday, he said: “I’m like every other Geordie, I’ve lived the dream. If you can’t play for them, then of course if you’re a Geordie, what better thing than to take the number one seat? I’m delighted to have been given the opportunity and I’ll do my best. “I know in some people’s eyes, I’m not Rafa and I understand there are big shoes to fill. But believe me, I’ll give it everything I possibly can and hopefully prove the doubters wrong.” Bruce, who met the players on Thursday after his arrival in China, might have managed Newcastle much earlier in his career having been approached when Sir Bobby Robson was sacked in 2004 during his time in charge at Birmingham. “Back a few years ago, I regretted it,” Bruce said. “I regretted it and it lingered around me for years, when Sir Bobby left. To be given the opportunity again, it was simply something I had to take, I had to grasp it. “I knew it was going to be difficult – as I said, the easy thing would have been to say no. I just hope that people will show the respect, which obviously you only gain by getting a few results and doing the job, but hopefully that will go hand in hand.” The club are understood to be in advanced talks with Hoffenheim over signing the Brazilian striker Joelinton, with the Bundesliga side’s head coach, Alfred Schreuder, confirming on Thursday that he expects the 22-year-old to leave in this transfer window. “Of course it is a pity that he leaves,” Schreuder told German publication Kicker. “It’s not my decision, that’s what the club does. It’s a matter of philosophy.”