It started with an email. My brother-in-law had died of cancer and I posted a tribute on Facebook. Shortly afterwards, an email arrived from someone I didn’t know, expressing their condolences for my loss and saying it made their “snarky comments” on Twitter seem petty and ill-timed. I knew, of course, that this was their way of alerting me to what they had actually said on Twitter. It was mostly the usual trolling that can be found on the most antisocial of social networks. I chose to ignore it. Like many writers, I spend a fair amount of time on Twitter. Learning to ignore the trolls is part of the job. But this particular troll refused to be ignored. The snarky comments gave way to homophobic insults. I was called “pansy”, “fag”, “queer” and “gaylord”. At the time, I was employed as LGBT editor at Time Out, so I was running my personal Twitter account and a second account on behalf of the magazine. The tweets kept coming. Some days there would be one or two. Other days, there would be dozens. When Guardian Weekend magazine ran a dedicated gay issue, I shared the link on Twitter and headed off to the gym. By the time I arrived, my mentions were mostly from this person. “GAY, GAY, GAY, GAY, GAY!” read one. Another described me as “the Aids generation”. Like many gay men my age, I lost a lot of people to Aids. Before becoming a journalist, I was an Aids activist. By the time I was 25, I had buried half my friends. I had written about this. I didn’t need reminding of the fact by someone clearly trying to trigger an emotional response. I blocked the account sending the tweets, thinking this would be the end of it. But I hadn’t counted on how determined my cyber-stalker was to make their presence felt. Because I use Twitter largely for work, my accounts were public. So they simply logged off Twitter, opened their browser and checked to see whom I was engaging with, then continued to tag me and several others in their tweets. If one person responded, the mention would appear in my notifications and I would be alerted to what was being said. I posted a tweet asking them to stop harassing me and threatened legal action if they continued. I asked my Twitter followers not to respond to their tweets. None of it made any difference. If anything, the situation escalated. There were comments on the Time Out website and on various other sites where my work was published. The accused posted blogs describing me as a “middle-class wanker” and accusing me of “gayism”. They doctored my Wikipedia page, deleting large parts of my bibliography and other professional achievements. They continued to send me emails from various accounts, CCing friends and work associates to ensure that I got the message. No sooner had I blocked one email address than they would create another. I discovered that I wasn’t the only target. Others included well-known feminist columnists, some of whom wrote for this newspaper. But despite the person’s reputation as a notorious troll, there were no photographs to be found anywhere on the internet. To understand the emotional and psychological impact of online harassment, you have to consider the amount of time many of us spend in front of our computers or glued to our phones. In my line of work, email is the main method of communication. Authors and journalists are expected to have a strong online presence, which means a considerable amount of time is spent on Facebook and Twitter. And that’s not counting the hours you might choose to spend on social media for personal reasons. Online harassment affects you in the workplace, on the move and at home. Abusive tweets and emails are often the first thing you see in the morning and the last thing you see before switching off your devices. It quickly reached the point where I dreaded logging on to my computer or checking my phone. I spoke to friends, who were becoming increasingly concerned about the impact the harassment was having on me. I was drinking heavily and in a state of constant anxiety. One female friend was worried that the person stalking me might be dangerous. So when they started booking tickets for my author events and posting photos of the tickets on Twitter with threats to come and challenge me in person, I became increasingly alarmed. The stalker could be anyone sitting in the audience at one of my events. They could be harmless. Or, for all I knew, they could be carrying a knife. Two things then happened at once. A friend who had also been targeted called to say she had identified our stalker. Then, one of the judges on the Polari First Book prize, which I had recently set up, received an email enquiring about submissions. The prize is for debut books exploring LGBT themes. The inquiry came from my stalker. The judge replied saying they could submit their self-published book, but that we weren’t able to accept submissions under a pseudonym. They came back confirming their real name and address. Despite the fact that many of her tweets expressed views commonly held by men’s rights activists, my stalker was a woman. It took me a few weeks before I finally did what I should have done months previously and reported her to the police. The detective asked what took me so long. The truth is, I was embarrassed to admit that I was being bullied by a woman. I was bullied a lot as a child – usually by other boys, always on the basis that I was “a poof” – and the shame still lingered. I have also been on the receiving end of homophobic abuse as an adult – but that was either verbal or physical and therefore seemed more “real”. When I was waiting to give a statement at Brixton police station, my eyes were drawn to a poster urging people to report domestic violence. The stark image of a woman’s battered, bruised face made my complaint seem petty by comparison. The online nature of the harassment made me question whether the police would take me seriously. Thankfully, they did. It took several months before an arrest was made and the accused charged under the Malicious Communications Act. For weeks, I had personal security whenever I appeared at public events and I had to keep a record of every unsolicited email and unwanted social media contact in order to help the police build a case and persuade the CPS to prosecute. Naively, I had assumed that once I reported the crime, someone else would monitor the accused’s online behaviour. But the police don’t have the resources. The detective stressed that a case such as mine all depended on the volume of evidence. So I had to keep copies of every email and take screenshots of every abusive, homophobic tweet, print them out and then give further police statements where I had to relive the abuse and its impact. The police referred me to victim support, but I didn’t contact them. Why? I think, on some level, I hated the thought of being seen as a victim. I have been a gay rights activist since the 80s and have lived through a period of enormous social change. Acknowledging my victimhood felt like a step backwards. But I was certainly in need of support. I was having trouble sleeping. I went to see my GP, broke down in his surgery and was prescribed antidepressants. I had never been on antidepressants before and I hated the way they made me feel. I became unfocused. I found it difficult to write. I still had trouble sleeping. I first saw the accused long before taking the witness stand. Approaching the court building on the first morning of the trial, I spotted a slightly dishevelled, skittish-looking woman, about 40, accompanied by an older man whom I took to be her father. Something in my gut immediately told me it was her. Sure enough, as soon as she saw me, the look on her face turned to one of panic and she scuttled off. Two things crossed my mind. One, that she was a typical keyboard warrior, brave behind a screen, but not so courageous in real life. Two, that something about her wasn’t quite right. Her appearance and body language suggested that this was someone with problems. I would have probably felt pity for her, had she not caused me so much distress. Testifying in court is a nerve-racking business. However much the police and prosecution tell you otherwise, it is hard not to feel that you are the one on trial. The defence made light of the homophobic nature of the harassment, dismissing it as “playful banter” and suggesting that I was oversensitive. They argued that I am a public figure on a social media platform and should therefore be open to healthy debate. I insisted that healthy debate does not include the right to harass and abuse someone, and that the defendant’s behaviour towards me was homophobic and relentless. The district judge agreed and found her guilty of harassment without violence. Unlike racial or faith-motivated offences, there is no “aggravated offence” legislation in UK law for crimes motivated by homophobia. But, in her summing up, the judge stressed the homophobic nature of the case. The defendant was given a two-year suspended sentence and issued with a restraining order. Having finally seen my cyber-stalker in the flesh, I assumed that the anxiety she provoked in me would quickly dissipate. My biggest fear had been not knowing whom I was dealing with. Now that fear had been put to rest, I thought I would put the whole thing behind me. But the impact of the harassment lingered long after the trial was over. I had nightmares most nights and flashbacks during the day. I was restless, hyper-alert and easily startled. Sometimes, I would see random women on the tube and my heart would pound, convinced for a moment that it was her. On the advice of my GP, I continued taking antidepressants for several months. I also sought help from victim support. I saw a counsellor, who told me I was suffering from a form of PTSD. What nobody tells you is that about 40% of people issued with a restraining order breach it within a few months. I am pleased to say that I neither saw nor heard from this person again. But what if I had? I was already at my wits’ end. Had she continued to harass me, what would I have done? I knew who she was and where she lived. Might I have been tempted to take the law into my own hands? I like to think not, but I couldn’t say for certain. That scared me. It also gave me the seed of an idea for a novel. The Closer I Get is a psychological thriller that doesn’t end with the villain being apprehended or facing prosecution. It is about a writer who is stalked by an obsessive fan and what happens after she has been found guilty. How does a victim of harassment put their life back together when the trial is over and justice has been served? And what drives someone to harass someone they don’t know in the first place? The characters in my story are entirely fictional. This being a psychological thriller, the line between protagonist and antagonist is deliberately blurred. But the underlying dynamic is one I understand all too well. Writing the book was daunting. Would it reopen old wounds? Would my mental health be affected? But turning a traumatic experience into a work of fiction proved enormously therapeutic. Before, I was still consumed with anger at the woman who harassed me. Now, I feel nothing but pity for her. And that is far easier to live with. The Closer I Get by Paul Burston is published by Orenda Books on 11 July