It’s been a sorry time to be a Milan fan. Having seen their team fail to qualify for the Champions League and then get banned from the Europa League for breaching FFP rules, the venerable old club’s followers need some good news. The kind of exciting transfer talk that places them at the front of the queue to sign one of the best defenders in the world. Yes, it says here that Dejan Lovren may be on his way out of Anfield to San Siro after his agent held talks with the Serie A club over a £25m move. Just £25m! What value! OK, so yes, he’s 29 and played only 13 times in the league for Liverpool last season due to a list of ailments that The Mill’s granddad would blush about, but they’ll get a confident defensive vibes man; a believer who will stridently ignore his own failings – and Milan’s. If he ever plays. Just £25m! Take that FFP! Manchester United want a new collection of racy young midfielders who will run around a bit for the cause instead of sulking like grounded teenagers. First on the list is Rumour Mill favourite, Bruno Fernandes. They’ve reportedly submitted a £31m offer for the midfield dynamo but have been told by Sporting to get serious and come back with considerably more cash. United beancounters have also set aside £25m for Newcastle’s Sean Longstaff. It’s the kind of money that would help fund Mike Ashley’s main hobby of buying up failing retail chains on the British high street. So watch this space. Oh, and on the subject of brooding midfielders, Paul Pogba has been training alone in New York while his teammates report back for training. Make of that what you will. A year after almost signing for Liverpool, Nabil Fekir is still very much keen to play for a Premier League team who play in red – and he may get his wish if Arsenal turn their attention away from Wilfried Zaha for a moment, and throw in a £30m bid for the unsettled Lyon playmaker. Reports in France suggest Fekir is being touted around like cheap meat in a dodgy pub. It’s a cut-price deal for sure, as Liverpool were primed to sign him for £50m last season before medical concerns caused the transfer to collapse. Crystal Palace have targeted jinking Carl Jenkinson as a replacement for Aaron Wan Bissaka at right-back. Jenkinson, who has been loaned out for the best part of a decade, is still an Arsenal player, apparently. He will cost Palace just £5m and the Gunners will probably be delighted to have the opportunity to negotiate with Palace so they can keep badgering them about lowering their asking price for Wilfried Zaha to something slightly less ludicrous than £100m. It seems that Barcelona may be up to some fun and games to get their mitts on Antoine Griezmann for a little less than the £107m Atlético Madrid want for the 28-year-old striker. You see, reports in Italy suggest the club are willing to pay £100m for the 21-year-old Inter and Argentina striker Lautaro Martínez, also known as “The Bull”. The Mill can smell a bit of that here. Expect Griezmann, not Martínez, to wind up at the Camp Nou. And in red-hot managerial news, Derby are set to hold further talks with Phillip Cocu over replacing Chelsea-bound Frank Lampard as manager. Cocu has been kicking his heels since October, when he was sacked by Fenerbahce.