While other leagues like to take their time when it comes to free agency, the NBA gets things done in a hurry. However, a few decisions took a while to develop, most notably Kawhi Leonard’s league-shattering decision to head to the Los Angeles Clippers after leading the Toronto Raptors to their first championship. Here are our attempts to see who fared the best after an eventful few weeks. 1) Los Angeles Clippers Did anybody see this coming? Late on Friday night, the Clippers pulled off a huge trade with the Oklahoma City Thunder to acquire Paul George, which ended up being the move they needed to convince Kawhi Leonard to sign with them after his brief stint in Toronto. Barely anybody was aware of the George trade until just after an earthquake stopped games in the Las Vegas summer league, because every metaphor has to be disgustingly on the nose in 2019 America. It was a fantastic deal for the Clippers, who added two legitimate MVP candidates to a team that had already managed to make a surprise playoff run last season with the none-too-shabby likes of Patrick Beverley, Lou Williams and Montrezl Harrell. Yes, the Clips had to give up a massive haul that included five first-round draft picks alongside players Danilo Gallinari and Shai Gilgeous-Alexander. But they can write that off as the price that needed to be paid in order to both get George from the Thunder and convince Leonard that they were a team worth joining. Now, they will enter next season as the hottest team in the NBA, and have one-upped that other team in Los Angeles shortly after they mortgaged all their assets for Anthony Davis. 2) Brooklyn Nets This has been the offseason of the neglected younger brother. Right after the Los Angeles Lakers were overshadowed by the Clippers, the Nets completely humiliated the New York Knicks. Kyrie Irving changed teams once again, jilting the Boston Celtics by signing a four-year, $142m contract with Brooklyn. Much like with Leonard, Irving acted as something of a harbinger, bringing alongside him Kevin Durant, a player who eventually could turn the Nets into the best team in the East. “Eventually” is the key word here as Durant will be out for a majority – or maybe even the entirety – of the 2019-20 season with an achilles injury. Still, the Nets are betting on Durant returning to his MVP form when he does return. In the meantime, Irving will get to enjoy running the entire show. The Nets will be dangerous even without Durant. 3) Philadelphia 76ers For the second straight season, the Sixers have gone all-in. The Sixers lost Jimmy Butler, their major trade acquisition last season to the Miami Heat, although they did manage to get back Josh Richardson in a sign-and-trade. They then went and offered big man Al Horford a four-year, $109m contract, adding him to a core that still features Joel Embiid, Ben Simmons and a re-signed Tobias Harris. The pieces didn’t quite come together last year but replacing Butler with Horford could do wonders for their team chemistry. 4) Utah Jazz While the teams in LA made the headline-grabbing moves, the Utah Jazz have very quietly gone through one of the most intriguing rebuilds in the Western Conference. After trading for the Memphis Grizzlies’ Mike Conley, they signed Bojan Bogdanovic and then added Ed Davis to the mix. Call them the hipsters’ choice to emerge from the West. 5) NBA parity Had Leonard gone to the Lakers instead of the Clippers, it’s likely we would have seen another super-team form in the Western Conference right as the Warriors took a step backward. While plenty of big-name players have hooked up over the last week, they managed to distribute themselves across the NBA rather than all finding themselves on a single team. This means that unless there’s some unforeseen moves yet to come, there will be no prohibitive favorites in either conference next season. If LeBron James heading to the Lakers opened up the East last year, this offseason opened up the West and there are many realistic finals match-ups in play now. Over the last few years, it’s felt like the league was becoming predictable and fans were starting to grow weary of the appearance of inevitability. It feels like we have pivoted away from that. 1) Los Angeles Lakers Let’s make this clear: if we’re talking about the offseason in general: the Lakers established themselves as winners the second they traded for Anthony Davis. At this moment, however, we’re looking at free agency. It’s impossible to argue that losing out on Leonard didn’t hurt the Lakers on several fronts. Not only did they miss out on putting together a super-team that would made them the clear finals favorites, they also waited so long for his decision they didn’t have a chance to bid on the most desirable of the other free agents. While the Lakers did the best they could to move on, it’s not like either the dependable Danny Green or the surprisingly devalued DeMarcus Cousins are the kind of players who could be part of a Big Three. Plus, they put themselves in a position where they had to bring back Rajon Rondo and JaVale McGee to the circus in LA. 2) New York Knicks The Knicks saved all that cap space with the hope of picking up two max contracts, only to see Irving and Durant head to that other New York team. They apparently didn’t even bother meeting with Leonard, just rightfully assuming that he wanted no part of whatever is going on over there. Instead, they spent their money on [checks notes] uh, Julius Randle. The Lakers were merely temporarily embarrassed by the Leonard decision, the James Dolan-era Knicks are stuck in a perpetual nightmare of their own creation. It certainly would be nice to have Kristaps Porzingis right now, wouldn’t it? 3) Toronto Raptors There’s no way to second-guess the trade with the San Antonio Spurs that brought in Leonard at the cost of DeMar DeRozan. Leonard pretty much single-handedly brought Toronto a championship and that will last forever. But, again, we’re talking about free agency here and the Raptors were clearly in a pass/fail situation. They didn’t have what it would have taken to convince Leonard to stay with them, he left for the Clippers and so their offseason went badly. Given how competitive the Eastern Conference stands to be next season, it’s hard to see the suddenly starless Raptors pulling off a repeat championship next year. Oh well, they will always have 2019. 4) Golden State Warriors Just in time for their move out of Oakland, the Warriors dynasty is officially over. Kevin Durant left for the Nets, although Golden State wisely picked up D’Angelo Russell as compensation. The Warriors re-signed Klay Thompson to a five-year, $190m maximum contract, but they don’t know when he’ll fully be healthy due to the ACL injury he suffered in the finals. Andre Iguodala is heading to the Memphis Grizzlies. An era is officially over. Don’t sleep on the Warriors, who could still win the championship next year. Steph Curry isn’t going anywhere anytime soon. It’s just that emerging from the West is going to be more difficult than it ever has been thanks to the improvements made by the Lakers, Clippers and Jazz not to mention the continuing presence of James Harden in Houston and the pesky Denver Nuggets. The Warriors haven’t been this vulnerable since the last time they missed the finals back in 2014. 5) Charlotte Hornets The Boston Celtics hoped to re-sign Kyrie Irving and Al Horford and possibly trade for Anthony Davis. None of that happened, but they did manage to lure Kemba Walker away from the Hornets and get them to take Terry Rozier off their hands in a sign-and-trade. And while we certainly can’t give the Celtics a W for their offseason, we definitely can give the Hornets an L. 6) Russell Westbrook The Oklahoma City Thunder did well by holding out for a king’s ransom for Paul George once they realized they wouldn’t be able to keep him. That said, it wasn’t a good look for former teammate Russell Westbrook that George left, especially since it comes only a few years after Durant left to join the Warriors. Westbrook’s been a league MVP but there’s always been a question about whether he was a player you could win with. Certainly, the Thunder never managed to do it despite partnering him with some high-caliber players and now they may be looking to ship him off now that a rebuild seems the next logical step. With $125m owed to him over the next three seasons, good luck finding a buyer.