The wave of urban renewal that swept the world in the 20th century gave us inner-city highways, modernist downtown malls and high-rise housing projects. It destroyed countless fine-grained, human-scaled neighbourhoods. We lost more than just physical buildings. Each of these communities contained something less tangible – neighbourhoods like these are ecosystems. They incubate communities and cultures that do not and could not exist elsewhere. Sometimes, as in these 10 that follow, a neighbourhood lives in the memory of the displaced and their descendants, as powerful in death as in life. In 1914, the author Gustav Meyrink wrote a vivid depiction of 16th-century life in Prague’s Jewish quarter, Josefov. His novel Der Golem describes an oppressive labyrinth of ancient, looming houses in which “something malicious seemed to permeate the very bricks”. That was pretty close to the perspective of Prague’s city government at the end of the 19th century. By then, Josefov’s medieval streets had become a dense, diverse hub of poor Czechs, immigrants and artisans whose trades had been devastated by factory manufacturing. City authorities, inspired by Georges-Eugène, Baron Haussmann’s recent “renovation” of Paris, saw it as a blight. In December 1896, the Finis Ghetto urban-renewal scheme kicked off with a literal bang, as 45 houses were destroyed by dynamite. With the exception of few religious sites, the entire neighbourhood was destroyed. The razing faced little opposition from Prague’s Jewish residents, many of whom returned after redevelopment – fuelling resentment among the displaced, and contributing to the antisemitic atmosphere that prevailed in the years before the first world war. A neighbourhood within a building, Mecca Flats was built for Chicago’s 1893 World’s Columbian Exposition and by 1910 was home to artists, musicians, white-collar workers and labourers, mostly black, many arrivals in the great migration. The building was one of America’s first luxury apartment houses, oriented around a central atrium that brought the street life of the neighbourhood indoors. By the great depression, it housed more than 1,000 people. The poet Gwendolyn Brooks worked in the building as a peddler in the 1930s, and immortalised it in her 1968 epic poem, In the Mecca, conceiving of it as a cross-section of black American life: “To touch every note in the life of this block-long block-wide building, would be to capsulize the gist of black humanity in general.” The Mecca was acquired by the Illinois Institute of Technology in 1941; tenants, activists and preservationists rallied to save it, but it was replaced with the school’s Crown Hall – a bright slice of modernism, designed in direct opposition to the perceived darkness and decrepitude of the Mecca. St John’s Ward was an aberration in uptight, homogenous 20th-century Toronto. A diverse polyglot with a population density approaching that of contemporary central Hong Kong, it was a prototypical arrival city, with Irish, Italian, Jewish, African, Chinese and others establishing their first Canadian beachheads. A 1922 dispatch in the city’s Globe newspaper reported: “Chinese restaurants are filled with negro customers, many of them women, while here and there an occasional white girl can be seen partaking of a meal with either a brown or yellow skinned partner.” Sanitation and overcrowding were the ostensible targets of the reformers who sought to eradicate the Ward, but that nascent multiculturalism was probably as much a target. Redevelopment began in 1946 and continued for decades; today, the district is an imposing institutional corridor separating the city’s downtown from the fine-grained neighbourhoods to the west – a few of which, especially Kensington Market and Chinatown, still bear traces of the old Ward. Born in Alabama, Coleman Young’s family moved to Detroit’s Black Bottom in 1923. The future mayor found himself at five years old amid a community of Jewish, Greek, Italian and Irish residents – and a burgeoning black population arriving, as his family did, from the south. (Boxers Joe Louis and Sugar Ray Robinson, both southerners by birth, lived a few doors from one another here in the 1930s.) Young was politicised as a teenager, listening to union workers talk leftist politics in a local barbershop. He found entertainment along the neighbourhood’s commercial spine, Hastings Street, where John Lee Hooker, Della Reese and others found their musical footing in small clubs. As with other renewal projects nationally, the funds to raze the community were in part provided by the federal Housing Act of 1949, which extended broad powers of expropriation to cities. By 1956 much of Hastings Street had been destroyed and replaced by the Chrysler Freeway. Bisected, what remained of the community quickly fell into decline. Late in life, Young would remember the neighbourhood as “a thrilling convergence of people, a wonderfully versatile and self-contained society”. Philip Payton Jr is sometimes referred to as the “father of Harlem” for his work buying properties in Upper Manhattan and renting them to black tenants. In 1905, he began to do the same on West 99th and 98th streets, purchasing several blocks of buildings between Central Park West and Amsterdam Avenue. A Harlem-in-miniature took root here, and half a decade later, it was a tight-knit community that included the composer Will Marion Cook, opera singer Abbie Mitchell, activist James Weldon Johnson, historian Arturo Schomburg and singer Billie Holiday. In 1951, empowered as Detroit was by 1949’s Housing Act, the city declared the district a slum and evicted residents. More than 500 buildings were demolished, replaced by a luxury housing project called Park West Village. The community became one of the lesser known victims of US slum clearance, though no less mourned by its former residents. “There’s a space in my life that’s missing right now because of that move,” former resident Jim Torain told a documentary film crew in 2008. In 1844, Los Angeles councilman and rancher Julian Chavez petitioned for 83 acres (33.5 hectares) of land in what was than a semi-rural district near today’s Echo Park. He got it, and over the following decades three neighbourhood, Palo Verde, La Loma and Bishop, developed in the verdant hills north of the city. The mostly Mexican-American residents practised subsistence agriculture and raised livestock, ran their own schools, and lived a semi-agrarian lifestyle – in the shadow of one of the nation’s ascendant boomtowns. By the 1940s, urban renewal made the community a target for redevelopment. Residents’ homes were expropriated, and while they were promised relocation to new public housing, those plans fell apart after Norris Poulson, who believed public housing to be a communist plot, won 1953’s Los Angeles mayoral race. A handful of stragglers waged the years-long Battle of Chavez Ravine against city authorities, but by 1959 the community was destroyed. In 1962, Dodger Stadium was erected on the site. Sophiatown was the Victorian-era brainchild of a real estate investor who in 1897 bought 237 acres of land near Johannesburg, laid out a few tidy streets, and named them after his children and wife. After the city located a sewage disposal plant nearby, his white homebuyers fled, and black residents found an opportunity denied them elsewhere: property ownership. By the 1950s, Sophiatown was the “Chicago of South Africa”, filled with shebeens (speakeasies), incubating musicians and artists. It was a focal point of activity for the African National Congress and a young Nelson Mandela, and a hub of anti-apartheid activism. In Sophiatown Speaks, the poet and former resident Don Mattera declared: “Sophiatown was the antithesis of what they wanted for this country. Sophiatown had the black people – meaning Coloured, Indians, Blacks of all tribes – and the whites living together.” In 1955, its residents were mostly relocated to the township of Soweto, out of the city. The community was bulldozed, reconstructed as a district of tidy bungalows, and renamed, in Afrikaans, Triomf, eventually reverting in 2006 to its original name. The de facto capital of Canada’s eastern provinces, Halifax is proof that urban renewal often exacted as great a toll on small cities as on large ones. In 1969, local planners were aiming to replicate the slum clearance policies of bigger metropolises, and devised a scheme to raze the city’s historic waterfront for an expressway to the suburbs. Protests halted the expressway, but not a massive downtown interchange that wiped out almost 15 blocks and 400 buildings in the city centre. It displaced thousands of mostly poor residents, and severed the city’s working-class North End from its downtown, exacerbating its decline. Many of the displaced were African-Nova Scotian, descendants of some of Canada’s oldest black communities. (The displacement came just a few years after the destruction of Africville, a historic black community at the city’s northern tip.) The interchange was considered a blight almost as soon as it was erected, and will soon be torn down itself, to be replaced by a mixed-use neighbourhood. In the 1950s, a group of itinerant puppeteers settled on the outskirts of Delhi, establishing this vital community of performers. Memorably described in Salman Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children, its thousands of small homes, called jhuggis, were crammed daily with magic shows, music, storytelling, puppetry and performance. But like similar communities, Kathputli lacked sanitation and other amenities; by the 2000s, it was targeted by the Delhi Development Authority, which planned an “in-situ rehabilitation” programme. This involved moving residents to a “transit camp”, razing the neighbourhood, and developing a new high-rise district. Nearly 3,000 350-square-foot apartments were to house former residents, with the rest of the land given to market-rate development. Few residents willingly moved, arguing that the community’s survival depended – like Seoul’s Euljiro district – on the irreplaceable particulars of its built environment. The tension came to a head in October 2017 when demolition began, leaving residents fleeing their homes with little notice. Some residents remained, living in the ruins. A visitor to Shanghai in the late 19th century would have found the city dominated by narrow, winding lanes of shikumen, the local equivalent of Britain’s Victorian terraced workers’ housing, or Philadelphia’s miles of rowhouse neighbourhoods. Laoximen is among the most famous of these neighbourhoods, the product of an earlier population boom that saw the city swell with rural residents coming to the fast-growing city, a hub of regional trade. Today, as the city struggles to house its 26.3 million residents, many old neighbourhoods are being targeted. Part of Laoximen has been destroyed, and demolition is imminent for what remains. Shanghai has a better reputation for preservation than many Chinese cities, however, and a few buildings in Laoximen may be retained. “It still breaks your heart every time you see something like Laoximen,” Tina Kanagaratnam of advocacy group Historic Shanghai told the South China Morning Post last year. “You know this whole way of life is not going to continue. But every time we go somewhere else in China and come back, we think, ‘Oh thank God we live in Shanghai’, because there is so much more of this than there is anywhere else.” Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram to join the discussion, catch up on our best stories or sign up for our weekly newsletter