President Andrés Manuel López Obrador of Mexico has called the jail conditions of drug lord Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán inhumane, while vowing to bring down violence stemming from drug violence by creating a society less obsessed with material wealth. Guzmán will spend the rest of his days behind bars in the United States after a judge sentenced him to life in prison plus 30 years. A jury found him guilty in February after a 12-week trial. At his regular morning conference on Thursday, López Obrador said that sentences like Guzmán’s – “a sentence for life in a hostile jail, hard, inhumane” – made a life no longer worth living. But López Obrador also criticized the violence Guzmán wrought over his long career, and said society needed moral reforms. “I also have many victims in mind,” he added. “It’s something very painful.“ López Obrador has created a new militarized police force to bring down violence that has spiraled as cartels splinter and smaller groups fight for territory. Last year, violence cost a record 33,000 lives. Those numbers continued surging in the first six months of López Obrador’s term in office, which began in December. When asked whether he expected violence to rise further over coming weeks following the sentencing of El Chapo, López Obrador said: “No, on the contrary. We think that bit by bit the number of criminal incidents will decline. “We will continue to create a better society, supported by values, that is not based on accumulating material wealth, money or luxury,” he added. In an opinion poll conducted by Mexico’s Reforma newspaper, with support from the Washington Post, 52% of people surveyed said López Obrador’s efforts to tackle crime were lacking while 55% said he was failing to bring down violence. In a juxtaposition to López Obrador’s call for austerity, earlier in the conference an official showcased luxury jewelry and diamond-encrusted watches confiscated by the government that will be auctioned over the weekend. Proceeds from the auction will go to impoverished Mexican villages. In recent months, Mexico has also put up for auction 77 vehicles, including a Lamborghini and a Mustang convertible, as well as safe houses with tunnels and the apartment of a cartel leader who was killed there and disposed of by his brothers. Forbes magazine once listed Guzmán as one of the world’s richest men. López Obrador said Mexico would explore whether there would be legal ways for Mexico to claim Guzmán’s assets. “These resources, these assets legally belong to Mexico and the matter will be considered on a legal basis,” López Obrador said. “I believe that the United States will agree.”