Lemons are chameleons; they’re different things in different seasons. In winter, their sunny colour, acid and zest bring warmth. Think of how a squeeze of lemon juice gives a bright edge, but also provides white heat for a lentil soup or noisy winter salad. Gratings of lemon zest provide hot flecks in a cake, or a whole lemon stuffed inside a roast chicken bakes into a slump, producing a mellow gravy that makes your mouth buzz with warmth. In summer, these culinary radiators become fans. The same yellow colour and bright, sharp flavour become the definition of cool and fresh. The sharp characteristics are reinforced by the way we use lemon when temperatures rise, squeezing drops on to wedges of watermelon or cold salad leaves, plopping slices in heavily iced drinks, or freezing juice into ices, sorbets and granita. I am writing this from southern Sicily, where every fan rattles and the sorbetti that were keeping me cool in Rome have been replaced by a steady march of granita. While most bars in our town no longer make their own gelato, granita is in the most part still made in-house. Freshly made coffee, tablets of almond paste, fresh or frozen mulberries and lemon juices are prepared, diluted, sweetened appropriately, then frozen into brown, sandy-beige, deep-purple and the whitest summer fuel for hot days. Like ice-cream, gelato and strawberry Mivvis, granita eaten on a hot day is an act of zen – it is living in the moment. Your hand requires your full concentration: nothing matters beyond how much of it you can eat while it is still icy and how quickly it is melting. The only granita decision necessary is the point at which you switch from spoon to drinking it straight from the tub. Unlike the Tupperware/scratch-with-a-fork granita made by those of us without an ice-cream machine at home, granitas served up in bars are churned. This means they are soft and easily scraped with the fat serving paddles that poke out of the granita tubs like gearsticks. Granita is not as soft or as smooth as sorbet, which in Sicily usually contains egg whites – the key to the almost marshmallow-like, silky softness. Granita, even churned ones, retain a granuloso or grainy texture; one reminiscent of ice or snow – which was, of course, where it started, with the Arabs, high in the Sicilian mountains. It is the churned granita, or smooth sorbet, you want for today’s recipe, sgroppino, which originates from the Veneto region, where it would have been made with lemon gelato or sorbet. Sgroppino was apparently a 15th-century meal punctuation for aristocrats, served between courses to cleanse the palate between one dish and the next. It has become popular all over Italy, with variations you could either see as heretical or delicious, depending on your position. While 15th-century Venetians served this as a meal punctuation, these days it is more likely to be served as a cocktail. I prefer sgroppino after a meal; a pudding crossed with another drink. Alternatively, I like one or two in the middle of a hot afternoon, for internal cooling and to aid full concentration. The sorbet should be soft enough to scoop, so remove it from the freezer a bit before using, whereas the prosecco should be cold and the vodka freezing. Prep 5 minServes 4 4 scoops lemon sorbet or churned granita200ml cold prosecco120ml cold vodka Put all the ingredients in a blender, or a bowl suitable for an immersion blender. Pulse into a smooth cream. Divide between cold glasses and serve immediately.