Giving a former mayor of London the keys to the country does not bode well for those wishing to see an end to decision-making centred on the capital, you might think. That sort of approach has held back large swathes of the rest of England for decades. Yet there are reasons for cautious optimism. Yes, the government will be constipated with Brexit for the next 97 days – if the administration lasts that long. And if we leave the EU without a deal, it will not be London that is worst affected. But it is not out of the question that Boris Johnson’s premiership might at least lead to a revival of the “northern powerhouse” concept, which has been largely dormant since its creator, George Osborne, was sacked as chancellor three years ago. It is a slogan that grates like the screech of a Pacer train’s brakes, but it is not an entirely empty one. Just ask Andy Burnham, who gave up his Westminster career to become one of the first metro mayors – an Osborne invention under which there has been real (if limited) transfer of powers to city regions. In his speech on the Downing Street steps on Wednesday, Johnson promised to unleash “the productive power not just of London and the south-east, but of every corner of England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland”. Hopefully, then, he will argue for cities and towns to control their own destiny – eight years as London’s mayor will have taught him how Whitehall tries to have the final say on all big policy areas, from housing and transport to policing and the financial sector. He has already indicated a desire to invest properly in transport outside the capital, telling the House of Commons on Thursday he is a “huge fan” of Northern Powerhouse Rail, a new trans-Pennine link from Liverpool to Hull, which he thought “we should definitely be doing”. Good. But most northern leaders will be hoping Johnson does not follow through with his threats to cancel HS2, the controversial high-speed line from London to Manchester and Leeds. They have good reason to suspect he was grandstanding during the Tory leadership campaign, knowing the project is unpopular among many Conservatives whose fields and golf courses the new rail line will bulldoze through. Though never a details man, Johnson must realise the project already has parliamentary approval to get as far as Crewe, the gateway to the north of England. He’ll have Esther McVey mithering at cabinet to bin it – she is the MP for Tatton in Cheshire, which will be bisected by the railway. But what signal would it send to northern voters stopping trains before they get to the very cities they’re intended to serve? Johnson knows the potential transformative effect of decent rail travel, having overseen the £17.6bn Crossrail project, a new 73-mile railway line through London that – though delayed and vastly over budget – promises to eventually bring another 1.5 million people to within 45 minutes of the capital’s centre. What does an Old Etonian with a London constituency know about life for ordinary people outside the capital? Very little, undoubtedly. But Johnson is said to be a delegator. Making the North Yorkshire MP Rishi Sunak chief secretary to the Treasury – a job that gives the holder a substantial say in how money is spent – can only be good for England’s northern half. Though the new chancellor – the MP for Bromsgrove near Birmingham, albeit born in Rochdale – may be more interested in firing up what the Tories grimly insist on calling the “Midlands engine”. (An engine that has yet to splutter into life: the BBC revealed most of the big councils are refusing to give a penny to the project, including Birmingham and Wolverhampton). Don’t read too much into Jake Berry, the northern powerhouse minister, being given a seat at the cabinet table. Just because you have a seat, it doesn’t mean you get much of a say. But after three years of being ignored by Philip Hammond and Theresa May, Berry must be relieved to at least listen in on the big conversations. The laundry list of pledges Johnson made in his first rambling speech – taking in everything from animal welfare to gene therapy – suggests he has made promises to every man and quite literally his cat. Will the north really be a priority for a former London mayor owing favours to every compass point? Will it even matter if the predictions from the “gloomsters” he pooh-poohed come true, and Brexit ravages the region? If he sticks to his pledge to leave the EU by 31 October, we will soon find out. • Helen Pidd is the Guardian’s north of England editor