Problem gamblers are significantly more likely to attempt suicide, according to a pioneering study that has prompted calls for the government to do more to tackle the dangers of gambling. Research commissioned by a leading UK gambling charity, GambleAware, found that problem gamblers were six times more likely to have suicidal thoughts or try to take their own life – and could be 15 times more likely to do so. The elevated risk remained even when correcting for other contributing factors that might be linked to suicidal thoughts, such as depression, substance abuse and financial problems. Stripping out such factors, the researchers found that problem gamblers were still three times more likely to consider or attempt suicide. Nearly one in five, or 19%, had considered suicide in the past year, compared with 4.1% of the general population, while 4.7% attempted suicide, compared with 0.6% in the wider population. The report’s co-author, Dr Heather Wardle, assistant professor at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, said the report’s findings should trigger swifter action to protect addicts, particularly within the industry. “The harms from gambling are profound and can be devastating for individuals, families and communities,” she said. “These results show how people with gambling problems are a higher risk group for suicidality.” “The people on the frontline of dealing with this high-risk group are the industry, who need to think about how they train staff potentially having interactions with suicidal people. They need to ensure those staff will put the wellbeing of people above profit.” Charles and Liz Ritchie, who founded the charity Gambling With Lives after their son Jack killed himself at the age of 24 while addicted to gambling, said the study demonstrated the need for tougher action from government. The Ritchies are seeking to have the government held legally liable for their son’s death, blaming lax regulation of the industry. “Overall the research confirms our own estimates from our assessment of international research that there are hundreds of gambling-related suicides every year in the UK,” they said. “It is now time for the government, regulators and the industry to address this serious issue and make gambling safer for everyone.” The Ritchie family are calling for a ban on gambling advertising, particularly the direct marketing emails that companies send to customers typically offering “free” bets or other offers. Direct marketing has been a factor in multiple cases in which betting firms have been accused of failing to intervene when addicts lose money rapidly. Gambling With Lives, whose members include parents whose children killed themselves after becoming addicted to gambling, also called for a mandatory levy on gambling firms to fund addiction treatment. Major firms in the industry recently offered to increase the amount they pay to £60m but said such a levy would be voluntary and would apply only to the five largest betting companies. The Ritchies have also called for gambling products to undergo rigorous safety testing before they can be released on to the market. The GambleAware study used data from 2007 based on a survey of gamblers in England, due to a lack of more recently harvested information. A more recent study by Swedish researchers also identified a link between problem gambling and suicide but used slightly different criteria. Using data from people who were diagnosed with a severe gambling disorder and later took killed themselves, the study found that among addicts the risk of suicide was 15 times higher. A spokesman for the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport said: “Every suicide is a tragedy, and we are absolutely committed to protecting vulnerable people from the risks of gambling-related harm. We secured a series of commitments from five leading gambling operators that will see a 10-fold increase in funding towards treatment and support for problem gamblers.” “In the past year, we have also introduced a wave of tougher measures to protect vulnerable people, including cutting the maximum stake on fixed odds betting terminals, bringing in tighter age and identity checks for online gambling, and expanding national specialist support through the NHS long-term plan”. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or emailjo@samaritans.org. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org