I was intrigued by Matthew Engel’s relative enthusiasm for the baseball London Series (Analysis, 1 July). And of course, riveted by the occasion, having been a season ticket holder at Yankee Stadium for five years (in Derek Jeter, Mariano Rivera, Tino Martínez times); the series made me yearn for a sport with which I fell in love, and happy days. But the games were fundamentally flawed. By a number of things: firstly, as Matthew wrote, London likes any big event, and this caprice showed in a mostly inexpert crowd that whooped more than it concentrated. Baseball is a cerebral and tightly focused game – much of apparently nothing punctuated by bursts of acceleration and deceleration – and this was lost in London Stadium. But the salient point is this: 50 runs over two matches is more ridiculous than thrilling. Imagine Liverpool and Manchester United playing in New York and scoring (a rough equivalent) 25 goals across two games. Americans unfamiliar with football may think this indicated terrific excitement, but knowing fans would rightly dismiss the matches as a defensive farce. That is what the games at London Stadium were: (a) because the defence could not see the ball to field it due to the mesh covering the athletics track and positioning of the mound and home plate at sunset, and (b) because the foul zone was so vast it made the task of the outfield impossible, as we saw on many occasions. Plus many other technicalities and conditions too numerous to list here. It was the right sport in the wrong place. Baseball has the curio of being a pastoral game played in the heart of the city, which cuts across our traditions of football and cricket. It is played in traditional wear without sponsors’ names plastered across it. Apparently all very un-American, but not so: baseball, perhaps surprisingly, is the national pastime, at home in America. It works for obvious reasons in the Caribbean, Mexico and Japan, whence many players come. But it doesn’t export beyond that. Perhaps I am a baseball snob, but if Brits want to learn about, understand and watch this most marvellous of all games, then (1) read George F Will’s Men at Work, and (2) buy a ticket to the US. Rather than try to import it like a fish out of water.Ed VulliamyLondon • Matthew Engel suggests that baseballs fly further in Denver due to lower gravity at altitude. That reasoning disappears, literally, into thin air. A typical 100-metre home run in Denver will fly about 5 centimetres further due to lower gravity, but 6 metres or more further due to the lower air resistance at Denver’s altitude.Ian J JacksonEdinburgh • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition