4-4-1-1 Carly Telford Two vital saves early on and could not do much about the goals. Mistake nearly punished by Press. 6 Jill Scott Worked hard as always and grew into the game but seemed as if she was outnumbered. 6 Lucy Bronze Lost track of Press for USA’s first goal and did not have much success going forward. 6 Steph Houghton Had the chance to equalise for England but penalty was poor. Quite a few misplaced passes, too. 5 Keira Walsh One of England’s most dangerous players. Superb cross-field pass started move that led to goal. 7 Millie Bright She, too, gave the ball away too easily. Shown a second yellow for challenge on Morgan. 5 Beth Mead Supplied a delicious cross to White for goal but quiet otherwise. Struggled defensively and was taken off. 5 Demi Stokes Struggled against Heath’s speed and failed to prevent Morgan from scoring the USA’s second. 6 Nikita Parris Started brightly but was starved of any service. Improved after Kirby came on in second half. 6 Rachel Daly Tried to use her speed to get past Dunn but rarely won that contest. Worked extremely hard. 7 ◀ Ellen White Took goal superbly, sidefooting in Mead’s cross. Won penalty but another effort was ruled offside. 8 Subs Kirby (for Mead 58) 6, Moore (for Walsh 71) 6, Stanway (for Daly 89) n/a 4-3-3 Alyssa Naeher Powerless to stop White’s goal but saved well from Walsh and had no trouble with Houghton’s penalty. 8 Julie Ertz Made the USA midfield tick. Never out of position, never hurried. Such an effective player. 8 Kelley O’Hara Not afraid to go forward but still not troubled defensively. Cross for first goal was magnificent. 7 Abby Dahlkemper The 26-year-old was solid at the heart of the defence and distribution was impressive. 7 Rose Lavelle Lively from beginning and set the tone with a lovely nutmeg on Bright. Came off injured. 8 Becky Sauerbrunn Nearly scored an own goal in the first half and brought down White for the late penalty. 6 Tobin Heath Her speed troubled Stokes from the start and was a big reason England never settled. 8 Crystal Dunn Did well against the double threat of Bronze and Daly from the England right-hand side. 7 Alex Morgan The captain led by example up front and made her goal look easy even though it wasn’t. 8 ▶ Lindsey Horan Appeared to be everywhere at times and provided the assist for USA’s second goal. 9 Christen Press Did not give Bronze a quiet moment and scored the vital first goal with an impressive header. 8 Subs Mewis (for Lavelle 65) 6, Lloyd (for Heath 80) 6, Krieger (for O’Hara 87) n/a