Tennessee Williams can make the stage vibrate to one character’s unravelling nerves. And he can capsize it with a slew of torrid guff. What he doesn’t usually offer is lull. But The Night of the Iguana is a particularly locked-in play – the central image is a beast on a leash – and James Macdonald’s production is mostly becalmed. Clive Owen, returning to the West End after 18 years, plays the defrocked priest who, having specialised in sleeping with young girls and then hitting them, is apparently now on the rack, in a hotel on the edge of a cliff: the dilemma of the play is “how to live beyond despair and still live”. Owen has all the symptoms of anxiety: legs that twitch in repose, intemperate outbursts, sweatiness that goes beyond a response to heat. Yet though he is troubling, he never looks dangerously anguished. He is less the primeval creature of the title, more of a whipped dog. Lia Williams is superb. She has a calm command with a hint of calculation – and a vocal echo of Katharine Hepburn Rae Smith’s design also has all the right ingredients but is too cramped to suggest the possibility of free fall. This hotel looks more run-down than really precarious. Under Neil Austin’s lighting, a background of crags glows like a sinister fake-coal fire. Characters troop down to the beach as if they were going to have supper in a basement kitchen. True, there is a rousing storm, but no one wants audiences to leave a theatre chiefly impressed by good rain. Sketchiness in Williams becomes near parody. A group of German tourists bounces on in bathing trunks and rubber rings, flexing and being noisy. Being a spinster, Finty Williams hits out with her handbag. Two performances take the evening to another level. In the part of the hot hostess, which was not so much played as mugged by Bette Davis in the 1961 Broadway production, Anna Gunn – of Breaking Bad – is beautifully natural, as tousled in affection and person as Williams specified. As the play’s enigma – the holy survivor with a hint of hustler – Lia (no relation) Williams is superb. Her creator compared her to the image of a saint in a Gothic cathedral. She does look sculpted, as if she has glid from a tomb, though she is never merely marmoreal. She has calm command, with a hint of calculation – and a vocal echo of the actress first slated to play the part, Katharine Hepburn. Tennessee Williams thought Vanessa Redgrave “the greatest actress of the English-speaking theatre”. She is without doubt one of the most arresting. When she comes on to the stage at Bath, she greets the audience as if we were sitting at her elbow. After the interval, she says she is glad we have come back. And in between she shares a photo album with people in the front row. The theatre is her living room. How can someone in such command of a stage be inured to the ramshackle shape of the material she presents as a partially dramatised narrative? True, Vienna 1934-Munich 1938 is a scrapbook of ideas and anecdote. Veined with echoes of the rise of the far right today, drawing on the writings of family and friends, it plaits the personal with the political – and that’s to the good. Her father, Michael, appears not only as a staunch socialist but as the lover of a young man, Tony Hyndman, who was also the lover of the poet Stephen Spender, who lauded his “mothlike lips at dusk”. Spender’s first female lover, the anti-fascist activist Muriel Gardiner is brought to life – smuggling passports and singing the Alabama Song – by Lucy Doyle in a professional debut remarkable for its delicate candour. Vanessa Redgrave remembers Noël Coward, another of her father’s lovers and a confidant of her mother, as being “the bee’s knees”. There is a hoard here but it is unwinnowed. Thomas Mann’s condemnation of Britain and appeasement is rousing and resonant, but delivered at too great bludgeoning length. Spender is less fascinating as a poet than as a figure who lovingly patrols his own deficiencies. And Redgrave is an actor who rivets, a bold advocate – and an author in need of an editor. seven methods of killing kylie jenner is a blizzard of a play written by Jasmine Lee-Jones, who is 20. It rushes along at high speed; it attacks in tiny pieces. Milli Bhatia’s fierce production is striking, bewildering, haunting. Designer Rajha Shakiry hangs a glistening white net over part of the stage: like a giant cobweb, it is a thing of the past, but from it trail threads. Beside this, Cleo (Danielle Vitalis) and Kara (Tia Bannon), both terrific, square up to each other, leaping and yelling in a vivid tango of irritation and intimacy, the kind practised by girls who remember each other from the playground. OMG, some scenes are twitterludes, mimed and spoken with electronically distortion: some passages are impenetrable – at least to me – but all are intriguing. Scenes between the two women spell out what is up, eloquently and relentlessly. Cleo, aka @incognegro, has launched a series of furious, witty tweets responding to the announcement that Kylie Jenner has become the “youngest self-made billionaire”: self-made “as my bed”; why does she get praised for making the big lips which have been sneered at on a black woman? She wants Jenner burnt to a crisp and as a result is being threatened. Kara thinks she should cool it. Which leads Cleo to accuse Kara of having it easy because she is light skinned and Kara, who prefers girls to boys, to accuse Cleo of being homophobic. Drilling back into childhood, and into black history, they argue tightly and with rich emotion. They are voices from a new theatre. Star ratings (out of five):The Night of the Iguana ★★★Vienna 1934-Munich 1938 ★★★seven methods of killing kylie jenner ★★★★ • The Night of the Iguana is at the Noël Coward theatre, London, until 28 September• Vienna 1934-Munich 1938 is at the Ustinov studio, Bath, until 3 August• seven methods of killing kylie jenner is at the Royal Court theatre, London, until 27 July