To look back on Rip Torn’s filmography is to see a man accustomed to elevating material. He was a figure of unyielding gravitas in 1982’s The Beastmaster. He managed the near-impossible task of treating Robocop 3 with respect. He even handled his role in Freddy Got Fingered like it had come from an undiscovered Mamet play. However, as the obituaries are already bearing out, Torn’s most-remembered role will always be Artie in The Larry Sanders Show. This is because The Larry Sanders Show was a rare instance of Rip Torn getting the material he deserved. Not only was it arguably the greatest sitcom of all time, but it wouldn’t have been able to exist at all had Torn not nailed his part. The Larry Sanders Show is an exploration of insecure ego pushed to the limit. Every single character is a bubble of self-importance floating through a cactus patch. There’s Larry Sanders himself, finicky and prone to the distractions of fame, desperate to leave for Montana but terrified by its lack of applause. Hank Kingsley is needy and embittered and always trying to edge into Larry’s spotlight. Even the writers, played by Jeremy Piven and Wallace Langham, consistently overstep their professional boundaries. The only thing stopping the show – both the onscreen talkshow and the sitcom itself – from descending into a swamp of self-conceit is Artie. As far as The Larry Sanders Show is concerned, Artie is God. Based on legendary Tonight Show producer Fred De Cordova, who once presented Torn with an autobiography inscribed with ‘To the other Fred’, Artie is at once the most selfish and selfless character in the entire series. Even more so than Sanders, the talkshow is Artie’s entire life. His only goal is to hold everything together no matter what. He’s an expert glad-hander, an ego-stroker of legendary repute and a tremendous bully all at once. Search YouTube for any of the numerous Artie supercuts and you’ll almost always be presented with a masterclass in manipulation. He keeps Larry happy, because that makes the show better. He keeps Hank in line, because that makes Larry happy. He’s an impermeable wall to the army of agents, publicists, executives and journalists who constantly threaten to chip away at Larry’s time to the detriment of the product. In episode after episode, Artie throws himself on a succession of grenades to keep the show on track. He’s a father figure, essentially. The characters constantly seek his approval, and this is the tension that keeps everyone together. But like all parents, Artie is a working model of stress. His devotion to the show is so all-encompassing that it comes at tremendous cost to his personal life. His temper is evident even when he’s smiling. He ploughs through marriages. He is almost definitely an alcoholic, which makes his standout episode Arthur After Hours such a classic. This was the showcase that Rip Torn always deserved. It begins with him embarrassing himself at the behest of Larry, which sends him into an alcoholic spiral. Artie staggers through the studio alone, at last untethered, screaming about his ‘big phoney bastard’ star Larry and dragging a karaoke machine on to the stage for his moment in the spotlight. He unloads on an unsuspecting cleaner (“You’re lucky Nic, because the shit I clean up talks back”), resigns via an uncharacteristically bitter voicemail and finally slumps down to watch highlights of Larry’s show. The next morning he’s sobered up and everything is back to normal, because everyone knows that Artie blows a gasket like this every year without fail. It’s an episode that requires a big, sad, raw, hilarious performance, and Rip Torn absolutely tears it to pieces. Another actor might have revved up the character’s unpleasantness, but Torn never lost sight of the loyalty that informed Artie’s every move. Look at Bob Odenkirk’s agent character Stevie as a point of comparison. In many ways he’s the anti-Artie, trying to achieve the same goals but with none of the charm. He’s brash and obnoxious and so self-centred that he leads Larry into a number of bad decisions. Artie was a firm but warm guiding hand; Stevie was a hard shove. The Larry Sanders Show unlocked something within Rip Torn. After decades in the business, it finally gave him a chance to show his entire range. He never quite hit the same heights afterwards, although his Don Geiss on 30 Rock certainly came close, but that’s only because roles like Artie are a once in a lifetime deal.