Police in Hong Kong are warning of possible violence on the eve of another mass protest against a controversial extradition bill after making “the largest seizure” of explosives in the territory. The seizure came on the day that thousands of pro-government supporters took part in a rally. Millions in the former British colony have thronged the streets since 9 June to protest against a proposed law allowing for the extradition of individuals to mainland China, where courts are controlled by the Communist party. Many in Hong Kong believe Sunday’s protest, which has been sanctioned by police, will end in violent conflicts, as in previous weeks. What started in early June as protests against a new extradition law have broadened into a pro-democracy movement concerned about the wider relationship between Hong Kong and China and the future for the special administrative region. Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, has offered a ‘solemn’ personal apology for the crisis and also hinted that she had in effect shelved the controversial legislation. However, protesters criticised her as insincere and said she had ignored their key demands. The demonstrations have continued. People have been demonstrating against legal changes that would make it easier to extradite people from Hong Kong to China. Supporters say the amendments are key to ensuring the city does not become a criminal refuge, but critics worry Beijing will use the law to extradite political opponents and others to China. Under the amended law, those accused of offences punishable by seven years or more in prison could be extradited. The government claims the push to change the law, which would also apply to Taiwan and Macau, stems from the killing last year of a Hong Kong woman while she was in Taiwan with her boyfriend. Authorities in Taiwan suspect the woman’s boyfriend, who remains in Hong Kong, but cannot try him because no extradition agreement is in place. Officials have promised to safeguard against abuses, pledging that no one at risk of political or religious persecution will be sent to the mainland. Suspects who could face the death penalty would not be extradited. Hong Kong officials have repeatedly said the bill has not come from the central government in Beijing. However, Beijing has voiced its backing for the changes. Many fear the proposed extradition law will be used by authorities to target political enemies. They worry the new legislation spells the end of the ‘one country, two systems’ policy, eroding the civil rights enjoyed by Hong Kong residents since the handover of sovereignty from the UK to China in 1997. Many attending the protests said they could not trust China as it had often used non-political crimes to target government critics, and they also feared Hong Kong officials would not be able to reject Beijing’s requests. Legal professionals have also expressed concern over the rights of those sent across the border to be tried. The conviction rate in Chinese courts is as high as 99%. Arbitrary detentions, torture and denial of legal representation of one’s choosing are also common. After the current crisis, analysts believe the Hong Kong government will probably start a new round of retaliatory measures against its critics while the Chinese government will tighten its grip on the city. Police have said that 32 people have been arrested over the recent demonstrations and five have been charged with rioting, which carries a maximum sentence of 10 years’ imprisonment. Six pro-democracy members of the legislature have already been ousted. Lily Kuo in Beijing and Verna Yu in Hong Kong During the past two weekends, after tens of thousands of anti-extradition protesters participated in peaceful, sanctioned marches, hundreds have been locked into tense, hours-long standoffs with the police, who then used pepper spray and truncheons on protesters late at night while they tried to leave, arresting dozens and resulting in injuries among many protesters and police officers. Hong Kong police said in a news briefing on Saturday that they hadarrested a 27-year-old man on suspicion of possessing explosives, after finding a cache of explosives and weapons in an out-of-town industrial building. Supt Alick McWhirter, of the explosive ordnance disposal unit, said police on Friday night found around 2kg of high explosives, triacetone triperoxide, or TATP, which was “extremely powerful” and unstable. “I think without a doubt, this is the largest seizure we have ever come across in Hong Kong,” he said. Steve Li, senior superintendent of the organised crime and triad bureau, said police also found petrol bombs, corrosive acid, knives as well as metal rods on the premises. Police said they also found anti-extradition bill banners and clothes emblazoned with “Hong Kong National Front”, a pro-independence group. The group’s spokesperson, Baggio Leung, told Hong Kong Free Press that he was not able to confirm why explosives were found there, and would only know more once the suspect was released on bail. In a separate press briefing, police used the discovery of explosives to justify why they have barred the Sunday protest from finishing in Central, the heart of Hong Kong’s business district, as the organisers, the Civil Human Rights Front, had planned. Police instead mandated that the protest should end in Wanchai, before the march reaches Admiralty, where the government headquarters is located, and Central. The move has angered many protesters but the police defended the decision by claiming that some planned to protest away from the approved route and threatened to use weapons. 1 July 1997: Hong Kong, previously a British colony, is returned to China under the framework of "one country, two systems". The "Basic Law" constitution guarantees to protect, for the next 50 years, the democratic institutions that make Hong Kong distinct from Communist-ruled mainland China. 2003: Hong Kong's leaders introduce legislation that would forbid acts of treason and subversion against the Chinese government. The bill resembles laws used to charge dissidents on the mainland. An estimated half a million people turn out to protest against the bill. As a result of the backlash, further action on the proposal is halted. 2007: The Basic Law stated that the ultimate aim was for Hong Kong's voters to achieve a complete democracy, but China decides in 2007 that universal suffrage in elections for the chief executive cannot be implemented until 2017. Some lawmakers are chosen by business and trade groups, while others are elected by vote. In a bid to accelerate a decision on universal suffrage, five lawmakers resign. But this act is followed by the adoption of the Beijing-backed electoral changes, which expand the chief executive's selection committee and add more seats for lawmakers elected by direct vote. The legislation divides Hong Kong's pro-democracy camp, as some support the reforms while others say they will only delay full democracy while reinforcing a structure that favors Beijing. 2014: The Chinese government introduces a bill allowing Hong Kong residents to vote for their leader in 2017, but with one major caveat: the candidates must be approved by Beijing. Pro-democracy lawmakers are incensed by the bill, which they call an example of "fake universal suffrage" and "fake democracy". The move triggers a massive protest as crowds occupy some of Hong Kong's most crowded districts for 70 days. In June 2015, Hong Kong legislators formally reject the bill, and electoral reform stalls. The current chief executive, Carrie Lam, widely seen as the Chinese Communist Party's favored candidate, is hand-picked in 2017 by a 1,200-person committee dominated by pro-Beijing elites. 2019: Lam pushes amendments to extradition laws that would allow people to be sent to mainland China to face charges. The proposed legislation triggers a huge protest, with organizers putting the turnout at 1 million, and a standoff that forces the legislature to postpone debate on the bills. “In recent days, after the end of protests … some used the opportunity to create chaos, this includes blocking roads, charging police cordon lines and even damaging public properties and attacking police officers,” Ch Supt John Tse, of the police public relations branch, said, adding that protesters had used metal rods and bricks to damage public properties and attack police. “These make us anxious about the situation tomorrow,” he said. Violent conflicts erupted after peaceful protests in out-of-town districts Sheung Shui and Sha Tin last Saturday and Sunday. Police used truncheons and pepper spray against protesters, who threw objects such as umbrellas and plastic water bottles at them. After being chased by police into a shopping centre in Sha Tin late on Sunday, several protesters were also seen beating a police officer. More than 40 arrests were made. Meanwhile, thousands of government and police supporters – many from pro-China groups – took part in a rally in Admiralty near the government headquarters. “Hong Kong’s prosperity relies on stability and economic success,” said a businessman on stage. “Say no to violence!”