On Sunday, an epic final capped off an enthralling Netball World Cup. But rather than the tournament rounding out a great year, this time it was scheduled smack bang in the middle of the world’s biggest, most intense domestic competition. Although Super Netball took a five-week break during the World Cup, there was no break for the players. They left Liverpool on Monday, one day after their biggest game in a four-yearly cycle to take a long-haul flight and land back in Australia by Wednesday – and then get straight back into playing this weekend. This is not OK. After already being away from home for four weeks, NSW Swifts players Paige Hadley, Helen Housby and Sarah Klau have been flown straight from the UK to Perth for their game against the West Coast Fever – continuing their lives out of a suitcase. Across the eight teams, 31 players from seven countries will back up from this gruelling tournament and come into the pressure cooker of a Super Netball season, where each game is arguably more intense than an international Test. While teams can take an extended squad of 12 players to their next three matches, with only five rounds remaining before finals the chances of those two extra players taking the court are slim – especially when the Collingwood Magpies take on the Giants this Sunday. Just three points separate these two teams in fourth and fifth places, respectively, on the ladder. What are the chances of the Giants resting Caitlin Bassett, Jo Harten and Jamie-Lee Price? Or of Collingwood resting Geva Mentor, April Brandley and Kelsey Browne? Perhaps the coaches can get together and make an agreement: “If you leave your three out, I will too.” It’s not the fault of the coaches – everyone understands their job is to win the games in front of them and put their team in the best position to make the finals. But if Super Netball truly wants to be the best competition in the world, it can’t be one that asks too much of its athletes. Moving the World Cup was not an option. But giving the players an extra week to settle back into their lives and get over their jet lag before hitting the court would have gone a long way to improving player welfare before the final part of the season. Those making decisions must start including athletes in the process, and prioritise player welfare and wellbeing. As well as the physical element, there is a huge emotional toll on all the girls. Whether they have come away with gold, silver, bronze or a 10th-placed finish, it doesn’t matter. Each country has expectations of where they want to finish and it takes a toll. The disappointment of not finishing where you had hoped, the relief of winning, the feeling of knowing everything you aimed for is over – anyone who has ever worked towards a goal would know this feeling. What I fear is that the players don’t have enough time to process what has happened. Moving from one high pressure environment immediately into another may mean they will bottle it up inside. That’s what all good athletes do in order to push through. But who is there to catch these girls if they crumble once the season ends – only to have to back up with playing another international series? There is so much to be worked on – the blame doesn’t sit with any one person or group – it is netball’s problem as a whole. And it needs to be fixed. Player welfare must be at the forefront of the game. Netball needs to consider its players as people first and athletes second. If the right balance can be struck, the most can be got out of the players, as they feel supported both on and off the court. It’s not easy – even something as simple as asking a player to take time off a tour to recover comes with complications. In the past, players have taken time off and never made it back into the Diamonds setup. I can think of four players just in recent times to have suffered that fate, and it would be easy for that to play on the minds of current players. What then are the chances of them putting their wellbeing before representing their country? We shouldn’t expect them to have to make this decision. They should be a part of a program that looks after their wellbeing with regularly scheduled breaks and time for recovery for everyone – not just those who ask for it. I understand the importance of growing the sport on the domestic and international stage. But at what cost? I hope there are no major injuries on court in this last half of the season but remember, not all injuries are physical. I am sure there will be a few that struggle with poor mental health this year too. In a time where players are now paid to be athletes 12 months of the year, the expectations on them will continue to grow. But have we got it right in what we are demanding of our players? These are the questions we need to keep asking to make sure the sport grows in a way that is manageable for everyone.