That conciliatory question mark is unlikely to cast much doubt on the side chosen by Cyclists: Scourge of the Streets? (Channel 5). “Britain has gone bike mad,” booms Craig Kelly, narrating for his life. “But the backlash is real.” And so, over the course of an hour, the angriest of comments, the snarkiest tweets and the deepest corners of the internet’s most tedious pedantry are all brought to life in the shape of a documentary that is basically a “Britain’s worst road users!” YouTube compilation dressed up in Lycra. Other than that which begins in B and ends in “rexit”, there are few topics more likely to incite rage than the subject of cyclists and drivers attempting to co-exist on the roads, so there is plenty of material to make sure everyone is fuming. To give it a bit more oomph, it promises to investigate whether cyclists – “a plague of lotuses”, according to one cabby, which conjures up a much prettier image than he perhaps intended – are operating outside of the law. We see cyclists zooming over zebra crossings as pedestrians attempt to use them, but they don’t even bother to cut out the cyclist in the same scene who does stop. #NotAllCyclists, etc. Anyone who lives in an area with a high concentration of cyclists is likely to see at least some of them behaving terribly on a near-daily basis. But the same goes for cars and, if you set out to film people behaving like idiots, then you can probably package together an hour-long film of people behaving like idiots, doing anything you like. I live on a busy hill that is rammed with traffic around school drop-off time, and my dawn chorus is car horns beeping, followed by apoplectic men in tight clothing shouting: “Wanker!” I can have my morning tea, look out of the window and watch it play out in beautiful harmony, and honestly, most of the time, both of them are “wankers”. The arguments here amount to nothing we haven’t heard before: cyclists are unaccountable, cyclists are dangerous, cycle paths are clogging up cities. It steers clear of the “You don’t even pay road tax” line, but I was half-expecting it. For a bit of balance, there is some footage of drivers knocking cyclists over, so we can see that being smashed into by a big metal box travelling at speed is probably a little bit more hazardous, on reflection, than the dangers posed by bikes. And a nice police officer from the West Midlands provides one of the only calm voices here, explaining that it is drivers, not cyclists, who cause the most problems and the most damage, before pulling over a woman for overtaking too closely. She turns out to be using her phone, while her child is not properly secured in its seat, which really does seem like a bad morning for her. Shows such as Scourge of the Streets are rarely boring, because Channel 5 has carved out an excellent niche in scratching the itch of schadenfreude, of having a good moan about stuff without actually having to be anywhere near it. This is Traffic Cops on two wheels. And, as ever, when the great British public get involved, it is hard not to be entertained. Ian, who lives in Surrey, is very upset that the 2012 Olympics inspired an influx of cyclists. His complaints, of litter, traffic jams and, astonishingly, “people defecating in front gardens”, all sound fairly reasonable, until they don’t. “Where have they come from? They’re certainly not local.” In news that would come as a surprise to no one, Ian has started a petition. Then there is Ferdi, who was hit by a cyclist flying round the corner on a pavement, and became a YouTube sensation. “I could lose my life, I could lose my mind, I could lose myself!” he shouted, and turned into a star. But I also felt slightly grubby about enjoying it. There is no mention of the reasons why people should be cycling more and driving less – health, convenience and the fact that cars aren’t doing much for the longevity of the planet – until very close to the end, and even then it only warrants a sentence. Its attempts to play both sides at once, to be sympathetic to both drivers and cyclists, fall flat. There are valid issues about infrastructure and legislation to be discussed, but even as a sentence, that is dull. And dull is not what Channel 5 does.