Even Sir Kim Darroch would have to admit that USA! USA!! USA!!! get something right when it comes to women’s football. The nation’s Megan Rapinoe-baiting leadership might very well be “diplomatically clumsy and inept” but clumsiness and ineptitude are the very last things anyone would associate with their women’s football team, who swept to yet another World Cup title – their fourth in eight attempts – by tonking the Netherlands 2-0 in Lyon on Sunday. Rapinoe, the tournament’s outstanding player, joint top scorer and leading journalist-assisting quote-creator, then took aim at Darroch himself in a statement that seems, at least when helpfully taken completely out of context, to have been aimed squarely at Britain’s embattled ambassador in Washington. “We as players, every player at this World Cup, put on the most incredible show that you could ever ask for,” she said. “We cannot do anything more to impress, to be better ambassadors. It’s time to take it forward to the next step. A little public shame never hurt anybody, right?” Darroch would probably disagree with that, but as it enters its third paragraph it is perhaps time for The Fiver to put to one side its trusty Topical Shoehorn and concentrate on the subject at hand. The Women’s World Cup is over, and it has been good. In the final, after a Rapinoe penalty gave the favourites the lead, Rose Lavelle, who had watched the 2015 final in a pizza restaurant – yet more evidence that The Fiver continues to live the lifestyle of an elite athlete – scored the second goal that sealed USA! USA!! USA!!!’s victory, a goal that demonstrated the drive, ambition and technical excellence that has been a hallmark of much of the tournament (though a bit of closing down at some point wouldn’t have gone amiss). The World Cup was expected to mark another large stride forwards in the search for equality of attention, respect and, at some point perhaps, money for the women’s game. And it has certainly delivered, despite its predictable conclusion. They did not exactly coast to victory but the USA! USA!! USA!!! side proved just too well-organised, too brilliantly motivated, too ambitious and ultimately too able for their rivals to cope with. England got close to bettering the champions in the semi-final but the organisation wasn’t quite on point – the team’s star full-back, Lucy Bronze, has since described Phil Neville as “not the best coach with the best tactics” – and defeat to Sweden in the third-place play-off saw their tournament end in double disappointment. Still, there is every reason to hope for better in their next major football-focused jamboree – discounting next year’s Olympics due to an excess of weightlifting, taekwondo and other home nations – Euro 2021. For a start, England are the only team that have already qualified. Secondly, and not entirely unconnectedly, they are hosts. And most encouragingly of all, USA! USA!! USA!!! won’t be there Join Simon Burnton from 5pm BST for hot and steamy MBM coverage of Mali 0-2 Ivory Coast at Afcon 2019. “There is no truth whatsoever in the suggestion Argentina has been asked to participate in Uefa competitions, nor to become a member of Uefa … However, in the spirit of friendship and camaraderie and as an inclusive organisation, Uefa will, of course, invite Argentina as special guests to watch any Uefa competition at any time” – Uefa is forced to issue a statement denying that Argentina have become so fresh and funky over recent fun and games in South America that they want to register as a European side. Football Weekly will be somewhere around here. “Given the ridiculously long delays it caused in the Copa América, I am fully expecting to hear shortly that the VAR room has finally decided that the ‘Hand of God’ in 1986 was in fact deliberate handball, and that subsequently not only will the goal be disallowed but a red card will also be issued to Maradona. Therefore his second goal will also be expunged from the record as he should not have been on the pitch. So, in fact, England won the quarter-final 1-0 and the semi-final will have to be restaged, with the Three Lions facing Belgium, sponsored by a well-known arthritis cream” – Ceri Rees. “A couple of weeks ago Joe Aribo did one from Charlton and joined the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers. I checked our squad and we were down to 12 players. Having said that, it was well balanced because we had just one goalkeeper and you can’t play more than one goalie at a time, right? Now our squad numbers a whole 15 players which is positively bloated in the eyes of our owner, Roland Duchâtelet, a man who was even willing to let our miracle-working manager go elsewhere. How I wish we had a new owner. I was going to send a message to Santa, but I fear that by Christmas we may already be preparing to become reacquainted with our old friends in League One” – Robert Darby. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Ceri Rees. Roma’s Stephan El Shaarawy is now Shanghai Shenhua’s €16m Stephan El Shaarawy in what Sean Connery impersonators are calling an infringement of copyright. West Ham have confirmed the departure of Marko Arnautovic for £22.4m in a 43-word statement that may as well have been written entirely in words starting with Fs and Os, before reinforcing it with a follow-up tweet picturing Mark Noble with the caption “True Hammer”. Manchester City will stage their WSL opener against Manchester United at the Etihad. Meanwhile, Chelsea will open the doors to Stamford Bridge for free for their opener against Spurs. Atlético Madrid have opened formal disciplinary proceedings against Antoine Griezmann after he failed to turn up for pre-season training. Burnley have reached into their transfer holster and triggered the £10m release clause in Jay Rodriguez’s West Brom contract, while doing the more traditional job of simply signing Stoke defender Erik Pieters on a two-year deal. Near Blur song Jack Stacey is now a Bournemouth defender rather than a Britpop belter after leaving Luton for the south coast. And former Egypt coach Farouk Gaafar says the side need the “iron fist” of a military man to lead the national side following their Africa Cup of Nations exit. “This timing needs discipline that will be found only in the army,” tenshunned Gaafar. You want the best pictures of the Women’s World Cup? You can’t handle the best pictures of the Women’s World Cup. Oh Neymar! Brazil were better off without him as they swept to home Copa América glory, writes cérebro de futebol em uma jarra Jonathan Wilson.Played 34, won zero, drew two, lost 34. Goals for: 21. Goals against: 245. Niall McVeigh meets the ‘worst team in Britain’ and your new underdog heroes.Manchester United are targeting players with potential but it’ll take more than a few sessions at The Cliff to get the best out of them, writes Paul Doyle.US-Wahey! As the women lifted the World Cup, the USA! USA!! USA!!! men’s team were losing the Gold Cup final. They deserve better than being the butt of the joke though, toots Tom Dart.Born in 2003, Harvey Elliott is younger than The Fiver. Unlike The Fiver, he’s going places – namely Liverpool, who have won the race for the Fulham midfielder, according to the Mill. Now with £2.5bn spent and more than a month to go – keep up with the summer of spending with our snazzy transfer interactive. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! 