That a pensions dispute with senior doctors in England has led to cancelled operations and delays in other kinds of medical treatment is alarming, and not only for patients and the hospital bosses who are responsible for their care. That is because the situation, which arose following the imposition of new limits on tax-free pension contributions, is a symptom of a deeper sickness. Doctors refusing to work extra shifts because they face financial penalties for doing so are only one manifestation of rising pressure on the NHS – pressure that health secretary Matt Hancock has failed to relieve. The issue for high-earning doctors is that when the value of their pensions exceeds £1.1m it becomes taxable, because £1.1m is the limit for pension tax relief. The issue for politicians is that the lifetime limit on tax-free pension savings, along with an annual limit, were imposed for a reason. The reason being that the Treasury needed the approximately £6bn a year in savings that they generate annually. Despite the limits, which have been lowered several times since they were introduced, pensions tax relief continues to benefit the wealthiest people disproportionately. So it made political as well as economic sense for the government to seek a technical fix to the doctors’ grievance, rather than lifting the caps. What makes no sense at all is for ministers to have proposed a fix that did not have the confidence of doctors and their employers. The argument over pensions tax relief and extra shifts has exploded into the open because hospital consultants, who are now protesting, do not believe that proposed new arrangements, whereby senior doctors would be allowed to lower their pensions contributions for up to 10 years, would work. It has often been pointed out that the only reason the NHS continues to function as effectively as it does is the extraordinary commitment by staff to their work. Added to this might be the commitment of the public. The NHS, despite its flaws, remains hugely popular. Most people do not wish to see it fail and for good reason: when compared with other countries’ health systems, the NHS continues to offer good value for money on an unusually equitable basis. Last year the government, aided by NHS England boss Simon Stevens, used the occasion of its 70th birthday to announce a much-needed funding increase: an average of 3.4% annually for the next five years. But welcome as were both the cash and the five-year commitment, the unpalatable truth is that the service faces enormous difficulties. Chief among these is staffing. The NHS has 100,000 vacancies, including 9,000 doctors. The resolution last month of a long-running pay dispute with junior doctors was positive news. But the latest trouble with consultants is just one among many indications that all is not well. So is the evidence of the annual inpatient satisfaction survey, which has recorded the lowest scores in 10 years. Last month the Health Foundation thinktank, backed by the NHS Confederation representing hospital bosses, claimed that the service needs £8bn a year in funding on top of what was agreed in 2018. When the government’s long-promised spending review finally takes place, the public will learn what it makes of such arguments. Meanwhile, the lack of serious engagement in the debate about the future of healthcare in this country by the two men currently competing to become the next prime minister is symptomatic of a national malaise still more alarming than that afflicting the NHS.