Commentators like Polly Toynbee have long argued that religion is on the wane (Faith in religion is dwindling, but when will British politics reflect that?, theguardian.com, 11 July). But as the American sociologist Peter Berger remarked in 1999 in his seminal work The Desecularisation of the World: “The world today, with some exceptions … is as furiously religious as it ever was, and in some places more so than ever.” Global figures show that 85% of the world’s population identify with a faith, despite the mixed picture in the UK. In this country, despite a rise in the number of people professing to be secular and atheist, faith still holds a deep residual attachment for many people, expressed sometimes through religious practice but, in many cases, through a kind of cultural identity. Some people may call themselves secular but will still tick the Christian, Jewish or other faith box on the census. Faith is woven into the tapestry of this country and is responsible for boundless social good. There are almost 50,000 faith-based charities in the UK, 27% of the total of all registered charities. Faith communities contribute disproportionately to the wellspring of volunteering and philanthropy in this country. Faith should not seek political power, but to influence society for the better. Secularists would do well to recognise the social contribution of faith and be self-aware about their own dogma and the need by everyone, no matter the challenges, to embrace a pluralist society.Zaki CooperTrustee, Council of Christians and Jews • Polly Toynbee writes that “superstition and unreason are on the retreat”. Listen to eminent scientists say they are getting closer to explaining the origins of the universe and the beginning of life, but also hear them say they do not yet even know how to frame the questions for the origin of consciousness. There does still appear to be a very great and wonderful mystery. Those who still have faith are not stuck in the past with childlike conceptions of God. On a cosmic scale we see the presence of God in the absolute wonder of life and the interconnection of all life as shown to us in science. God, we are taught by contemporary theologians like the extraordinarily popular Richard Rohr, could be seen more as a verb than a noun, the very ground of our being. This kind of attitude and experience leads to the desire for action, understanding, debate, compassion, love, respect for all forms of life. Polly concludes: “Not prayers but only human agency can save us.” We believe in both!Martha Patrick-MorsmanCarbis Bay, Cornwall • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition