After the most heart-stopping of all finals, from which England’s men emerged as World Cup winners for the first time, their captain, Eoin Morgan, offered his heartfelt gratitude to supporters and shared hopes that new ones will have been made. The England captain was soaked in champagne and still clutching the trophy when he arrived for the press conference after his side’s victory over New Zealand, admitting it was the only way he could believe the miracle that had unfolded at Lord’s. Morgan said: “It’s been an absolutely incredible journey to everybody around the country and around the world who has followed us and supported us, thank you so much. It’s been phenomenal. Right from the very beginning of the tournament, all the way through, regardless of our performance, people believed because we believed and I’m very thankful for that and everybody is as well.” This all-time classic was the first international match shown on terrestrial television in the UK since the 2005 Ashes after the rights-holders Sky agreed to share their broadcast on Channel 4, meaning a potential audience in the millions will have been reached. With Ben Stokes the star on the day – his unbeaten 84 set up the initial tie, before helping score 15 runs in the super over – Morgan fancies children will now want to emulate the all-rounder in the same manner that Andrew Flintoff inspired a nation 14 years ago. Such thoughts mark a huge turnaround for Stokes. Not only has the 28-year-old battled back from the heartbreaking end to the World Twenty20 final in 2016 – he was clubbed for four successive sixes in the last over as West Indies snatched the title from England’s grasp – he has also thrown himself into his cricket with renewed zeal following the well-documented 2017 Bristol incident. Morgan said: “To come through it is extraordinary. He’s almost superhuman. He has really carried the team and our batting line-up. The atmosphere, the emotion that was going through the whole game, he managed to deal with that in an extremely experienced manner. And obviously everybody watching at home will hopefully try and be the next Ben Stokes. “I think a lot of careers would have been ended after what happened in Kolkata. Ben on numerous occasions has stood up individually and in a unit for us. He leads the way in training, in any team meetings we have, and he’s an incredible cricketer. And today he’s had a huge day out and obviously we are thankful for that.” Stokes, who was in tears at the end, said: “We will find out tomorrow what it’s done for cricket – we’ve always had great support. The game was ebbing and flowing. I hope we have inspired people to want to do this in the future.” Morgan has been central to England’s transformation, with he and the head coach, Trevor Bayliss, having taken the side from their group stage exit in the 2015 World Cup to the top of the rankings, something now turned into the most prized global silverware going. Aged 32, there are clearly doubts as to whether Morgan will continue through to the 2023 World Cup in India. The re-branded Twenty20 World Cup is being staged in Australia next year but such thoughts will be put on hold for a while. Morgan said: “We will let the dust settle, we’ll celebrate as hard as we can. I think it’s deserved. And then we will look at things. Four years is a long time away. “I think the big question I will have to answer is will I be in the team in four years, will I be good enough? These guys are improving very quickly. Will I be able to keep up with them?” Morgan’s value clearly goes beyond his output with the bat, with the final itself an example of his ice-cool leadership. Before they fielded, with the super over looming, he gathered his players for a huddle that, in spite of the intense pressure of the moment, saw jokes cracked and smiles emerge. Clearly small events went England’s way, from Stokes being caught in the deep with 15 balls of the initial game remaining – only for Trent Boult to step over the rope – or the four overthrows in the final over that, following two scrambled runs, turned nine needed from three into three from two. Asked if it was the luck of the Irish, in reference to his own roots, Dublin-born Morgan smiled and replied: “We had Allah with us as well. I spoke to Adil Rashid, he said Allah was definitely with us. I said we had the rub of the green. That actually epitomises our team. We’re from quite diverse backgrounds and cultures and guys grow up in different countries. To actually find humour in the situation we were in at times was pretty cool.” Kane Williamson, the New Zealand captain who was named player of the tournament but is now twice a runner-up after being a losing finalist in 2015, was magnanimous at the end, accepting the tie-breaking regulations that ultimately separated two sides. He said: “Obviously we’re just gutted. The guys put on a huge amount of work to get here and play in another World Cup final. Throughout this whole campaign I spoke about uncontrollables and there were a couple that were hard to swallow. “All the cricket they have played and the way they have played it, England are deserved winners. Either side would have felt fortunate after a tie in regular time then another in the Super Over. One of those things, eh?”