British TV and radio stations will be explicitly required to protect the “welfare, wellbeing and dignity” of individuals who take part in their programmes, under proposals that could radically change how reality TV is made in the UK – and have a collateral impact on news and documentaries. The media regulator, Ofcom, said it was proposing to add two rules to the existing broadcasting code to protect members of the public who take part in programmes, in an announcement timed to coincide with the final of this summer’s series of Love Island. In addition to requiring producers to take due care to protect the dignity of participants, broadcasters will also have to ensure members of the public are not “caused unjustified distress or anxiety by taking part in programmes or by the broadcast of those programmes”. The changes could upend how reality TV, which often thrives on showing embarrassing moments that participants may later regret, is made and the extent to which broadcasters can push boundaries in the search for ratings. Although the proposals have been developed partly in response to the death of a participant on The Jeremy Kyle Show, the code will apply to almost all radio and television programmes other than dramas, sitcoms and soap operas. As a result, news reporters and documentary creators will be explicitly required to consider the impact of including members of the public in their broadcasts, with potential implications for investigative journalism. Ofcom said its guidance would make it clear that different approaches are suitable for different genres of programming, although broadcasters may err on the side of caution. The regulator said “attitudes in society to welfare and wellbeing” had changed and the broadcasting code needed updating to reflect new social standards. It specifically highlighted the thousands of complaints received from members of the public last summer – often as a result of social media backlashes – regarding Roxanne Pallett on Celebrity Big Brother, a row between Kim Woodburn and panellist Coleen Nolan on Loose Women, and the treatment of Dani Dyer on Love Island. Tony Close, Ofcom’s director of content standards, said: “People who take part in TV and radio shows must be properly looked after by broadcasters, and these rules would ensure that happens. “These new safeguards must be effective. So we’re listening carefully to programme participants, broadcasters, producers and psychologists before we finalise them.” Regulations around reality television came under renewed scrutiny after the death in March of the former Love Island contestant Mike Thalassitis. Thalassitis was the second cast member of the programme to take their own life, following the death in June 2018 of Sophie Gradon, who appeared on the show the year before. In May, the House of Commons DCMS select committee launched an inquiry into the wider reality TV industry as a result of the death of Steve Dymond, who died shortly after failing a lie detector on The Jeremy Kyle show. Committee members were inundated with written testimony from former reality TV show participants. After Thalassitis’s death, ITV pledged to increase the level of support and advice it provides to Love Island contestants as the broadcaster sought to protect one of its most valuable programmes from a public backlash. The channel has recently announced plans to launch a second winter series of the show, which could become one of the first programmes to be covered by the new broadcasting rules. The rules will apply only to traditional television and radio broadcasters and not online-only content on YouTube, which remains unregulated.