Rodri is set to sign for Manchester City from Atlético Madrid in a club-record €70m (£62.8m) transfer, eclipsing the £60m paid to Leicester City for Riyad Mahrez last summer. The 23-year-old midfielder is expected to become a City player after Atlético announced that the Premier League champions had met the Spain international’s €70m release clause. He is in line to become Pep Guardiola’s first acquisition of the window. On their website, Atlético confirmed that representatives from the Premier League side and the player paid the buyout fee at La Liga’s headquarters on Wednesday. Atlético’s statement said: “La Liga has informed Atlético de Madrid that Rodrigo Hernández, through his lawyer, and representatives from Manchester City, paid the player’s release clause at the sports association’s headquarters on Wednesday July 3. Manchester City has paid the buyout clause on behalf of the player. The player has therefore unilaterally terminated his contract with our club, which ran until June 30 2023.” Rodri was re-signed by Atlético from Villarreal last summer having spent several years in the academy. He has made six appearances for Spain and represented his country at a number of age-group levels. Rodri’simpending arrival at City as the successor to Fernandinho as the holding player means Guardiola can focus on landing the second of his two major transfer targets. The manager also wants a centre-back following Vincent Kompany’s departure. Guardiola’s first choice is Harry Maguire but Leicester’s valuation of the 26-year-old – thought to be around £80m – is not matched by City. Manchester United have made a £70m offer for the England international. City’s manager believes Eric García, an 18-year-old central defender, has the potential to establish himself in the first team, having joined from Barcelona two years ago. García made his City debut in December and got two further appearances last season but is yet to feature in the Premier League, so Guardiola is intent on acquiring an established player in the position. Guardiola is likely to move to strengthen other areas only if a player demands to leave. The right-back Danilo may do so, because he is second choice behind Kyle Walker. Should the Brazilian ask for a transfer, Juventus’s João Cancelo would be assessed as a possible replacement. Angeliño, a 22-year-old left-back, has re-signed for City from PSV Eindhoven, the Spaniard having joined the Dutch club last summer. His arrival may provide competition to Benjamin Mendy and Oleksandr Zinchenko.