Weeks like this are what you dream of as a kid growing up. A World Cup semi‑final against Australia, and with it the chance to take our place in the final at Lord’s on Sunday, is why you take up the sport and put in all the hours of hard work. Thursday at Edgbaston is the big one. You can talk about treating it as another game, but as England players we know it is more than that. We accepted this when we put ourselves in a must-win scenario for the last two group games. Dealing with the pressure and overcoming India and New Zealand to get here is great for us looking ahead to this semi-final. We have tasted do-or-die cricket already and emerged with the wins we needed. And in terms of performance, we still feel there is more to come. The support for England around the country has been amazing. Bar the India game, where most were cheering for our opponents, the public have really got behind us. And not just on the field. In Birmingham, where I live, I have had a lot of Pakistan fans tell me they are supporting England now, which is brilliant. Sky putting the final on free-to-air television if England get there is a great move. That is why they are not just our broadcasters but also our partners. We really hope we can deliver on our side of the bargain, our following could go through the roof if so. The England team is made up of good people, first and foremost, and we are a very multicultural side, too. I believe we represent our country well and our diversity is one of our strengths. If everyone was from the same background, I don’t think we would have played the kind of dynamic style we have over the past four years. Difference is respected and the environment Eoin Morgan has created is such that we are encouraged to transfer our personalities into our cricket. When I look back on my career in years to come I will be proud to say I did not just play in a good England team but one with good people, too. Will our defeat by Australia in the group stage have an impact on Thursday? Maybe, but they will remember we smashed them in our most recent series. They will have been gutted to lose against South Africa on Saturday and in the back of their minds we will have been the team they wanted to avoid in the semis. Edgbaston is a big factor, too. The atmosphere is very different from Lord’s – the crowd can really get on top of the visiting side – and our recent record in Birmingham is very strong. We feel much more comfortable playing there. Another is Jason Roy, who missed the defeat at Lord’s but is back and firing. We have a few big players but he is the one batsman who can take down the opposition’s best bowler and make them look very average. The expression “X factor” gets thrown around a lot but he genuinely has it. His relationship with Jonny Bairstow is quite a contrast because they are almost opposite characters. Their reunion at the top of the order has taken some pressure off Jonny but I think he was going to score those hundreds against India and New Zealand no matter what after his little duel with Michael Vaughan and some of the other pundits. I have never played with or against someone like Jonny. When he believes people are on his case or questioning him, he responds with runs. It almost comes with a guarantee. So the next few days will be spent telling him everyone still thinks he is rubbish – although we should perhaps check with our sports psychologist that this is definitely the way to go. His name is David Young and it was a meeting we had before the India game that lifted a lot of our anxiety. Everyone got the chance to talk and it gave guys a chance to speak about their feelings, which seemed to be a combination of frustration and nerves. Getting this out in the open helped us to move forward. I first experienced sports psychology during my England under-15 days, then it really kicked in with the under-19s. It is valuable but I believe your best psychologists are your teammates and the coaches who have been there before, because that feeling of walking out to bat or bowl is so unique. This is where our head coach, Trevor Bayliss, can be underappreciated outside the setup. He has seen it all, from his time coaching Sri Lanka to the final in 2011 and winning the Indian Premier League with Kolkata Knightriders in 2014. After the Australia defeat he was the calmest by far. He knows he is working with international players and so chooses his words wisely. You can talk too much, as a coach, but Trevor picks his moments and cuts through the rubbish with just a few words. Once again I will be preparing to play. The hardest thing when you miss out is being powerless to change the game. But as a 12th man I also feel I can see more than when in the heat of the battle, so I am always forthcoming with advice. That is another feature of this team, we communicate well with each other and I cannot see that changing this week.