In New Zealand, preparations for the World Cup final have been well advanced for months. The only problem is those plans are for another tournament, with rugby’s blue-riband event in Japan in September the focus of attention before the cricketers took a nation by surprise to reach Sunday’s Lord’s showpiece. Unlike with the all-conquering All Blacks, nobody in New Zealand expected Kane Williamson’s team to get to the final. It means those hoping to watch the match against England in bars and pubs across the country are out of luck. Late-night alcohol licences take 20 days to process and few, if any, landlords had the foresight to predict that the Black Caps would get this far. That is despite the fact New Zealand are playing in their second successive World Cup final, after the team led by Brendon McCullum lost to Australia, their fellow co-hosts, at the Melbourne Cricket Ground in 2015. Low expectations are nothing new, then, for New Zealand’s cricketers and the perennial dark horses at every major tournament are again revelling in their underdog status going into Sunday’s final. “Underdogs?” says Williamson. “A lot of people say that on a number of occasions, which is great, and England rightly deserve to be favourites. Coming into this tournament from the start, they were favourites and they’ve been playing really good cricket. But whatever dog we are, it’s just important that we focus on the cricket that we want to play and we have seen over the years that anybody can beat anybody, regardless of the breed of dog.” With a population of 4.7 million, this is a cricket nation that constantly punch above their weight on the world stage. Yet the public fervour seen back home during this unforeseen run to the final appears to have outstripped what New Zealand’s players experienced four years ago. “We’ve seen a lot of support come through, which is awesome,” Williamson said. “The last World Cup was at home and a lot of the attention was there on your doorstep and we had crowds of Kiwis coming to every game, which was really special. Over here we’ve got a few fans scattered in amongst the majority of opposition crowds, but that’s great as well and I know we’re getting a lot of support from a long way off.” Every dog does indeed have its day but just how confident is Williamson that his team can topple the world’s No 1-ranked side on home soil and that he can become the first New Zealander to lift the trophy? “Anything’s possible,” he says. “And it’s a really special occasion tomorrow and to be involved in a World Cup and representing your country, let alone to turn up here at the home of cricket and be involved in a final, is pretty special. “But the focus for us is very much about the cricket that we want to play and the performance we want to put on the board. If we do that, we have seen throughout this competition that anybody can beat anybody.” The pressure on England, who are playing in their first 50-over World Cup final for 27 years, could also work in the Black Caps’ favour. “We have to turn up and have to see what unfolds,” says Williamson. “Nothing promises in this game, everybody has different bits of pressure and how you treat it can be a big part of that. There’s all different bits of pressure on anybody, whether you are favourites or not.” Then there is the task of taming England’s most prolific opening partnership in ODI history, with the successive explosive century stands between Jason Roy and Jonny Bairstow in the past three matches key to their team’s progress. “Those two have been fantastic,” Williamson said. “There is a huge amount of respect for the match-winners that they have within their side, at the top of the order and throughout.” From England, the respect will be mutual for a team who, back in their homeland, have unexpectedly stepped out from the shadow cast by the All Blacks.