Pro-choice campaigners in Northern Ireland have accused Boris Johnson and Jeremy Hunt of pandering to religious fundamentalists in the Democratic Unionist party by ruling out any abortion reform for the country. The Conservative leadership rivals were challenged on Tuesday to state whether they would support Westminster bringing in laws to allow abortion in Northern Irish hospitals. Both said they would maintain the status quo if they entered Downing Street. Ten DUP MPs prop up the Conservative government in the Commons and wield parliamentary power that will prove critical in the Brexit process. Emma Campbell, the co-chair of Alliance for Choice, said Hunt and Johnson had “betrayed the women and girls who will travel over to England to have an abortion today, those that will make the journey the next day and the days after that until there is abortion reform”. On the influence held over the Tories by the DUP, which is anti-abortion, Campbell said: “What else could their reticence be about? This is all about Brexit and the support they will need from the DUP. It certainly is not about the rights of women from Northern Ireland.” Grainne Teggart, Amnesty International’s campaign manager in Northern Ireland, said: “Women’s rights will not be sacrificed for political expediency. A majority of the Northern Ireland public want Westminster to legislate on this matter.” The anti-abortion campaign group Both Lives Matter welcomed Hunt and Johnson’s position because, it claimed, the majority in Northern Ireland “don’t want abortion laws imposed by Westminster”. A poll for Both Lives Matter (pdf) last year found that 64% of people in Northern Ireland thought that changing the abortion law should be a decision for the people and politicians of Northern Ireland, not MPs elsewhere in the UK. In contrast, a poll for Amnesty last year found that 66% of people in Northern Ireland thought that, in the absence of a devolved government, Westminster should legislate to reform the law. Hunt and Johnson were speaking in Belfast while canvassing support among 500 Conservatives in Northern Ireland in the contest to succeed Theresa May. Northern Ireland is the only part of the UK where the Abortion Act 1967 does not apply, and both women and medics who procure or carry out terminations can be jailed for life. An abortion is only permitted in Northern Irish hospitals if there is a risk to the woman’s life or if continuing the pregnancy will cause her lasting physical damage. Asked whether he was in favour of imposing abortion reform from Westminster in the absence of a devolved government, Johnson said the issue should be debated at Stormont if power sharing is restored, rather than in Westminster. “I don’t think that the UK should be imposing something that should be decided here,” he said. Hunt, asked whether he would be in favour of changing the anti-abortion laws if he was from Northern Ireland, said it should be a devolved matter only. The 1967 act, which allows for abortions across Great Britain up to 24 weeks into pregnancy and beyond that in certain circumstances, was never applied in Northern Ireland. Previous attempts in Stormont to extend the act have been blocked by the DUP. Since the devolved government collapsed in 2017, the Conservative government in Westminster has resisted moves to extend the act to Northern Ireland.