The Britain of 2019 is very different from the Britain of 1964, the year I started my journalistic career. Among the most obvious changes are those of social class and ethnicity. A country in which the largest social group was both working class and white has been transformed. Naturally enough, these developments have affected the makeup of our media, but in different ways. Journalism has become an almost uniformly middle-class trade in which entrants are usually expected to have enjoyed a degree-level education. By contrast, running counter to the rise in the BAME (black, Asian and minority ethnic) population, media recruitment has not kept pace with that increase. It is assumed that the lack of working class and BAME media representation distorts output. I concede it may be unproven, or possibly unprovable, but I am convinced it is so. In their heyday, popular newspapers, which were overwhelmingly staffed by white working-class journalists, reflected the concerns and, yes, the prejudices, of the communities from which they sprang. There is a world of difference between empathising with people and sharing the same experiences as them. Perhaps it took the huge working-class vote in favour of Brexit for a middle-class media to realise its distance from reality. Many editors across the media spectrum – newspapers, broadcasters and online – have recognised the need to address the narrowing demographic intake. News UK, with its academy, the London Evening Standard, with its apprenticeship scheme, and the Guardian, with its Scott Trust bursaries, Positive Action Scheme and sub-editor traineeships, are among those organisations that have sought to give young people from diverse social and ethnic backgrounds a start in journalism. Now come two new initiatives with somewhat similar aims, one designed to improve the life chances of working-class people who are passionate about journalism, especially those who live outside England’s south-east, and another aimed at improving the perception of Britain’s Muslim citizens. Following the murder in April of the Northern Ireland freelance journalist Lyra McKee, the Centre for Investigative Journalism (CIJ) swiftly created a bursary in her memory. It offered to train people from underprivileged backgrounds “who aspire to become journalists or who are journalists at the very early stages of their career”. In announcing the bursary, the CIJ said it was “inspired by Lyra’s determination to become an investigative journalist, despite personal disability, the need to care for her disabled mother as well as fighting the in-built bias against working-class entrants to journalism”. It contended that “too often … internships go to well-connected, well-heeled young people. As a result, the higher echelons of the national media risk being made up largely of those who lack sources within and any experience in common with wider society.” So, it sought “bright people without access to London media connections”. Last week, the first 11 beneficiaries of the scheme – including people from Derry, Belfast, Glasgow and Bristol – attended the CIJ’s investigative conference at Goldsmiths, University of London. There, they heard from Lyra’s sister, Nichola, that the McKee family would fund the bursary’s fourth year. The Lorana Sullivan Foundation is paying for the initial three years. Next comes an opportunity for the students to attend a series of masterclasses in investigative journalism under the leadership of Stephen Grey, a Reuters special correspondent with a wealth of reporting experience. They will join other applicants on the course, which is due to be run on five successive Saturdays in the autumn. Grey and his fellow tutors will teach lessons in a range of subjects, such as the handling of sources and how to analyse data. He says: “It’s much more difficult to get a foot in the journalistic door nowadays. There’s a barrier to access for those without qualifications or for those who live outside London. Even for staff in regional papers, it’s difficult to get a start on national media without some kind of connection. We are offering places on the course, free of charge, to people who have demonstrated a commitment to truth-telling journalism, whether in local or regional media, or blogs and new media.” Of all the BAME groups, it is Muslims who have suffered some of the most hostile media coverage in recent years. According to Paul Salahuddin Armstrong, managing director of the Association of British Muslims (AoBM), the negative portrayal of his community on screen amounts to “a gross misrepresentation of the greater Muslim population”. Waseem Mahmood, a strategic communications consultant who has set up broadcasting projects in various countries specifically aimed at combating terrorism, agrees: “We suffer from negative coverage which fuels Islamophobia.” To try to counter the surfeit of biased narratives about Muslims, his son, Khurrum, came up with the idea of creating an advisory body to ensure that film producers and script writers depict Muslims with greater accuracy and fairness. So, he approached the AoBM and the result is the founding of the Film and Television Bureau. Khurrum, an award-winning film-maker himself, says: “We want to act as a consultation service for film and television projects. We’re ready to work from the script stage through to on set.” He wants the bureau to engage a panel of consultants and scholars who can assist producers with a range of issues, from theological questions to historical dress. Authenticity, he believes, will redress the unsympathetic image currently prevalent in both TV and movie productions touching on Muslims. He also believes the bureau could help to cure the lack of diversity and inclusion within the film industry. This ambition dovetails with the CIJ’s Lyra McKee undertaking and is informed by a similar belief: media output is influenced by its practitioners. It also raises a further set of questions. In the case of Muslims, what has been the effect of negative stereotyping? On them, and on others? As for the white working class, what has been the impact of the middle-class nature of the media? In both instances, does it help to explain why mainstream media is, at one extreme, distrusted and therefore abused or, at the other, regarded as irrelevant and therefore ignored?