Marcus Rashford and the teenager James Garner got Manchester United’s pre-season tour off to a winning start, with the new boys Daniel James and Aaron Wan-Bissaka showing promise in a comfortable 2-0 victory against Perth Glory. Rashford finished nicely before 17-year-old Garner came off the bench to score in the win at the mammoth Optus Stadium in Western Australia’s state capital. Romelu Lukaku, Victor Lindelof, Eric Bailly and Lee Grant were not available for the match due to slight niggles, but Ole Gunnar Solskjær was still able to name entirely different XIs in each half. James, signed from Swansea last month, was handed a starting role in Perth and emerged as United’s most impressive performer of the opening period. Ashley Young, captaining the side, hit the side-netting from a free-kick and Anthony Martial and the impressive Jesse Lingard also had opportunities before Solskjær made sweeping half-time changes, with the unsettled Paul Pogba summoned and Wan-Bissaka handed his first United appearance. United started the second period on the front foot and the deadlock was finally broken in the 60th minute as Pogba’s flick found Rashford to hit a lovely low finish on the turn into the far corner. Angel Gomes, Mason Greenwood and Marcos Rojo had attempts to extend the visitors’ lead, before Garner came on for a seemingly hurt Luke Shaw in the closing stages. The left-back had barely made it off the giant field by the time his replacement rifled a low effort past the Perth goalkeeper from 20 yards in front of 50,206 fans. Greenwood then saw an effort impressively tipped on to the post by Tando Velaphi as United ended strongly. United’s first-team coach, Mark Dempsey, is to fly back to England from Perth after being taken to hospital on Friday due to the “intensity” of the club’s pre-season tour. The 55-year-old fell ill at the team’s Crown Towers earlier in the week. “Mark Dempsey will be discharged from hospital following assessment and treatment,” read a club statement. “Due to the intensity of the tour schedule we have decided together it’s best for him to return home.” Dempsey was appointed first-team coach by Solskjær, the manager having previously employed him as his assistant during two spells in charge of Molde and also at Cardiff City. On Friday The Sun reported that Dempsey’s wife, Susan, stated he was suffering exhaustion and dehydration. “So everything is fine. I’ve just spoken to him now,” she told the newspaper. Jamie Jackson