Late-night hosts spent a second night disparaging Donald Trump over his racist Twitter attack on four Democratic congresswomen of colour while also discussing his defence strategy. On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert reiterated how Trump’s tweet telling Ilhan Omar, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Rashida Tlaib and Ayanna Pressley, dubbed “the Squad”, to go home, was inaccurate and racist. “They’re from here,” he said. “Immigrant or otherwise, they’re American, that’s how you get into Congress. That statement of Trump is old school racism minus the school.” Colbert continued: “It’s one of the most terrible things Donald Trump could say to an immigrant other than ‘Will you marry me?’” In a follow-up tweet, Trump claimed that there is not a racist bone in his body. “We’ve seen your body,” Colbert said. “I’m not sure there are any bones, just mascarpone cheese pumped into a suit.” He went on to say that for Trump, racism is in fact an important part of his repertoire. “Racism is your brand,” he said. “It’s like Colonel Sanders saying ‘I don’t have a finger-lickin’ bone in my body.’” Trump doubles down on his racist tweets, while Republicans scramble to condemn them in terms other than “racist.” pic.twitter.com/wNCMBbo2ZV On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah also made a similar joke about Trump’s racist bone tweet. “Well, to be fair I’ve seen his body and I don’t think he has any bones,” he said. “He’s sort of like that Stranger Things creature.” He went on to say that Trump would be the “first person to fail an x-ray exam” before discussing the hypocrisy of Trump’s line of thinking. He claimed that the four women should leave the country rather than complain about it yet Noah showed a montage of Trump doing the same thing during his campaign trail. “Instead of complaining why didn’t he just leave?” he asked. “It doesn’t make sense.” He then used a sports analogy to further prove the idiocy of Trump’s thinking. “If the Knicks kicked out every fan who yelled at them to play better, Madison Square Garden would be emptier than Mike Pence’s spice cabinet,” he said. Republicans have since been on the defence, with Jim Jordan claiming Trump isn’t racist but just frustrated. “Frustration doesn’t make you racist. If anything it just lets your racism slip out,” Noah said. On Jimmy Kimmel Live, the host referred to Trump as “President Clickbait” before also making a similar joke. “It’s true, he doesn’t have any bones in his body,” he said. “He’s like a human McRib. He says this a lot. We’re not worried about your bones being racist, we’re worried about your brain and your mouth being racist.” He continued: “When he finds out who’s been posting all this racist stuff on his Twitter account, he is going to be pissed.” Kimmel then went on to make a joke referencing the porn star that Trump had an alleged affair with. “A racist bone in my body was the name of the sex tape he was hoping to make with Stormy Daniels at the golf tournament,” he said. On Late Night, Seth Meyers was the fourth host to make the same joke: “Well, based on this photo, I have to ask do you have any bones in your body?” He went on to bring up Joe Biden who challenged Trump to push-ups after he questioned his physical and mental state. “Just a heads up, if someone criticised your mental state and your response is to do push-ups, it’s not a great argument in defence of your mental state,” Meyers said. Bernie Sanders has also challenged Trump to a one-mile run. “In other words, a suicide pact,” Meyers joked.