Despite their tactical teething problems, Brazil got there in the end. At the Maracanã on Sunday, the Seleção will attempt to maintain their record of having lifted the Copa América every time they have hosted the tournament. Standing in their way are Peru, who have improved enormously since they were beaten 5-0 by Braz in the group stage a fortnight ago. A victory for Brazil would mean a third trophy on home soil in six years, after they won the 2013 Confederations Cup and the gold medal they won at the Olympics in 2016. Such a run would be considered a golden period for many countries, but Brazil remains unconvinced. “In this period,” explains Breiller Pires, a football writer for the Brazilian edition of El País, “Brazil suffered the biggest embarrassment in their history, were twice eliminated from the Copa América and again disappointed at the World Cup by falling in the quarters to Belgium. “If they win the Copa América, the team shouldn’t be fooled by the result as the technical level of the competition doesn’t even look like the required standard to beat big European opponents. In 2013, Brazil were deluded by the result of the Confederations Cup and paid a very high price.” Winning their ninth Copa América – and their fifth as hosts – would not erase every painful memory from their recent past, but it would represent their first major trophy since 2007, when Gilberto Silva captained the team to success in the Copa América in Venezuela. They beat Argentina in that final 12 years ago. Having already dispatched them in the semi-finals this year, Brazilians are starting to feel very confident. “The majority of Brazilians feared Chile more than Peru for this final,” says Márvio dos Anjos, sports editor of O Globo newspaper. “The 5-0 hammering is a fresh memory and beating Peru is a habit, even though were were eliminated by them in the 2016 Copa América. As well as this, the team still hasn’t conceded a goal.” Brazil are unbeaten in 15 games since their exit from the World Cup last summer but they have a habit of turning success into complacency. “Brazilian culture underestimates its rivals in football,” says Pires. “We can’t ignore that Peru have become a very competitive team since the arrival of Ricardo Gareca. The 5-0 win masked a lot of things. In the first 10 minutes at the Arena Corinthians, Brazil suffered. Luckily, the goal came quickly from a play inside the area and after that the goalkeeper made a mistake. Things won’t be as easy in the final.” Indeed, it seems that shellacking was the best thing that could have happened to Peru. After finishing third in their group, Gareca’s men overcame Uruguay on penalties in the quarter-finals and beat defending champions Chile 3-0 in their semi-final in Porto Alegre. After his howler allowed Roberto Firmino to score a cheeky no-look goal from close range, Peru goalkeeper Pedro Gallese has been impressive, denying Luis Suárez from the spot and keeping two consecutive clean sheets. Another reason for caution is the fact that, while Brazil are at home, they are still in unfamiliar surroundings. Despite its standing as the Mecca of Brazilian football, the Maracanã has only hosted the Brazil senior team twice since it was renovated for the World Cup. It hosted Brazil’s friendly with England in June 2013 and their victory over Spain in the Confederations Cup final a month later. But the Seleção have not returned since. Even bitter rivals Argentina have played at the stadium more often. The Seleção’s absence from their spiritual home seems symbolic, both of the disappointments of the last six years and the widening gap between the team and the fans. That lack of identification with the team is the result of several factors, including high ticket prices and a squad made up largely of players who play outside Brazil. Some fans even struggle to support the few players who are based in Brazil, as they pull on the yellow and green of Brazil at the expense of their own clubs. “The Brazilian championship doesn’t stop during international breaks,” says Pires. “They leave their clubs and the Seleção is seen as a competitor. I don’t think the Copa América title, in and of itself, will placate this feeling that the Seleção is not really representative.” Dos Anjos, on the other hand, thinks some success could help repair the rift: “If they win, it will bring a lot of pride. It will show that Brazil can win championships, at least at the continental level, and will create a good memory of a national team that plays in London more than at the Maracanã.” According to the doyen of Brazilian football writing, Juca Kfouri, Tite is considering quitting whether Brazil win or lose the final. In his column on Thursday, Kfouri reported that the manager is “disappointed with the dismantling of his coaching staff” after Sylvinho and Fernando Lázaroleft left for Lyon and former Arsenal player Edu agreed to return to the club as their technical director. There are few, if any, Brazilian coaches on Tite’s level and he has spent the last three years implementing his style of play. The Brazilian football federation quashed the rumours quickly and will surely hope that a victory on Sunday will convince him to stay. If Brazil beat Peru and Tite stays, a first international trophy would give him the prestige he needs to go into the next World Cup cycle without questions hanging over his head. “Tite would win the confidence to carry out his most difficult transition, which is to rebuild a very old defence,” says Dos Anjos. Before fretting over the future, though, Brazil must concentrate on the task at hand. To bring the fans onside, the Seleçaõ will hope to score an early goal, just as they did against Peru in the group stage. “If Brazil play badly, we will hear silence and Peruvian songs,” warns Dos Anjos. “Half an hour of dull football could be fatal for the spirit in the stands and the team will have to deal with it.” How Brazil handle that pressure could decide a lot more than the destination of the trophy. • Yellow & Green Football are on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter• Joshua Law and Tom Sanderson are on Twitter