Inspectors from the UN’s nuclear watchdog will work to verify Iran’s claim it has broken the terms of the 2015 nuclear deal. The International Atomic Energy Agency said its inspectors in Iran would report to its Vienna headquarters “as soon as they verify the announced development”. It did not elaborate. Iran announced on Sunday that it was ramping up the level of uranium enrichment beyond the 3.67% permitted under the deal. On 1 July Iran increased its stockpile of low-enriched uranium beyond the cap set by the deal. Iran’s moves have come in response to sweeping US sanctions imposed after Donald Trump unilaterally withdrew from the deal a year ago. The Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, called on world powers to impose “snapback sanctions” on Iran in response to its declarations. Netanyahu said on Sunday that enriching uranium to such levels had only one purpose – to create atomic bombs. He said western leaders had vowed to impose sanctions the moment Iran crossed that threshold. The Israeli leader has been one of the harshest critics of the nuclear deal. Israel considers Iran to be its most dangerous enemy because of its nuclear programme. Iran’s deputy foreign minister said his nation would take another step affecting its compliance with the nuclear deal in 60 days. Abbas Araghchi told a news conference he could not elaborate on the nature of the next step. Araghchi said Iran considered the deal with world powers to be a “valid document” and sought its continuation. He said Iran was open to negotiations with Europe, which the US could join. Araghchi also said the Iranian oil tanker that Britain intercepted off Gibraltar on Thursday had not been headed towards Syria. He said there was no law allowing authorities in Gibraltar to stop the tanker and the seizure was “piracy”. Royal Marines and the Gibraltarian police intercepted the supertanker Grace 1 on Thursday, saying they believed it to be violating EU sanctions by carrying Iranian crude oil to Syria. Spanish authorities said the seizure had come at the request of the US.