Gavin Woodhouse has lost control of three of his companies after a judge ruled that his business model appeared to be “thoroughly dishonest” and a “shameful abuse of the privileges of limited liability trading”. The moves come a week after publication of an undercover investigation by the Guardian and ITV News, which raised questions about the business interests of Woodhouse, who has raised millions of pounds from private investors but whose firms have a multimillion-pound “black hole”. Hearing an application to place three Woodhouse businesses into interim administration, Judge Sally Barber said: “This appears to be a thoroughly dishonest business model and a shameful abuse of the privileges of limited liability trading. I am entirely satisfied by the evidence before me that this court must take immediate action.” She ordered that two Woodhouse care home businesses – MBI Clifton Moor and MBI Hawthorn – along with the entrepreneur’s planned adventure resort Afan Valley be placed into interim administration. Powers that Woodhouse possessed as a director have been removed with immediate effect and administrators from the insolvency firm Duff & Phelps will take over the running of the companies until a full hearing. Barber added: “This is not just insolvency [it is] what has been going on behind the curtain of limited liability. These intercompany loans [have been] written off in their millions. This is investors’ money.” Last week the Guardian and ITV News revealed how Woodhouse, who is launching a £200m outdoor adventure resort in south Wales with the support of the celebrity Bear Grylls, had raised millions of pounds about five years ago from private investors to fund four care homes – none of which are operational and three of which have not been built. Millions of pounds from those stalled care home projects were loaned to another company in which Woodhouse owns 60% of the shares but that company has gone into administration and the cash appears to have vanished. Investors have grown increasingly concerned about their money and Woodhouse admits that he has fallen behind with their payments. A third care home company – MBI Walsden – avoided an interim administration order as it is no longer trading and Woodhouse is not a director. Woodhouse’s lawyer declined to comment on her client’s behalf in court. Woodhouse denies any wrongdoing and says he has not had enough time to defend himself.