The Sabbath was never a day for gambling in these parts and Tommy Fleetwood resisted the temptation in picking his way round a sodden, wind-whipped course with more devil in it than your average prison cell. He still did not win but he did as well as the elements, the Dunluce Links and his temperament would allow. On a day when JB Holmes shot 87 and Cameron Smith reckoned a 15-handicapper would not get around the course at all, it was no disgrace finishing six shots behind the sentimental and rightful favourite, Shane Lowry. The ever-smiling Irishman held him at bay for four and a half hours in front of his home crowd through light breeze and hair-messing gale, through driving rain and not much sunshine. When it was done, a little after 6pm, Fleetwood got nearly as big a hug from the big-hearted winner as did Lowry’s wife and daughter. Fleetwood admitted later he was “disappointed and a bit low. I look at it now, six shots back, but the last three or four holes were kind of a bit of a procession for Shane and he did great. That’s the first time I’ve played in the last group of a major on a Sunday. You learn things as you go. You learn things about yourself.” He said of Lowry, “He never lost control of himself. He made some key putts at key times. He did better in those moments than I did today. I just didn’t convert the putts at times. And my errant shots, I didn’t do a great job of fixing them.” He might have made more of the early chances that came his way. To miss one birdie putt is forgivable; to miss three in a row then an eagle chance proved expensive. When he did birdie the 5th, a 374‑yard par-four clinging to the cliffs as if in an oil painting, Lowry matched him to retain his five‑shot lead. Still, Fleetwood’s safety-first golf – straight driving, sensible use of the irons and decent concentration with the flat stick – had enabled him to stay in punching distance of the gentle bear from Offaly on Saturday. The rest were playing for third place. Fleetwood’s one poor shot in the first 50 minutes arrived on the par‑three, bunker-free 6th, the ball dying on him in the strengthening breeze to the right front of the undulating, elevated green. It took a controlled chip to save him. The skies began their vicious assault in earnest an hour into their contest, weather familiar to both men. As Fleetwood had said the night before: “I’ve had some of my best rounds in terrible, terrible conditions, where I’ve enjoyed grinding it out. And Shane definitely has not played all his life in sunshine and no wind.” Fleetwood found a greenside bunker on the par-five 7th and needed a solid putt from about six feet across the soaked grass to save his par – and again Lowry birdied, after a sublime chip that left him a tiddler to convert. Driving into a wet howler on Curran Point, the monster par-five 8th with the stunning backdrop, Fleetwood lost control of the shot and found the rough, tucked in behind a knoll 154 yards from the flag. He could do no more than hack his way back on to the fairway, then bogeyed – as did Lowry for the second time in his round. Little wonder. The wet stuff went from wretchedly uncomfortable to mini-tempest and the gallery took on the look of sinners doing penance. When the leaders turned for home, wetter than a washing machine, there was a pause in the rain and they shared the course with 20 others still battling away in front of them. A double bogey put a serious hole in Fleetwood’s score and he was now looking over his shoulder at Lee Westwood rather than chasing Lowry, who remained five clear of him after his own bogey, completing the front nine in 36, one stroke fewer than Fleetwood. The Englishman got into light rough on the left off the tee on the 10th. Negotiating a 16mph crosswind, he was not thrilled to see his ball find similar grass on the other side of the fairway and gave the course back another shot. With eight holes left Fleetwood trailed by six strokes, two more than when they started two and a half hours earlier, and was one shot clear of Westwood. A curious lassitude fell on the event as if there was nothing anyone could do to alter the course of the non-contest. This was not anyone’s fault but neither hunter nor hunted moved the dial much. Not even a Lowry bogey on the 11th and a Fleetwood birdie on the 12th – shrinking the Irishman’s lead to four with six holes left – aroused much concern among the trekkers who on Saturday had created more noise than a house party. If day three was one of premature celebration for Offaly and “the island of Ireland”, as Graeme McDowell sagely remarked, the afternoon of day four was what the French call la petite mort. The applause gathered force again, however, as the tournament wound down to its correct conclusion, a triumph for Lowry, a minor disappointment for Fleetwood, who never did enough to worry Lowry. Still, for half an hour or so we had one cracker of a storm.