What were you hoping for?A new experience and an interesting story to tell my mum. First impressions?A little bit shy and a good head of hair. What did you talk about?Work, the hobbies I fibbed about, favourite alcoholic beverages and we even braved Brexit. Any awkward moments?Having to repeatedly tell the waiter in the middle of the restaurant that I was there for the Guardian blind date. Good table manners?Yep, there wasn’t any nose-picking or double-dipping. We both admitted defeat and asked for forks instead of fumbling along with the chopsticks. Best thing about Jack?Loves his nan and has good taste in gin. He also suggested the second bottle of wine, which shows good life choices. Would you introduce him to your friends?They’ve got their hands full with me. Describe Jack in three wordsAmbitious, friendly and good hair. What do you think he made of you?I think I initially came into the date like a bull in a china shop. Hopefully funny and charming? Did you go on somewhere?We just walked to the station. And... did you kiss?Nope, zero kisses. A friendly hug was exchanged, though. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?He was a lovely date, but probably a bit more of a buzz in the conversation. Marks out of 10?6.5. Would you meet again?No, I don’t think the stars aligned for us. What were you hoping for?To meet someone new and go with the flow. First impressions?Attractive and quite nervous. What did you talk about?Veganism, our scene kid days and what awful hair we had, our careers/life ambitions, Brexit (as you do), our love of dogs. Any awkward moments?He turned up 15 minutes late (turns out he was queueing outside), I thought I’d been stood up. The conversation sort of died a bit towards the end; I think we were both a bit nervous because everything gets reported back. Good table manners?Yeah. Best thing about Jordan?We’ve got very similar interests. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes. Describe Jordan in three wordsAttractive, friendly and confident. What do you think he made of you?(Hopefully) nice and funny. I did chuck out a few random facts – for instance, that my grandparents name all their animals after domestic appliance brands (Neff and Bissell the dogs, Zanussi the cat). Did you go on somewhere?No, but we stayed for an extra bottle of wine. I would have asked for his number, but I was a bit scared of him saying no. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?My choice of main dish. Marks out of 10?7.5. Would you meet again?Yeah, as friends. • Jordan and Jack ate at Din Tai Fung, London WC2. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com