Sebastian Vettel, despite everything, is still smiling. The equanimity with which he faces his shortcomings this season and the realisation his Ferrari team cannot challenge Mercedes for the Formula One title, says much for his character. Yet competing in the 11 remaining races in a car with which he is struggling weighs heavy and that smile must be beginning to fade. Little wonder that debate in the paddock before his home race at the German Grand Prix on Sunday revolves around whether he will retire at the end of the season. At 32, Vettel has four titles, all for Red Bull between 2010 and 2013. He joined Ferrari in 2015 with the intent of emulating Michael Schumacher, building the team around him and returning their first drivers’ championship since 2007. What followed has been a rollercoaster of optimism and shattered hopes that could easily break a driver. Vettel insists he will see out his final season with Ferrari next year before deciding on his future. This season is already gone, with Vettel 100 points behind Lewis Hamilton, and Mercedes holding a distinct advantage. Once again the hope of a Ferrari challenge has disappeared, dispiritingly almost from the opening race. Worse still the Scuderia, who had backed Vettel as their No 1 driver from the off, appear to have given the German a car that simply does not suit him. In the 2015 and 2016 seasons, Ferrari were blown away by the dominant Mercedes car. By 2017 they were in a position to mount a challenge and last year were even stronger, with the superior car for much of the season. Errors by driver and team proved costly and their hopes slipped away. Last year Vettel went off at Hockenheim while leading in the rain, the low point of a season peppered with mistakes. This year he spun while in competition with Hamilton in Bahrain, and in Canada went off when under pressure from the British driver. At the last race at Silverstone, his misjudgment in crashing into Max Verstappen was as public and as egregious an error as he has made since Spa 2010 when he lost control at the Bus Stop and hit Jenson Button. He has admitted he is more than aware of his failings. “I always put myself under pressure, so I can’t be happy if things go wrong,” he said. “The pressure I put on myself after that is bigger than any external factors. For me it’s the most honest and straightforward way to deal with it myself, because I know what I’ve done wrong and what I’ve done right.” The incident at the British Grand Prix was seen as an error indicative of a driver struggling for confidence. Alain Prost singled it out. “The collision at Silverstone happened due to a lack of judgment. We clearly see that he is not in top form,” he said. “It is due to a lack of sufficient concentration, motivation or judgment.” At Hockenheim Vettel has insisted it was a privilege not a burden to race for Ferrari. However Johnny Herbert, who raced alongside Michael Schumacher at Benetton in 1995, is convinced that representing the Scuderia lies heavy on Vettel. “Sebastian still has to carry Ferrari on this shoulders,” he said. “The pressure of Italy, of the team, of the media. In the last couple of years they haven’t taken that pressure off. That massive weight hasn’t allowed him to breathe. Ferrari haven’t got that balance right, a driver needs that.” But what seems equally as important as where Vettel is mentally is what he is feeling through the seat of his pants. His titles were won during the blown diffuser period of 2010-2011 and then when it was banned, Red Bull maintained their advantage by clever channelling of exhaust gasses in 2012-2013. The period was one where downforce was dominant and Vettel was its master. He likes to arrive fast into the corner, brake late and turn-in aggressively, before getting back on the power. The Red Bull suited this to perfection, he had the front end he needed for corner entry and the confidence that the grip would be there when he hit the throttle on exit. When the Red Bull struggled with rear stability early in one season, Vettel’s teammate Mark Webber had an edge. As the team solved the problem, the car came to Vettel, as did the title. In 2014 when all exhaust blowing was removed Vettel looked uncomfortable, did not win a race and was beaten by his inexperienced teammate Daniel Ricciardo. This season Ferrari will have endeavoured to build a car to suit Vettel, instead they have delivered what appears to be the opposite, a car with inherent understeer. Worse still he has struggled to adapt to it. Since the Canadian GP he has been outqualified and outperformed by his Ferrari teammate Charles Leclerc in every race. Leclerc seems more adept at being to hustle the car through the corners. “If I don’t feel what I need it’s a bit tricky,” Vettel said of his car in 2018 at Melbourne. A view with which Herbert concurs. “The car is not what he wants,” he said. “It’s not delivering what he needs to feel through the tips of his fingers and his shoulders and when you don’t have that feeling you are going to struggle and then the mental side comes in.” Herbert believes Ferrari must shoulder much of the responsibility. “At Benetton [technical director] Ross Brawn and [designer] Rory Byrne asked what Michael wanted,” he said. “When they listened to Michael they were on the same page and they knew what he needed and how to give it to him. That relationship enabled Michael to achieve what he did.” The Ferrari team principal, Mattia Binotto, has held up his hands in admitting the car is not where it should be but publicly Vettel remains committed to his task. He married his childhood sweetheart with whom he has two children earlier this year and enjoys a life away from F1 and at Hockenheim reiterated his intent to see out his time with Ferrari. Having put four years in already and still smiling, Vettel knows there is still a job to be done with the team. “He went to Ferrari to try to win a championship, he has not achieved that,” Herbert said. “I would be so surprised if he walked away having not achieved that. I would be shocked if he did that. The opportunity is still there. He has not finished the job he went there to do.” At their home race Mercedes are running a white livery to celebrate 125 years since what is considered the first race held in 1894 from Paris to Rouen. Ferrari however had the edge in Friday’s first practice session. Vettel was quickest with Leclerc second in front of Hamilton and the Red Bull of Max Verstappen. The Ferrari teammates traded places in the afternoon session with Leclerc holding a 0.124sec advantage. Hamilton again had to settle for third, 0.146sec off Leclerc’s pace. Mercedes, struggling in the fierce temperatures as they had in Austria, will be hoping for cooler weather.