Following their relegation from the Premier League and the departures of both Aron Gunnarsson and Victor Camarasa, Cardiff City were in desperate need of midfield reinforcements. Will Vaulks is an excellent addition. He chipped in with seven goals and seven assists last season while captaining Rotherham and should prove to be a real asset with and without the ball. Strong in the tackle and great in the air, with a cannon of a throw-in to boot, he’ll be a key player. Anthony Knockaert struggled to have a real impact in his two seasons in the Premier League with Brighton, but he has proven on numerous occasions that he is a star player at Championship level. He won the player of the year award the last time he was in the division, in 2016-17, when scored 15 goals and laid on eight assists to help Brighton earn promotion. If he can come close to recapturing that form, Fulham will have a good shot at an immediate return to the top flight. Another winger who struggled to transfer his Championship form into the top flight. If Leeds can get Helder Costa back to his best, they will be in for a treat. The 25-year-old was previously Wolves’ record signing – when they signed him from Benfica for £13m in 2017 – but a serious ankle injury stunted his progression and he hasn’t really been the same since. When fully fit, the Portuguese is a matchwinner though. He was a success for Wolves in the Championship, scoring 15 goals and 14 assists in the league with Wolves – meaning he had a direct hand in a goal every 150 minutes. With Jonas Lossl leaving for Everton, Huddersfield have exploited the loan market for a keeper once more. The club looked to Liverpool to sign Danny Ward in 2016 – helping them to promotion – and have raided the club once more for Polish youth international Kamil Grabara. The 20-year-old is first choice for Poland’s U21 side in front of the highly rated Bartlomiej Dragowski and made the most saves at this summer’s European Championship (15). Steering clear of injuries has been Nick Powell’s problem throughout his career but, if Stoke can manage his fitness and workload well, this free transfer could be a masterstroke. The 25-year-old was only able to start 25 of his 32 appearances last season but he still chipped in with eight goals and six assists. He’s extremely confident and will chance his arm from anywhere, which will benefit a Potters side that only scored 45 goals in 46 league games last season – the third worst tally in the division. Very few people will have seen this one coming. Brentford’s capture of Pontus Jansson from Leeds is a real statement of intent. The Swede has been linked to a number of Premier League clubs in the past but didn’t see eye-to-eye with Marcelo Bielsa on numerous occasions and was subsequently shown the door at Elland Road. A dominant aerial presence in both boxes, the 28-year-old is an all-action defender and more than capable of playing out from the back. Former Charlton and Arsenal man Semi Ajayi had a fine season in the Championship last season for relegated Rotherham and his newfound versatility should prove a real asset to what was an ageing Baggies side. The giant Nigeria international stepped up from centre-back to midfield to good effect in the latter half of the campaign and he also discovered a knack for scoring screamers alongside his obvious threat from set pieces, scoring seven goals for the club. An elegant player in the middle of the park, Romaine Sawyers is an absolute steal at £3m. The 27-year-old is more than capable of dictating play from deep or threading intricate passes through the lines in the final third. He should add some much-needed creativity to what was an industrious West Brom midfield last season. Only Pablo Hernandez has created more chances from open play over the past two seasons in the Championship. Big things were expected of Sam Gallagher when he broke into the Southampton first team six years ago, but he has failed to live up to expectations. Still just 23, the striker is going back to Blackburn Rovers this summer, having enjoyed the best season of his career at the club while on loan there in 2016-17. The targetman scored 11 league goals for the club that season and his aerial threat and stature should benefit the likes of Bradley Dack, Adam Armstrong and Joe Rothwell in support. Mallik Wilks provided a real goal threat while on loan at Doncaster last season as the club reached the play-offs in League One, so it’s somewhat surprising that Leeds have allowed him to leave on a permanent deal this summer. The 20-year-old scored 14 goals from the left flank last season for Doncaster, with his direct running and pace out wide making him one of the most dangerous players in the division. Promoted Barnsley certainly kept a close eye on the youngster and will see his signing as something of a coup. • Visit WhoScored for more statistics and ratings• Follow WhoScored and Martin Laurence on Twitter