Those who write from their comfy chairs (Letters, 3 July) to criticise the overall positive effect Glastonbury festival has had for 49 years should explore coming as a volunteer. WaterAid, Oxfam and Greenpeace are where to start. Stewarding to raise funds for one of the numerous smaller charities, which I have done for six years, is an option. Like other festivals, Glastonbury is not the province of the privileged. Many come from every background imaginable. They have saved for the opportunity to experience not just the music but the spontaneous friendship and vast range of alternative activities for all ages – children come free! This atmosphere cannot be delivered by television. Obviously the complete absence of single-use plastic water bottles, 1 million fewer, escaped the attention of eager critics, and I can reassure Judy Gahagan that the cows have a nice holiday and the other inhabitants of Worthy Farm rapidly reclaim their rural habitat, including the Eavis family.Andrew WilkinsonOxford • Re Pam Fraser’s regret (Letters, 3 July). My wife and I started going to Glastonbury when we were 60. We’ve gone every year since, and plan on continuing to go. At 70 this year, we were among the older attendees, but not the oldest. Don’t regret not going, Pam – go next year! You’ll enjoy it.Mike and Helen HarperCatterick, North Yorkshire • I, like Pam Fraser, also regret (at the age of 66) that I’ve never been to Glastonbury. But I did go to the Weeley festival in 1971 – the only time it took place. It was organised by the local Round Table as a charity fundraising event. They had planned for about 5,000 people, but nearer 110,000 attended as the Isle of Wight festival didn’t happen that year. It was three days of non-stop music, day and night, with the most wonderful weather – which was a blessing as my friend and I had only black bin bags to sleep in! An amazing experience.Karen BraddonCumbria • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition