Novak Djokovic was not allowed to wear his hat on court on Friday but taking away his crown is going to be a far harder task. The defending champion faced his first significant test against Poland’s Hubert Hurkacz and while he lost his first set of the championship he simply rolled up his sleeves and romped into next week. Hurkacz is among the much talked about “next generation” of players who are showing signs of promise but taking an age to mount a sustained challenge to the dominance of Djokovic, Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer. The 22-year-old thrilled on his way to winning the second set tie-break but Djokovic’s victory was never in doubt. He brushed off losing the second set just as he did when told he could not wear his cap due it its black trim supposedly contravening Wimbledon’s all white dress code. The most ruffled Djokovic has been so far was when facing repeated, and fully warranted, questioning over his relationship with the former ATP board member Justin Gimelstob after his second-round win. As a result, he refused to answer questions on the subject on Friday, insisting he would focus on his tennis. On court however, his progress has been serene and if the authority with which he seized back control of the match in the third set did not serve as a reminder as to the dominance of the defending champion, Nadal and Federer this year, Kevin Anderson’s shock defeat earlier in the day surely did. The big-serving fourth seed, who lost to Djokovic in last year’s final, has struggled badly with an elbow injury all year and it showed against Guido Pella, who eased to a 6-4, 6-3, 7-6 victory. Anderson’s departure, as well as that of Russia’s Karen Khachanov, leaves Kei Nishikori as the only other top 10 seed, aside from the big three, still standing. The draw has opened up for Djokovic to the extent the best-ranked player he can face before the final is the 15th seed Milos Raonic. He has even been spared a fourth-round test against the up-and-coming Canadian Felix Auger-Aliassime, who crashed out in straight sets to Ugo Humbert. “It’s a surprise not to have any top-10 player left in my side of the draw,” Djokovic said. “At the same time respect to everyone who won against those guys and top seeds.” Anderson, whose preparations have been severely hampered, – this was only his fifth tournament of the year and second since his recovery – said: “Those three guys are just really good tennis players. They’re just so experienced, they know what it’s like playing on centre courts week in, week out at the grand slams. They know what it’s like being in the semis, in the finals. That sort of experience just keeps on compounding because nobody else is really having nearly as many opportunities.” Anderson’s problems this year should not detract from Pella’s performance. The Argentinian has a habit of claiming the scalps of losing finalists – last year he defeated the 2017 runner-up, Marin Cilic en route to the third round – and his reward is a meeting with Raonic and the opportunity to continue his run – the Canadian 15th seed having lost to Andy Murray in the 2016 final. Raonic made light work of the 6ft 11in American Reilly Opelka, coming through in straight sets 7-6 (1), 6-2, 6-1. Khachanov went down in straight sets to Spain’s Roberto Bautista Agut, who now faces Benoît Paire, seeded 28th, after the Frenchman recovered from a set down to defeat Jiri Vesely 5-7, 7-6 (5), 6-3, 7-6 (2). Fernando Verdasco, who dumped out Kyle Edmund in the previous round, secured a 6-4, 7-6 (1), 6-4 win over Thomas Fabbiano of Italy. He will face Belgium’s David Goffin, who edged out the 11th seed Daniil Medvedev, 6-4, 2-6, 6-3, 3-6, 7-5.