The former US special counsel Robert Mueller has said Donald Trump was not exonerated by Mueller’s report into Russian interference in the 2016 election and the Trump campaign. Minutes into testifying at a hearing at Capitol Hill on Wednesday, Mueller said – contrary to Trump’s claim – that the special counsel report did not provide the president with total exoneration. “It is not what the report said,” Mueller said. “The president was not exculpated for the acts that he allegedly committed,” Mueller said. Mueller is testifying at a pair of televised hearings that carry high stakes for Trump and the Democrats, who are split between beginning impeachment proceedings against him or moving on to the 2020 election. Mueller, whose inquiry detailed extensive contacts between Trump’s 2016 campaign and Russia at a time when Moscow was interfering in the 2016 election with hacking and propaganda, appeared first before the House of Representatives judiciary committee. Early in his testimony, he confirmed that the president refused to be interviewed by Mueller and his team, despite more than a year of requests – contrary to Trump’s claims. Lines of questioning were largely split along party lines, with Democrats used their time to confirm some of the most damning portions of Mueller’s report, and Republicans questioning the scope of Mueller’s investigation and whether his probe followed justice department regulations. Opening his testimony, Mueller said his “extensive investigation” was conducted over two years. “Given my role as a prosecutor, there are reasons why my testimony will be limited,” he said. “The report is my testimony, and I will stay within that text.” Muller repeated “I can’t get into that” many times during the hearing when asked to go beyond the report. In two hours of testimony, Mueller deflected questions 60 times, according to a count by NBC News. Ohio Congressman Jim Jordan, a close ally of Trump, pushed Mueller on the origins of the investigation, even though Mueller said he would not speak about that. “I’m not sure I agree with your characterizations,” the mild-mannered Mueller told Jordan as he lambasted the investigation. Trump said on Tuesday he did not plan to watch Mueller’s testimony. But in a short break in proceedings, he tweeted quoting Fox News anchor Chris Wallace as saying the hearing had so far been “a disaster for the Democrats and a disaster for the reputation of Robert Mueller”. Wearing a dark suit and a blue patterned tie, Mueller sat solemnly as proceedings began. Opening the first hearing, the committee’s Democratic chairman, Jerrold Nadler, praised Mueller and said no one, including Trump, is “above the law.” Democrats, who control the House, hope Mueller’s testimony will rally public support behind their own ongoing investigations of the Republican president and his administration, even as they struggle with whether to launch the impeachment process set out in the US constitution for removing a president from office for “high crimes and misdemeanors”. Mueller did not respond to questions from reporters as he arrived, then was flanked by security personnel as he made his way toward the committee’s hearing room. Mueller is not expected to deliver any new bombshells, according to Democratic aides, but rather stick to the contents of his 448-page investigation report about the 22-month-long investigation of Russian election meddling. Nonetheless, one Democrat on the House judiciary committee told the Guardian Mueller’s testimony will prove “damning and explosive”. Republicans are expected to object to the presence of Aaron Zebley, the former deputy special counsel who had day-to-day oversight of investigations in the inquiry, who will accompany Mueller. Zebley will be present at the judiciary hearing, according to Mueller’s spokesman Jim Popkin and a House judiciary staffer, and will be sworn in as a witness for the intelligence panel, according to an aide for that committee. “This was specifically NOT agreed to,” Trump wrote on Twitter on Wednesday morning before the hearing was set to begin. Democrats hope the 74-year-old former FBI director will give the American public a compelling account of Russia’s sweeping interference, the Trump campaign’s readiness to accept help from Moscow and Trump’s efforts to impede the Russia probe that Mueller investigated as potential obstruction of justice. Trump, running for re-election in 2020, has blasted the Russia investigation as a “witch hunt” and has repeatedly assailed the investigators including Mueller. More to follow…