1) It’s the British Grand Prix this weekend, which gives us an excuse to raid the archives for some classic races from Silverstone and elsewhere down the years. Let’s start with the race’s first staging at Aintree, when Stirling Moss won it for the first time, and then relive the incident-packed 1976 race at Brands Hatch, when James Hunt’s victory over Niki Lauda was overturned on appeal and the race awarded to the Austrian. The 1987 edition saw Nigel Mansell sensationally overhaul Nelson Piquet at the last to win, and 1995’s featured an infamous crash between championship rivals Damon Hill and Michael Schumacher as Johnny Herbert took a surprise win. While in 2008, Lewis Hamilton underlined his promise with a magnificent victory in the wet and five years later a thrilling race was won by Nico Rosberg. 2) Fancy a pointless mud-diving goal celebration? We got ’em. Still, at least no one was sent off for their exuberance. Here’s 10 who were, including Edinson Cavani for a sniper impersonation, Carlos Tevez for a topless chicken dance, a couple of foolhardy strips and, our favourite, Medi Dresevic running into the stands and applauding himself for scoring. 3) It’s also the Cricket World Cup final on Sunday, an event that tends not to throw up quite as many thrillers as the semi-finals do, but there have been some memorable showpieces down the years. They include the batting masterclasses from Clive Lloyd in 1975, and Viv Richards in 1979 that helped win the first two World Cups for West Indies, and the same side’s collapse four years later that handed India their first crown. England’s last appearance in the final ended in defeat thanks to a superb bowling performance by Imran Khan’s wounded Pakistan tigers, while in 2003 and 2007, batting exhibitions from Ricky Ponting and Adam Gilchrist respectively brought the title to Australia. And just to cheer up India fans after their semi-final woe this week, here’s MS Dhoni’s finishing skills winning the 2011 final. 4) Wimbledon quirks: when sprinklers attack, and Coco Gauff’s father’s bar erupts after her thrilling win over Polona Hercog. Then there’s Jelena Ostapenko’s secret weapon, the doubles body-serve – although it works better when you hit an opponent. 5) The Netball World Cup begins in Liverpool on Friday, a tournament that has been dominated by Antipodean teams from the get-go. Here’s New Zealand beating Australia to win the second edition in 1967 and the Kiwis taking on Trinidad & Tobago in 1979, a curiosity as the title was shared between those two teams and Australia as there was no final, just a 10-team round-robin. The 1991 final was something of a classic, with Australia beating New Zealand 53-52. While English hopes this year are pegged around their memorable Commonwealth Games gold medal triumph last year. 6) In cycling (and especially against Marianne Vos) it ain’t over ‘til it’s over, as Lucy Kennedy found to her cost on stage three of this year’s Gira Rosa: 1) Learn to bat like notorious New Zealand rabbit Chris Martin. 2) A package of the best table tennis points of recent years: 2018, 2017 and 2016. 3) Footage of the (unofficial) Women’s World Cup final of 1970, with Denmark beating Italy 2-0 in Turin. 4) What we’ve all been waiting for: a guide to underwater wrestling. Welcome to Aquathon. Spotters badges: JanOlsson, denothemeno, BeloHorizonte, whobroughtoranges Do subscribe if you fancy. Do subscribe if you fancy.