Joseph Heller was very particular about what is, and what is not, a catch-22 situation. He insisted it must be “perfectly, cruelly illogical, with life-or-death peril”. Moz Azimi has a good case to argue that he fits those criteria. The young Kurdish man who spent nearly six years on Manus Island was on track to be accepted for resettlement by the US. He was brought to Port Moresby for his first interview, where the US insists the process must be carried out. For reasons Azimi doesn’t understand, they said he had to go back to Manus before they would let him be brought back for the second interview. But he was so traumatised by what he had experienced there that he could not endure returning. As a result he lives in limbo in Moresby, taken in by a sympathetic local family, with few other means of support. He must be interviewed in the Papua New Guinea capital to have a chance of escape, but it cannot happen unless he returns to Manus Island first. Azimi is one of many individuals caught up in Australia’s offshore processing network whose lives are on hold thanks to “perfectly, cruelly illogical” circumstances. They include a refugee who wants to live on Manus Island, but can’t, and another who has permission to go to the US, but doesn’t want to leave his disabled toddler, from his marriage with a Manusian woman. Julia Gillard's Labor government reopens detention centre – not used since 2004 – and the first 19 asylum seekers arrive from Christmas island. A UNHCR report finds every asylum seeker on Manus displays signs of anxiety and depression. New Labor prime minister Kevin Rudd announces people who seek asylum by boat will never be settled in Australia, with all sent to Manus or Nauru. Three days of violence leaves 70 detainees seriously injured, with some shot by police, stabbed and with their throats slit. Iranian detainee Reza Barati is murdered after security guards inflict fatal head injuries during the riot. Iranian Hamid Kehazaei dies after a delayed medical evacuation to Australia, as a treatable bacterial infection develops into septicaemia. More than 500 men begin a two-week hunger strike in protest against conditions on the island. Two stitch their lips together, three swallow razor blades and collapsing strikers have to be forcibly removed by security. A Guardian investigation reveals widespread failings in the healthcare services provided by IHMS in detention centres, including Manus Island. A PNG woman employed by Transfield alleges she was raped by Australian colleagues inside the centre. The alleged perpetrators are flown out of the country. Papua New Guinea supreme court rules the detention centre is illegal and unconstitutional and must be closed. Australia confirms Manus detention centre will close but says none of the 854 men still there will be resettled in Australia. Sudanese refugee Faysal Ishak Ahmed dies after six months of suffering numerous blackouts, falls and seizures inside the detention centre. PNG immigration officials confirm the centre will close on 31 October, and tell detainees to 'consider their options'. Over the following months basic services are shut down around detainees, to encourage them to leave. The Australian government settles a class action, paying $70m compensation to more than 2,000 detainees for illegal detention and mistreatment, but denies any liability. Iranian asylum seeker Hamed Shamshiripour is found dead, having taken his own life. His friends say they pleaded with the Australian government to provide treatment for his mental health problems. Twenty-five men leave Papua New Guinea for the US under a resettlement deal between Australia and the US. The total number to be transferred is still uncertain, with the US under no obligation to take a set amount. A formally recognised refugee dies in Lorengau hospital. A week before it's due to close, it’s revealed more than 600 detainees are refusing to leave the centre, citing fears for their safety in Lorengau. PNG police threaten and hit men as they drag them out of the decommissioned Manus Island detention centre. Up to 60 refugees and asylum seekers are left without a place to stay as the new accommodation is still not ready. 58 refugees accepted for US resettlement leave PNG. Somalis and Iranians are excluded due to Donald Trump's travel ban. Another 18 refugees leave PNG for resettlement in America. The UN refugee agency warns those left behind show 'a pervasive and worsening sense of despair'. The father of three dies after jumping out of a moving vehicle in the third apparent asylum seeker suicide on Manus in less than a year. Amid a worsening health crisis, at least eight men transfer from the immigration facility on Manus to its equivalent in Nauru. The Kurdish Iranian writer wins both the $25,000 non-fiction prize at the Victorian premier’s literary awards and the $100,000 Victorian prize for literature for his debut No Friend But the Mountains, composed one text message at a time from within the Manus detention centre. Doctors are given more power to decide whether asylum seekers held in offshore detention should come to Australia for medical treatment. Coalition government accused of failing to explain why Paladin was awarded offshore detention security contracts through closed tender. An employee of the government’s contractor on Manus is charged with sexual offences against two PNG women. Paramilitary police unit dispatched to refugee centre amid a massive rise in self-harm and suicide attempts following despair over the re-election of Australia’s Coalition government in May. An asylum seeker sets himself alight in his room. PNG police say they will charge him with arson and attempted suicide. Moz Azimi lives in Port Moresby now. “They called me a few times but I didn’t accept their offer to go back,” he says of the US assessors. “I cannot stay in detention. Because I was traumatised terribly when I was on Manus.” Down one of the city’s suburban backstreets, the young Kurdish man lives with a Papua New Guinean family who have taken him in as one of their own. “A pastor introduced me to them and I paid for a few months because they didn’t know me,” he says. “[But then] I didn’t have any money and I packed my stuff and talked with – I call her Mum – and said I should go … back to Manus. And all of them came around me and said we will never let you go back to Manus. “I just cried. They said you brought a smile to our family.” Azimi, who has been in Papua New Guinea for more than six years now, says he was hit with a metal pole by a PNG officer when authorities forcibly emptied the detention centre at the end of 2017’s 24-day standoff. “I can’t remember a lot from that time. When they moved us forcibly to East Lorengau, after a few days I got a stammer,” he says. Azimi became close friends with an Australian advocate, Christina Combe, who passed away earlier this year, and who also supported him when he decided to stay in Port Moresby. “When I was listening to her voice I felt I was very lucky.” Azimi sits in his room upstairs at the family’s small motel. His belongings are neatly stacked around the edges of the wall, and a guitar sits on the bed. On a small table is a framed photo of Combes. “When I play music it helps me to not harm myself or think about many terrible things. I have nightmares every night, but I think playing guitar is helping.” Because he refused to return to Manus Island, Azimi says he was cut off from the financial and medical support provided to refugees. Now he lives a largely anonymous life in the Port Moresby community, but isn’t legally able to work, and struggles to afford healthcare. “I think I cannot go to other provinces [either], and if I go to the airport I think they will arrest me,” he says. For now he says he has accepted this is his life. If he won’t go back to Manus Island he can’t continue the process for US resettlement and is destined to eke out an existence in Port Moresby. Iranian refugee Paul Papi is leaving PNG for the US, but wants to take his son with him. Guardian Australia meets Papi shortly after church, at the Lodge 10 hotel in a leafy part of Boroko, Port Moresby. No one is allowed guests in their room so we sit on a small leather sofa, behind a dividing wall and in earshot of Paladin guards. A former Sunni Muslim and now devout Christian convert, Papi is dressed in a shirt and tie, a small manicured beard and grey hair belying his 38 years. He carries Cyrus, his “sunny boy”, who is 13 months old, and not yet walking or even crawling. Papi met his wife on Manus Island, like dozens of his fellow detainees. He and Judith had Cyrus and moved to Port Moresby. Then they learned he had disabilities. Medical documents seen by Guardian Australia say Cyrus has suspected clubfoot, and Erb’s palsy in his left arm. “It’s his bone, it’s twisted,” says Papi. “But the doctors here can’t do anything, just support his leg ... Nothing else. I don’t know [if surgery can fix it]. He needs to go to Australia or another country because of his problems.” Papi takes off the brace bandages to show Cyrus’s hand and foot. The toddler giggles and grabs at his father’s dangling tie. He’s happy now, but Papi thinks his son is in pain. Refugees at Lodge 10 are waiting to go to the US for permanent resettlement, a process which can take months from when they are first told they’ve been accepted. Papi is at the end of that process and is expecting to go to the US any day. He says he was “proud” to be going to the US but doesn’t want to leave until he knows that Cyrus can either come with him or get medical treatment in Australia. “I have been to the [local] hospital, the one at PIH,” he says. “But they said they are not caring for the refugees’ kids, just the refugees. They’re just kids. They’re innocent. I made a mistake but he didn’t make a mistake.” Cyrus’s mother, Judith, says she would like to follow her husband and child to another country, but failing that, she wants them both to go. Judith has signed an affidavit to say as much. “I’m not worried about me, I’m worried about my son because he’s got a big problem with his bones,” she says later. “I want him to be fine, well. I know that my husband can take him to Australia or USA and they can operate on his bones. I want my son to walk and stand and crawl, because now he can’t.” Judith, who speaks with Guardian Australia via videolink assisted with some translations by Papi, says she met her husband four years ago on Manus Island. “I trust him and I know him very well, that he can look after my son,” she says. “He can give a good future to my son. He also protects my son, not like my family do.” She says she won’t go back to Manus Island even if Papi and Cyrus leave because her family mistreated her. The US state department told Guardian Australia a refugee can file a “follow to join” petition to have a family member resettled with them after they arrive, but the process can take months. The cases of refugee men who have met local women and had children has caused issues on multiple fronts. The number of children born to these relationships isn’t clear, and reported to be anywhere between seven and 39. The PNG authorities have also been slow at providing adequate documentation for the children, prompting concerns over their future rights as citizens. And some members of the Manus community have said the relationships have “destroyed” the fabric of the remote and traditional community, especially in the cases where the father has left. While a handful of the fathers remain in Papua New Guinea, many have gone, leaving their wives and children behind. Helal Uddin didn’t want to leave PNG. The Bangladeshi asylum seeker made headlines in 2018 after he was deported back home only to smuggle his way back to PNG, to reunite with his wife, Alice Michael, and their young son, Mohammad. Now two, Mohammad fidgets as he clings to his mother, sitting under shelter in a crude outdoor kitchen behind her family’s small shop in Lorengau, Manus Island. “Mohammad likes dancing and playing a lot, he can’t stay quiet,” she says, laughing. On cue, the young boy starts dancing around the benchtop, giggling. “He knows his dad,” Michael says. “When we call to talk to his dad [about] what he’s eating, he tells his dad everything. When people asked him where is your dad, he used to tell them, my dad is in jail.” The couple met when Michael was working in a nearby shop which has since burned down. They married and she says the community didn’t treat her husband as an outsider. “Then when I got pregnant with this little boy I went back to [my] island, but he called me to come back so we lived together,” she says. But one day Uddin came and told her he had to go. “He said they’ve come and told him they’re bringing him back,” she recalls. “They put him in the cell and the next day took him to the airport.” Some months later Uddin found his way back to them, by boat from Indonesia. Michael met him in a neighbouring province and they returned to her home island. But he was discovered and jailed in Port Moresby’s Bomana prison. Michael tears up and says she doesn’t get to see Uddin but she does speak to him most days. “Helal is good, whatever he says he will do he will do it, he never lies,” says Michael. “I would like [people] to understand that it’s so difficult to have a child with no father … I want Mohammad’s dad to stay with us so he can help with the looking after of Mohammad.” Uddin has pleaded guilty to illegally entering PNG, and paid a 2,000 kina fine. He has served more than the three months handed down, but remains at Bomana because there is no immigration accomodation available, his lawyer Agnes Peter says. Peter says Uddin will likely be sent back to Bangladesh but is confident he’ll be allowed to return on a working resident visa. It’s the visa he should have gone for previously, on the basis of his Lorengau shop, she says. He can’t apply from within PNG. They are now organising paperwork with PNG business authorities, and Peter says she has been told by immigration department officers that they see no reason why they wouldn’t approve his application. … Of the thousands of people Australia sent to Manus Island under its six-year-long offshore processing regime, the few who are left – like Azimi, Papi and Uddin – are complex cases in ways likely never envisioned by the scheme’s architects. Australia’s Coalition government maintains that the hundreds of people brought to Australia for medical reasons will be sent back to Manus Island and Nauru, but it also refuses to accept a longstanding offer from New Zealand to resettle 150 refugees annually. At least one government MP has publicly opposed this stance. There is no apparent solution to return those who have not been found to be refugees but who refuse to be sent back to their country of origin. Iran, for example, will not take involuntary returns of its citizens. The US will not reach the threshold of 1,250 resettlement offers it offered, and there is no other third-country option on the horizon despite years of searching. As the Australian government faces increasing pressure to end the system, it’s also becoming increasingly apparent that the system was implemented without a complete exit plan.