There is a certain sense of irony that in what has been the most unpredictable Super League season, the lineup for the Challenge Cup final has an air of inevitability to it. St Helens and Warrington have led the way for most of 2019, so to some it will be no surprise to see them competing for the year’s first piece of silverware next month at Wembley. However, with three trophies between them in the past decade, the first meeting in a final between two towns separated by nine miles presents a gilt-edged opportunity to not only claim the sport’s most prestigious prize but begin to cement a legacy as a great side. It is a point not lost on one of the stars of the modern game. James Roby is the sole survivor from St Helens’s last visit to Wembley in 2008, and one of a handful of players to have featured in their only success since then, the 2014 Super League Grand Final victory over Wigan. “In any sport, you’re probably never properly remembered unless you win things,” he said after his side’s 26-2 win over Halifax on Saturday. Roby’s status is already assured, but the group of players he will lead out on 24 August are still some way from being considered in that bracket. Runaway league leaders last year – just as they are this season – the fact the Saints lost in league and cup semi-finals 12 months ago meant they had established a reputation for the big games that success in the final would go a long way to correcting. “It is quite relieving to get the monkey off our backs after last year,” he said. “It’s been a long time since we went to Wembley and it will be nice to make some new memories with this group. We’ve given ourselves a chance to win something again, but we know we’ve got to go and cement that opportunity now by getting the job done at Wembley. It’s time we were winning silverware again.” A domestic treble is not out of the question for St Helens. By the time they walk out at Wembley, they may already have sewn up top spot in Super League and the League Leaders’ Shield for a second successive season but victory in the Challenge Cup, given their absence from the final, is understandably far more important for them. “This group’s legacy is probably incomplete without winning something like this,” Roby said. “Any team is the same in terms how they’re regarded and we’re certainly aware of that. But we’d like to think this group are on a journey to doing that. We’ve done everything right so far this season and we’ve got to stick to that and not get carried away.” The opportunity is equally significant for Warrington. A consistent presence at the top of Super League for several years, they have not won a trophy since the 2012 Challenge Cup final, and have lost a staggering six consecutive finals in league and cup since then. “At this stage, it feels like we have only been invited to the wedding,” their coach, Steve Price, said with a smile. “This time we want to be the bride, not the bridesmaid.” “We’re confident our best rugby is yet to come this season,” said the Warrington half-back Blake Austin, who has been instrumental in their run to the cup final in his first season as a Super League player and was a key figure in their 22-14 win over Hull in Saturday’s first semi-final. “Wembley is likely to be rocking and hopefully it brings the best out of us as a group.” There are also interesting similarities between Price and his St Helens opposite number, Justin Holbrook. They have revolutionised their respective clubs in recent years but neither have been able to secure the two big trophies. One of those droughts will end in four weeks’ time and in doing so the opportunity to be remembered as one of the great sides could go some way to being realised, too.