What to make of Ryan Moore? At his best, he’s one of the most effective Flat jockeys I’ve ever seen but he seems short of his best just now. Remarkably, the 35-year-old has gone a fortnight without a winner and begins day two of the July meeting on a losing run of 29. These things happen, of course. Losing runs are something you must learn to live with if you’re a jockey or, er, a tipster. But it must be rare for Moore to go this long between wins, bearing in mind the opportunities he gets. Since his last success on 27 June, he’s been on seven beaten favourites and 11 of his mounts started at 3-1 or shorter. It’s fair to say that he has been damaging the crossbar, having been second 11 times. Old Glory was done on the line at The Curragh, Extra Elusive and Mekong were both beaten just a head at Sandown. “Is the brilliant rider losing his touch?” The Sun wondered aloud this week. But the thoroughly objective rankings compiled each week by the Thoroughbred Racing Commentary still have Moore as the best jockey in the world, albeit with Frankie Dettori breathing down his neck. From what I’ve seen on the track, I wouldn’t say Moore is doing anything differently. Some races did not represent his finest work, like the Irish Derby, but no jockey gets it right all the time. An odd factor this year has been how often he’s ended up on the wrong one from Aidan O’Brien’s yard, which has been the story in four Classics and again in Thursday’s July Stakes. As O’Brien sorts out the pecking order of his horses, Moore’s strike-rate can be expected to rise. So what do we expect from Moore on Friday, when his six mounts at Newmarket include the fancied trio Final Song, I Can Fly and Kipling? His confidence is probably not high, in the circumstances. Perhaps he is not so driven as he was, given all that he has achieved. There’s no proving either of those impertinent suggestions until someone invents a way to measure confidence or drive. In the meantime, results will tell us whether Moore can still do the job or not and everything I’ve seen of him suggests he will get back to winning very soon. I’m all the more sure of this because the last time I waffled about jockey form, the gentleman in question had gone half a year without a winner and then rode one the very next day.Surely a Moore hat-trick is the least we can expect. I’m thinking the favourites will oblige in the two Group races for fillies that are the focus of the Newmarket card. One Master (3.35) has top-class form against males, having won the Foret and been beaten just a length in the Breeders’ Cup Mile and the Queen Anne, so she’s a fair bet at 5-2 in the Falmouth. She does have two and a half lengths to make up on her stablemate Beshaayir from their Irish form in May but she needed that run, while the winner got a soft lead under Dettori. I hope and trust this race will not work out in exactly the same way. The Duchess of Cambridge sees a clash of Royal Ascot winners and, mainly on the grounds that this is over six furlongs, I’d favour Daahyeh (2.25), though 13-8 is tight, especially since Final Snog, third in the Queen Mary, is quite likely to do better again. My main interest in the handicaps is Manjaam (3.00), a 33-1 shot in the Bet365 Trophy. He’s terribly well handicapped, having fallen to a mark 7lb below the one from which he won at York in May last year. That’s largely because he showed little in his first three runs since joining Ian Williams from Ed Dunlop but the refitting of cheekpieces helped him run better at Ayr last time and he might be able to take another step forward. He carries his owner’s second colours, which is part of the reason the market is so uninterested. Kieran O’Neill, who has quietly compiled an 18% record for the yard, rides for the first time. Mark Johnston has an absurdly good record in the opener and 10-1 is fair about his Dark Vision (1.50), who was so impressive with his last-to-first burst in the Vintage Stakes this month last year. He hasn’t won since but there’s still plenty of ability there, judging by his opening run at Chelmsford and his fourth to King Of Comedy in the Heron, and this step up in trip could be helpful. Mick Channon is one of several trainers who have recently hit form, so Maksab (4.45) is worth a look at a suspiciously generous 22-1, being a dual course and distance winner who has been gelded since his disappointing spring. I’ll be having a saver on Medieval, from the Paul Cole yard that is also going strongly all of a sudden. At York, there’s been some interest in Najashee (3.45) but I think you can still get 10-1. He ran his best race since joining Roger Fell last time and the step up in trip can help. Newmarket 1.50 Dark Vision (nb) 2.25 Daahyeh 3.00 Manjaam 3.35 One Master (nap) 4.10 Al Suhail 4.45 Maksab 5.20 Orvar York 2.05 Spartan Fighter 2.40 Durston 3.15 Perfection 3.45 Najashee 4.20 Mrs Bouquet 4.55 Holmeswood 5.30 Irreverent Ascot 2.15 Eton College 2.50 Grenadier Guard 3.25 American Graffiti 4.00 Birch Grove 4.35 Pesto 5.10 Sunsprite 5.45 Breanski Chester 5.50 Ballymount 6.20 Feelinlikeasomeone 6.55 Vivid Diamond  7.25 Dark Of Night 8.00 Logi 8.30 Bowson Fred 9.00 So Near So Farhh Chepstow 6.00 Sigrid Nansen 6.30 Rose Crown 7.05 Song Of The Isles 7.35 Outtake 8.10 Good Luck Fox 8.40 Captain Dan 9.10 Jungle Juice Ffos Las 6.10 Bletchley Castle 6.40 Trigger Nichol 7.15 Khismet 7.45 Brave Helios 8.20 The Cashel Man 8.50 Milanvera