When David Nicholls decided to call time on his acting career, theatre’s loss was popular fiction’s gain. By his own admission, Nicholls was never more than a bit-part player – he once stated that “in eight years of professional endeavour I only ever played two human beings with a name”. Yet a lingering sense of thwarted theatrical ambition is never far from the surface of his fiction. It was most keenly felt in his second novel, The Understudy, which drew on personal experience of long evenings in attic dressing rooms hoping that the star might literally break a leg. Emma Morley, the female protagonist of Nicholls’s breakthrough romantic comedy One Day, had an excruciating dalliance with a radical theatre co-operative, traipsing around Midlands youth centres in Cruel Cargo, an earnest, Arts Council-funded indictment of the slave trade. Sweet Sorrow introduces the equally idealistic, but no-less misguided endeavours of Full Fathom Five theatre co-operative, as they attempt to mount a production of Romeo and Juliet in the grounds of a country house during the long hot summer of 1997. Though not lacking in ambition, the company is chronically short of actors; which is why it welcomes 16-year-old Shakespearean neophyte and school leaver Charlie Lewis into the fold. What attracts Charlie is not the opportunity to participate in winsome group-bonding sessions, or the chance to wear a tabard in public. Rather he is prepared to put up with any amount of artistic humiliation in order to spend the summer in close proximity to Juliet, played by the beguiling 15-year-old Fran Fisher. Clearly Charlie is not cut out to be a Romeo. But against his better judgment he is cajoled into playing the thankless wooden spoon role of Benvolio. Benvolio happened to be one of the few named characters played by the hapless protagonist of The Understudy, who reflected that even when he mysteriously stops speaking halfway through the play, nobody seems to notice. Charlie, however, finds this most pallid of Shakespearean parts to be a natural extension of his own personality: “With no good jokes, no family, no love life, he seemed to bore or irritate everyone he spoke to … Benvolio was a sidekick, a conformist and an observer. Amazing, really that people I barely knew had cast me so well.” Charlie’s first-person account is full of retrospective asides (“Years later, going through old things, I came across the original costume design”), which indicates that his all-consuming passion for Fran Fisher was never destined to last. But it is illuminated with precise, surprisingly tender observations, from her peculiar hairstyle – “austere and glamorous at the same time, Joan of Arc just leaving the salon” – to her teenage imperfections: “In the soft flesh at the top of her arm I could make out her BCG scar, dimpled like the markings on a Roman coin.” Inevitably, the course of true love does not run smooth; and perhaps it is too much to be expected that Fran and Charlie should get things together having gatecrashed a party and shared hallucinogenic drugs. Even so, the episode is delivered with Nicholls’s distinct feel for an unexpected metaphor, as Charlie recalls a tab of acid split four ways “like the loose grouting from bathroom tiles, chalky and damp with spit”. Throughout the book, Nicholls resists the temptation to become overly sentimental about teenage infatuation. “Love is boring,” he states. “Love is familiar and commonplace for anyone not taking part.” Charlie’s major discovery is that the amount of time Shakespeare’s lovers actually spend enjoying each other’s company amounts to a few pages: “a pamphlet almost, the brief interlude between anticipation and despair … If Shakespeare ever did write the scenes where the lovers talk about their favourite food, or earnestly explain the lyrics of their favourite songs, then he was right to exclude them from the second draft.” There are perhaps some aspects of Nicholls’s own final draft that could have become a little tighter. Four hundred pages feels like a lot to devote to a single summer’s romance, but he adds ballast to the love story with a different form of dependency. Charlie feels an onerous sense of responsibility for his separated father, a feckless former jazz musician and owner of a chain of failed record shops, who has sunk into a state of clinical depression. The role-reversal of becoming his father’s carer is not something for which Charlie claims any credit: “‘Care’ suggested compassion, integrity, selflessness and devotion and I had none of these. Not a carer then. Was ‘resenter’ a word? ‘Live-in resenter’?” Though the scenes with his father tend to drag, no one who has previously been seduced by the warmth and wry humour of Nicholls’s fiction is likely to be disappointed by the fizzing trajectory of the central plot. Sweet Sorrow is a funny, affectionate exploration of first love, viewed from the perspective of a bit-part player with no aspiration to become the romantic lead. Or to paraphrase slightly, there never was a story of more woe than this of Juliet and her Benvolio. • Sweet Sorrow is published by Hodder (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.