As the next Tory leader, and possibly a general election, loom, the UK electorate must consider one fundamental economic question: does it want a huge increase in government borrowing? Both Boris Johnson and Jeremy Hunt are ready to break out of the austerity straitjacket and spend huge sums. Not just to blast their way through the chaos that will follow leaving the European Union on 31 October, but also to inflate spending on a long shopping list of items, from social care to defence. Labour is reviewing its 2017 manifesto commitments in preparation for a general election. It is likely to stick with the previous formula, but with a few added extras, which means that the party’s manifesto pledges for extra day-to-day spending are largely covered by tax rises. Investment spending, on the other hand, should be funded by borrowing, it says. Britons, then, find themselves for the first time since the financial crisis in a similar situation to Italians in their last general election, with parties at both ends of the political spectrum wanting to spend large amounts of mostly borrowed money to spur investment. There is no doubt the Tories and Labour can justify their borrowing, mainly because credit is very cheap and is likely to remain so. This is an argument Keynesian economists have used since 2010, when central banks responded to the crash by slashing borrowing rates to almost zero. These economists made their case while most western governments, panicked by the sums spent bailing out banks and replacing lost tax income, went in the opposite direction and cut spending. It was clear then and remains so now that the stratospheric levels of savings held by the west’s ageing middle class – primarily in pension pots – alongside the amassed ill-gotten gains of the super wealthy and oil-rich nations means the supply of money flowing through the banks will outweigh the demand for money over many decades, allowing borrowers to dictate what they pay for loans (in other words, not much). Labour strengthens the argument with an activist programme of dispensing the borrowed money. Why not, it asks, invest in parts of the economy that could be more productive, yet are ignored by the private sector? Such investments, funded by regional banks owned and run by the state, will boost the nation’s income and help solve longstanding and costly social problems in one swoop. Labour may find that, following decades of neglect, pouring financial fertiliser on the regions has little effect For the Tories, the borrowed money, apart from minimal sums spent alleviating the distress of the poorest, will be better channelled into tax cuts that directly encourage private sector activity. Unlike Labour’s slow-burn solution, which involves building up the economic capacity of agencies and businesses outside the south-east, tax cuts give an immediate adrenaline rush to the corporate sector. Only an ideologue could fail to see that both routes out of the current torpor are fraught with risks. Labour may find that, following decades of neglect, pouring financial fertiliser on the regions has little effect. And businesses that have rejected commercial bank funding to support investment plans may give a state bank the same two-fingered salute. The Tory solution has even less chance of success. We know this after nine years of cuts to corporate taxes, which have done nothing to spur investment. Still, there are prominent supporters for extra spending with borrowed money. Olivier Blanchard, former chief economist at the International Monetary Fund, wrote a much-quoted paper this year arguing that the consequences of higher public borrowing were overestimated in a low interest rate world. Last week, OECD chief economist Laurence Boone said governments in the eurozone were doing little to prevent a dramatic slowdown in growth and should borrow and spend more. Were she not just talking about the 19-member euro bloc, she probably would have included the UK. But governments are justifiably nervous. It may seem defeatist to say so, but if you are concerned about another financial crisis, or even a plain vanilla recession, higher borrowing puts finances at risk. With austerity measures in place, total UK public debt is expected to decline over the next five years from 80% of GDP to around 70%. Reverse that trend and the government starts to match the profligacy of households and corporates that have sent private debt spiralling to 250% of GDP and beyond. When the UK already spends more on imports than exports to the extent that it has the worst balance of payments in the G7, when the 10-year run of global growth is running out of steam, when China is suffering, Washington is in protectionist mode and the UK’s public finances are already worsening, it might be better to hunker down.