André Gomes has said he wants to lead Everton’s attempt to challenge the top six having regained the confidence and enjoyment that he lost at Barcelona. The Portugal international completed a £22m transfer to Goodison Park last week after being sold on the club and Marco Silva’s plans during a successful loan last season. Gomes, who signed a five-year contract and could cost £25m with add-ons, endured a difficult time at the Camp Nou, where he insists the biggest problem was the pressure he exerted upon himself following an initial €35m move from Valencia in 2016. He consulted a psychologist to help him at Barcelona and admits he needed the loan to Everton to rediscover his self-belief. Gomes said: “With Barcelona everything was perfect. I think the first year was good and the second was difficult dealing with expectations. The problem was with me. It was the pressure and expectation I put on myself, not that of the fans or the club. The environment was really good. When I spoke to Marco [Silva] the first time, before I came on loan, I wanted to feel more capable again. I wanted to try to be myself – to do the simple things. I am glad I accepted that loan because now I feel really good. That is why I have signed. It was an easy decision.” The midfielder made 78 appearances during two seasons with the Spanish champions, winning La Liga once and the Copa del Rey twice. “I don’t feel like I failed,” Gomes said. “It was a really good experience in Barcelona. For me it was really good to play with Iniesta, with Busquets, with Messi, with Suárez. You can really enjoy the training sessions, learn a lot, especially in the game, and when you play Champions League every week, cup games, derbies against Madrid. It’s a kind of different pressure but you learn a lot. “You also learn about your mistakes when you are not good, or not at a level you are expected to be. That is more the problem: the expectations on yourself and how you are not capable of doing something when you are not at that level. “At that time I had one person I was speaking to, to try to help me to figure out some issues I had with myself. It’s not a big deal to have someone close to talk to, someone neutral who knows the environment. The big difference now is the way I enjoy more the simple things; the training sessions, how many times I go to the gym, times I am with my teammates in the hotel, times I am with my family, the games. It’s all about enjoying more.” Gomes’s signing, plus that of his fellow loanee Kurt Zouma, was a priority for Silva and the 25-year-old accepts his permanent return brings added responsibility. “Fans now know me, the club knows me, the manager is expecting me to do the same things but to keep improving,” he said. “The mindset for me is to keep improving and do better. If I continue doing this, I have to take responsibility and help others. That is normal.” Everton’s new recruit also believes the club’s ambition must be to qualify for European competition. He added: “We know it is tough. The top six are strong. The Europa League and Champions League finals had English teams. But we have the ambition. We want less ups and downs during the year and I seriously think we can achieve big goals – fifth or sixth, at least. Last season we did not start well but we finished well, especially at home. We can work on that. I am not saying we will reach that goal, but we want it. We will try to accomplish that.”