The innocence of youth was useful as the Troubles raged in Northern Ireland. Padraig Harrington bears testament to that, even if an inquisitive nature took over eventually. As border checks and bombs reflected a grim way of life, Harrington was – in theory anyway – flirting with danger when travelling north from Dublin to participate in amateur championships. A journey that started as a teenager in 1987 will have travelled full circle by the time Harrington arrives at Royal Portrush for the 148th Open Championship that starts on Thursday. “There were four of us driving up to Warrenpoint to play a match and we were stopped on the road, there was a big tailback, an hour of traffic before we get to a soldier redirecting us on to a detour,” Harrington says. “The driver was told: ‘Ah, there is just a wee problem up the road.’ On the news later there was a 500lb bomb on the road. “It’s amazing how when you get older, the books you read, you find out how the people who lived through that just became normalised by it. A 500lb bomb was a big deal to us but run‑of-the-mill or a ‘wee problem’.” Any sense that Harrington was scarred or jaundiced by such episodes would be wrong. When the two‑times Open champion arrives in Portrush for the final major of the year, there will be only fond memories. Harrington received respect and admiration in Northern Ireland as his golf blossomed. The feelings were quickly mutual. “People coming up from the south had, how would I put it, a view of Northern Ireland and that was certainly not what I experienced,” he says. “I don’t think people could have been nicer. “In my situation playing golf, you just didn’t see or know or be aware of anything beyond how nice people were. There was definitely an appreciation that you had come to play up there at the time; some people wouldn’t go. I just always remember how welcoming and nice they were. “There would be a view coming from the south that you would be treated differently and maybe I was; but I was treated differently in the very best possible way. “Even if we went to the wrong place, drove down the wrong road, people would be nice to you and help you get to the right place, get out of that place. They were nice to outsiders. “I’d think: ‘Well I’m here to play championship golf, this is what I do’, but you then begin to see a bigger picture. At the start of the 90s there was normality on the surface when there certainly wasn’t underneath but I didn’t see that at all. I think tourists maybe felt the same way, they couldn’t believe how welcoming people were. There was more of an appreciation there. So eventually you say: ‘OK, why is that?’” In the here and now Harrington expresses hope that a hard border will not be reintroduced as a result of Brexit. “It stops the ability of goods and people to flow, which normalises that we are all Europeans.” Perhaps Harrington’s current role, as Europe’s Ryder Cup captain, heightens his sensitivities in that regard. The 47-year-old’s recollections of checkpoint controls include the stark reality that epitomises what sportspeople – and there were so many of them – encountered as Ireland was defined by division. “You’d pull up to the main border crossing and they seemed to put the youngest member of the regiment on guard, so you had a guy not much older than you or even younger than you. He looked 16 or 17 when he must be 18 or 19,” says Harrington. “He would lean into the driver to ask for details and his gun would be 45 degrees across his chest and down, which basically means it is pointing at you in the back seat. You are sitting there thinking: ‘Please let nothing happen to scare this lad ...’ You don’t want a car to backfire or anything because this gun is pointing at you and it’s loaded. He is a kid, I’m a kid. It’s an odd feeling. “Coming from the Republic, the police don’t carry guns, we don’t see guns. Still to this day I find it very odd when I travel the world and see a policeman with a gun. I stare at the gun. Policemen must genuinely worry about me because I can’t help myself staring at their gun. It was just so weird back in those days because we didn’t see guns.” Harrington has a deep affinity with Royal Portrush Golf Club, where he held the course record until “some young kid tore it apart” – a reference to Rory McIlroy. The significance of this Open, returning the tournament to the Antrim coast for the first time since 1951 will not be understated by the champion of 2007 and 2008. “It’s huge for the Open to go back and it’s a great course,” he says. “It’s great for the town of Portrush to have this festival. It’s great for Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland that we have moved on so much, we can host an event like this. “It’s amazing how, when standard of living and economies move on, people just want to get on with their lives. When there is jobs and education, people are more focused on going forward rather than holding on [to the past]. Things have moved forward and the Open is a big symbol of that.” There are few better ambassadors for this championship than Harrington, a role he treats seriously. As the game wrestles for prominence in a cluttered sporting world, he believes this Open departure from mainland Britain could be a necessary indicator of things to come. “The R&A represents 70 million golfers, the PGA Tour represents a couple of thousand players,” Harrington says. “The R&A host the Open and this is the start; in time it will move around. I cannot see why they won’t continue to move it, not just to countries in Great Britain but to countries all around the world. Who knows where it will be held in 100 years’ time? It could be Australia. “There is plenty of jurisdiction for the Open. For the R&A, it is putting it out there that they are a true championship. “Portrush won’t just be a successful Open but it is a great move by the R&A to point out how much they are the major of the people. I believe the amateur game is far bigger than the pro game. Unfortunately the amateur game has to pander to the pro game.” This week golf’s big names are the ones in the spotlight. So, too, is a more serene Northern Ireland. Harrington would be forgiven a smile during quiet reflection.