You learn much about people by the company they keep. The regressive left justified its name last week when Jeremy Corbyn sat down with one Shraga Stern in Westminster. In that convivial moment, he showed that the insults Labour hisses at its opponents – “homophobia”, “misogyny”, “exploitation” – were as nothing when set against the opportunity for its leader to counter the testimonies of the 30 whistleblowers who have gone to the Equalities and Human Rights Commission to detail Labour’s racism. What did they matter when he could pose with an actual Jew? And what a Jew! With his Yiddish accent, black clothes, beard and ringlets, Stern looks like a caricature from the 18th century – and the look does not deceive. Stern is part of the Satmar sect of Hasidic Jews: an outfit run by a dynasty of obscurantists which rejects every step humanity has taken away from religious domination since the Enlightenment. You can see its assertions of religious militancy in New York and Israel, and now in Britain. Stern made his own contribution to interfaith dialogue when he appeared alongside Muslim parents protesting against LGBT equality lessons in Birmingham schools. His statement deserves examination. It was not just that he saw a plot by “LGBT lobbyists” to push the “indoctrination and sexualising of kids”. He ended with a call to fight for the freedom “to educate the children the way we were educated”. Ideally, the “education” he favours for Hasidic children entails no secular teaching beyond a grasp of basic English and no sex education – so that teenagers are more easily pushed into arranged marriages and girls don’t know that marital rape is rape. As a system of theocratic control, it’s hard to beat. Even if the young want to risk the psychological trauma of cutting themselves off from family and friends, who would shun them, how will they live? They can’t go to university. They are unqualified for all but menial jobs. Yehudis Fletcher, an orthodox Jew from the anti-extremist Nahamu thinktank, says escape is almost impossible to contemplate. If you’re a man you are fit only to study the Talmud and, if a woman, you’re fit only to serve your husband and provide him with children – lots of them. Fletcher campaigns against deplorable standards in ultra-orthodox faith schools, forced marriages and child abuse, which in a breaking of the code of silence has led to Hasidic men being jailed. (So much for “sexualising kids”.) She knew Stern when she worked in the East End construction business. The notion that he was a socialist sent her off into bitter laughter. As well as his attitudes to women and same-sex relationships, she suggested Labour should check out how migrant workers were treated on London sites – just to be on the safe side. I could hazard a guess about what Stern wants from Labour. Fletcher has her own thoughts: “He wants Corbyn to treat extremist Jews the same way he treats extremist Muslims.” No more talk of mandatory sex education in religious schools. No more attempts to stop children being brought up in oppressive isolation. The Labour leader's embrace of reactionary elements in Judaism and Islam gives cover for the racism of the white right In short, this caricature is no laughing matter. No “progressive” would be seen with such a man. Corbyn does so because the Satmar sect is anti-Zionist, but not for reasons that any progressive could support. Believers don’t give a damn about the treatment of Palestinians. Instead they worry that the existence of a Jewish state before the arrival of the messiah is blasphemous; the more so when that Jewish state is not a theocracy, or perhaps I should say is not a theocracy yet. As a recent Satmar news release put it, Israeli ministers are “uprooters of Torah and haters of religion”. Last week, Labour party workers voted overwhelmingly to protest against the “cancer of antisemitism” which Corbyn has tolerated. (The ballot was secret, incidentally, because GMB union members feared retaliation by Labour’s leadership if they expressed public dissent.) Listen, if you still have the ability to listen, to the men and women who work for the workers’ party and maybe you will understand how deep the rot has penetrated. “Those who speak out against antisemitism are forced on sick leave and out of the building,” they said. “We won’t stay quiet on antisemitism or tolerate this pernicious culture any more.” How convenient for Corbyn to have Stern pop up and imply to those among his supporters who are beyond shame that charges of racism have been “weaponised” by the enemies of socialism. A deeper malice is at work. The Labour leadership’s embrace of reactionary elements provides cover for the racism of the white right. It ignores Jews and Muslims who want to live ordinary lives without experiencing prejudice. For what thrills do such “normies” offer? Better to latch on to the exotic “other” and treat them as modern versions of Rousseau’s noble savage. Hence Iran, Hamas and Hezbollah, who will slaughter for their beliefs, are preferred to Arab liberals and socialists, the Muslim Brotherhood to tolerant British Muslims, and reactionary Jews to the mass of British Jewry whose main struggle with the post-Enlightenment world is with the racists who harry them. The invaluable gift that the left-wing antisemites hand to the right is a shield to parry justified accusations of racism. Donald Trump is now raising it and I soon expect to hear Boris Johnson throwing Labour’s record in the face of his critics. For all the fury from left and right, the treatment of immigrants and their descendants is not so different. Both see them as potentially violent outsiders, thrillingly so in the case of the regressive left, dangerously so in the case of the far right. Both brush aside the everyday hopes of the majority and get their kicks from fanatical minorities. Don’t tolerate the intolerable. The left’s racism of low expectations is still racism. It still sees its “noble savages” as savages. For all Corbyn’s cooing, a noble savage remains, after all, a savage. •Nick Cohen is an Observer columnist