If there is one area of Glastonbury that truly captures the cultural zeitgeist, it’s the Healing Field. Crystals, yoga, meditation and massage were once seen, in the UK at least, as the preserve of new-age evangelists. They are now the mainstream: these days, you can buy crystals from Urban Outfitters, be recommended yoga, meditation and compassion-based therapy by the NHS – and Gwyneth Paltrow’s Goop has turned notions of transformation and healing into a $250m (£196m) empire. Glennie Kindred set up the festival’s first Healing Field in 1985, after meeting “healers from the east at green gatherings in the 1970s. Michael Eavis gave me a budget of £25,” she says. The field now has hundreds of volunteers working on a donations-based system. “It’s been absolutely heaving this year,” says Kindred. “That’s a big shift from when we first started out.” So what caused this shift? “Things like meditation and herbs to ease ailments – only a small group of people in this country used to know them, like the hippies. But now, more and more people have experienced them and have seen how good they are for you.” In 2019, the field’s motto of a “saner, greener, healthier place” certainly feels less counter-cultural woo woo and more like basic common sense. “Healing is giving,” says Kindred, “and with the climate crisis, I think people are recognising that the only way the planet will survive is to change ourselves. We have to stop being takers and start giving back: we can’t be these resource-grabbing consumer-driven people any more.” What do the healers here make of celebrity wellness moguls such as Paltrow’s repackaging of the things they have been saying for years – often thousands of years elsewhere in the world? It turns out almost no one I speak to here knows what Goop is. But Cecilia Bruzzone, who specialises in aromatherapy massage and crystal therapy, does. Her tent smells incredible: lemongrass, mint and lavender. “People like Gwyneth Paltrow do serve a purpose in highlighting this stuff for people,” she says, “even if they can’t afford it. The danger is when there’s no awareness by these brands that they are still taking natural resources, like minerals from the earth, and they shouldn’t just be blindly consumed. We need to start asking ourselves: is this really what I need – or am I just consuming because I need to consume this thing?” Kindred agrees but is keen to stress that healing doesn’t have to cost much at all, nor do remedies from such UK native herbs as lemonbalm take much toll on the Earth. “Look, if you’ve got the money, you spend the money on that level. We live in a consumer culture. But there’s plenty of information in books and YouTube videos to learn how to make all these things yourself. At the absolute simplest level, it’s about making a tea with herbs or dabbing them on your skin.” None of this is new, of course. In fact, most of it is very old. “The British festival scene is deeply rooted in paganism,” says Prof Lucy Robinson, a historian at the University of Sussex. “England has a long history of spirituality and engaging with alternative folklore practices, particularly in times of crisis. After the first and second world wars, these alternative, mind and body spirit practices became really important.” She says moments of upheaval – the climate emergency, Trump, Brexit – “ lead to people criticising the existing structures, challenging their ability to provide. It’s not surprising that ideas are proliferating at a time when people’s lives are really uncertain. We are living in an increasingly fragmented and individualised world, which means we are more responsible for our own wellbeing.” Of course, she says, “we have a free market that recognises that there’s financial value in it, too. Try avoiding mindfulness at the moment – it’s impossible!” There is a lot of talk in the field about an “awakening” – a growing awareness that things need to change. “The world is all going tits up,” says the spiritual healer Jen McCarty “and people are waking up.” McCarty first came to this field 20 years ago and never really left. “I was living in London and I had this awakening behind a tipi. I left my life behind and moved to Glastonbury village.” Paltrow and the wellness industry may well have penetrated the mainstream, but here, making small differences is still seen as key. “We are working within a capitalist system,” says Bruzzone. “It’s about doing what you do because you believe it makes a difference, to take only what you need, and not do it just for the sake of profit.” As I walk out of the field, past the massage tents, head rubbers and singing groups, I think how much potential there still is in people helping each other – without even a sniff of Paltrow’s £67 calming crystal drinking straws. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.