This week, two recipes for when you want to spend very little time in the kitchen. There’s one to make when corn is cheap and sweet and tomatoes plentiful, from now until the end of summer. I keep the corn and tomatoes raw here, countering their natural sweetness with a good hit of red-wine vinegar, while the croutons, golden on the outside, chewy on the inside, make this summer salad more of a meal. The second is a herb and lentil dish with an upbeat dressing of ginger and lime that makes the most of soft summer herbs. Fresh, bright and easy eating for summer optimists; even when it’s not sunny, we can eat as if it is. I eat this as a lunch or light supper; to make it even more substantial, I often pair it with some avocado smashed with a little lime juice and some chopped green chilli. You could also roughly chop a couple of avocados and toss them through the salad, if you like. Prep 20 minCook 15 minServes 4 2 slices good-quality bread (I use sourdough)Olive oilSalt and black pepper2 ears corn500g tomatoes (all shapes, sizes and colours)4 spring onions2 tbsp red-wine vinegar100g toasted almonds50g pecorino (I use a vegetarian one)1 small bunch mint, leaves picked1 small bunch basil, leaves picked50ml extra-virgin olive oil Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/ gas 7. Tear the bread into small, rough chunks and lay them on a baking tray. Drizzle generously with olive oil (about four tablespoons) and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Roast for 10-15 minutes – how long you cook them for will depend on the density of your bread. You want the croutons to be crisp on the outside and chewy on the inside, so try to take them out before they are hard all the way through. Meanwhile, make the salad. Cut the corn kernels from the ears; I do this by resting the end of the corn in a large mixing bowl, which stops the corn from flying everywhere. Cut the tomatoes into bite-sized chunks – it’s nice to keep the shapes and cuts different – and add them to the bowl. Finely slice the spring onions and add these, too. Add a good pinch of salt and pepper, plus the vinegar, and leave to sit for at least 30 minutes. When the croutons are ready, take them out of the oven. Roughly chop the almonds and finely crumble or coarsely grate the pecorino – I like mine crumbled into pieces about the size of a grain of rice. Tear the herbs into the bowl, then add the almonds, cheese and the olive oil, and toss everything together. Finish by tossing the croutons through just before you serve. Here, I use a mixture of herbs I have at home. Any of these will work: coriander, mint, basil, chervil, parsley, tarragon and chives. Picking the leaves into a bowl is a lovely thing to do – you’ll be hit by a wave of fragrance and the bowl will get prettier and prettier as you pick. Prep 20 minCook 5 minServes 4–6 ¼ cucumber, chopped into 5mm dice2 tbsp white-wine vinegarJuice of 1 lemon1 tsp flaky sea salt1 tsp golden caster sugar5 generous handfuls mixed soft herbs1 x 400g tin puy lentils, drained and rinsed50g toasted pistachios, roughly chopped For the ginger dressingZest and juice of 2 limes3 tbsp olive oil1 green chilli, finely chopped1 shallot, peeled and finely chopped½ tsp tamari or soy sauce1 tsp brown rice vinegar1 tsp runny honey or agave nectar½ thumb-sized piece ginger, peeled1 small garlic clove, peeledSalt and black pepper Mix the cucumber in a bowl with the vinegar, lemon juice, salt and sugar. Scrunch well to help begin the pickling, then cover with a plate and set to one side. Roughly pick the leaves from the herbs, discarding any tough stalks, and wash in a bowl of cold water. Lift into a salad spinner, and spin to dry – that way, they’ll retain more of the dressing and won’t wilt immediately, which can sometimes happen when the leaves are wet. Next, make the dressing. Mix the lime zest and juice, olive oil, chilli, shallot, tamari, vinegar and honey in a bowl. Use a fine grater to grate in the ginger and garlic. Mix with a fork and season to taste. Drain the cucumber and pat dry with kitchen paper. Put in a large bowl with the herbs and lentils, toss, add the dressing, and turn it all a few times to coat everything evenly. Sprinkle with the pistachios and serve straight away.