It’s time to get ready for three weeks away from home. I spend more time than usual playing with the dog, watching Love Island with my daughter and then spontaneously suggest a romantic dinner with my other half. She is so stunned to be asked out that she asks me if I’m having an affair. I say: “No. I’m just recoupling with cycling.” With a heatwave settling over Europe, I have loaded up on shorts and summer shirts, which inevitably means that we will at some point definitely have bad weather. I recount the number of shirts and realise that I am a couple short. I dash to the shops and pick up a few more. When I arrive in Brussels, I see that they have forgotten to take the security tags off. The press conferences begin in the 1958 Expo complex of vast concrete halls, overlooked by the King Baudouin Stadium and the faded optimism of the faintly absurd Atomium. It is both quaint and poignant, like something out of a Jonathan Coe novel. In fact, it is something out of a Jonathan Coe novel. That aside, it comes as no surprise that all the riders profess to be in great shape and have great legs. It’s Ineos, née Team Sky, press conference day. Even with Chris Froome languishing in rehab nursing his injuries following his crash in during a practice ride before stage four of the Critérium du Dauphiné in Roanne, France, the British team draw a huge media presence, yet ironically they have little to say. Meanwhile across town, the fallout from the Dimension Data team’s decision to omit Mark Cavendish – the first time the Manx Missile has missed the Tour de France since his race debut in 2007 – from their lineup is gathering, with awkward silences and stilted responses and a team boss who finds something better to do. At last, the 2019 Tour is ready to go. In the blazing sunshine of the Place Royale, Cavendish’s team manager, Doug Ryder, stands by the door of his team bus and defends his decision to leave his star rider at home. A few paces away, his sports director, Rolf Aldag, bemoans Cavendish’s absence and rails against the decision. The peloton rolls away from the start, with Dimension Data a team that is falling apart before the Grand Départ.