For the sake of this column, it would have been convenient if Inspector Montalbano had eaten courgettes in some shape or form while investigating the death of engineer Silvio Luparello in The Shape of Water. He doesn’t. Instead, while the Sicilian detective unpicks the web of prostitutes, pimps, judges, false clues and vendettas, he eats calia e simenza (roasted chickpeas and salted pumpkin seeds), pasta with oil and garlic, shrimps with lemon, roast peppers and Signora Elisa’s braised purpiteddri (baby octopus). I was almost as captivated by my favourite detective’s meals as his investigations in La Forma Dell’Acqua, but also by the way Sicily springs to life in the novel, as it does in all of the late, great Andrea Camilleri’s books – especially the beauty and squalor of the south coast, on which I now lie reading, in a “sun blazing enough to shatter rocks”. No courgettes, but Salvo Montalbano does eat fresh striped mullet, fried to a delicate crisp and drained on absorbent paper. Which is exactly what you want to do with today’s recipe, which is only Sicilian insofar as I made them here – courgettes from the stall at the end of the corso, ricotta from the supermarket deli counter – the coolest place in Gela at 10am on a Tuesday. This week’s recipe is a collision of three others, borrowing aspects from each. It adopts the flour, water and courgette batter from Rosetta Costantino’s Calabrian pitticelle; borrows the ricotta, parmesan and herbs from the courgette patties I’ve made for years; while the use of chickpea flour is inspired by Madhur Jaffrey’s vegetable pakora. Deep-frying always seems to provoke discussion – the smell and the faff of it, the best sort of oil (and the expense of that), the best pan to do it in. I have never been particularly bothered by the smell of frying, taking the fan-on, kitchen-door-open, shower-cap-on approach. I am aware of the faff, the inevitable splatters and sheen of oil, the sodden kitchen roll, but the payoff is the delight of fried things. The idea you can’t fry in olive oil is silly: olive oil is one of the healthiest fats, ideal for frying and flavour As for the frying oil, I use olive, which I think of as a hardworking ingredient rather than a means to an end, which justifies the cost. The suggestion you can’t fry in olive oil is a silly one: rich in monounsaturated fats, which are highly resistant to heat, olive oil is one of the healthiest fats on the planet – ideal for frying and deep flavour. But it must be hot enough – 180C or 350F (or when a cube of bread dances energetically round the pan), at which point the heat seals the food, meaning less fat is absorbed. Watch too, that it doesn’t get too hot, smoke or burn. This will be blatantly obvious, but just pull the pan from the heat for a while. As someone once told me, frying is all about the manoeuvres. Olive oil can also be filtered and used again. Olive oil does have an imposing flavour, which is not to everyone’s taste. Alternatively, use lard or, at a push, peanut oil. Two inches of oil (which rises to three inches when ingredients are added) is a workable depth for most of my frying, so I use a small, deep frying pan, cooking in small batches, until the fritters are like Montalbano’s mullet – fried to a delicate crisp. and drained on absorbent paper. The best of three recipes, these fritters have just enough batter to hold together a soft courgette and ricotta heart, while the shaggy outsides, with bits of courgette sticking out like unruly hairs, are properly crisp. I like these fritters as an antipasti with a squeeze of lemon. They could also be served as part of a meal, with tomato and salted ricotta salad maybe, or caponata, or even boiled potatoes with sweet red onion and capers. Prep 5 minCook 20 minMakes 15 500g courgettes150g chickpea flour100ml water150g ricotta2 tbsp grated parmesan2 tbsp chopped basil, mint or parsleySalt and black pepperLemon wedges, to serve Wash and trim both ends of the courgettes. Using the coarse side of a box grater, grate the courgettes on to a clean tea towel. Gather the ends of the tea-towel and twist hard over a bowl to catch the excess water squeezed from the courgettes. In a large bowl, whisk the chickpea flour with the water until you have a paste. Add the ricotta, parmesan, herbs and the grated courgette, and stir. Add salt and pepper to taste. The mixture should be soft but also hold its shape on a spoon. If it is very sloppy, add more chickpea flour, but be careful not to make it stiff. In a deep, medium-sized pan or frying pan, heat two inches of oil – olive, sunflower, or your preferred oil to fry with. Test the oil is hot enough by watching for when a cube of bread dropped in dances round in a coat of bubbles. Using tablespoon, drop blobs of mixture into the hot oil – don’t overcrowd the pan though. Use a slotted spoon to nudge and turn them to make sure they fry evenly. Once they are golden, lift on to a plate lined with kitchen towel, blot, transfer to a serving plate, sprinkle with salt and serve with lemon wedges.