The Opec oil cartel has agreed to keep a lid on its production levels for a further nine months to avoid a global oil price crash. The world’s largest oil-producing nations have reportedly agreed to extend until March a deal, first struck after the 2016 oil price crash, to cut 1.2m barrels of oil a day from the global market. The 14-country cartel is meeting in Vienna this week to determine a coordinated response to the growth of the US shale oil industry and the slowdown of the global economy. Market commentators fear that these twin threats risk destabilising the balance between supply and demand in the oil market which could cause prices to drop. Manuel Quevedo, the president of the Opec conference, said: “Over the past month or so we have seen a growing list of escalating uncertainties.” Quevedo, who is also Venezuela’s energy minister, said the oil market exposed concerns over “trade negotiations, monetary policy developments, as well as geopolitical issues”, adding: “There are clear signs of some economic bearishness, and many institutions are pointing to a more challenging outlook for oil supply and demand fundamentals.” Opec will seek the backing of an alliance of large oil producers from outside the cartel, led by Russia, at a separate meeting of the Opec+ group in the Austrian capital on Tuesday. The Opec+ agreement is expected to move ahead after Iran and Russia both offered public support to the plan despite concerns they might block it. The agreement caused oil prices to rise by a dollar to more than $66 a barrel on Monday. It followed a rally across global markets after the G20 meeting over the weekend raised hopes of a peace deal in the US-China trade war. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said over the weekend that he had agreed with Saudi Arabia, Opec’s de facto leader, to extend the existing output cuts until December 2019 or March 2020. Iran has also said it will not stand in the way of the deal despite being sidelined within Opec while it faces tough US sanctions, which have taken a heavy toll on Iranian oil exports. The Iranian oil minister, Bijan Zanganeh, said in Vienna that Iran was not going to leave Opec but warned that the cartel would “die” if Saudi Arabia and Russia continued to make unilateral decisions for the group. “The important thing to me is that Opec remains Opec. It has lost its authority and it is on the verge of collapse,” he said. The cartel is also under pressure from Donald Trump, who has called on the group to increase its output to make up for the lost Iranian oil barrels. The US has imposed sanctions on Tehran amid deepening geopolitical tensions, but hopes to avoid raising pump prices. Meanwhile, leading oil producers are said to favour oil prices of at least $70 a barrel.