Newcastle United have announced the signing of the Hoffenheim striker Joelinton for a club-record fee, believed to be in the region of £40m. “I’m really happy to be here,” Joelinton told the club’s official website after signing a six-year deal. “I know it’s a large investment that the club has made in me and that comes with a huge responsibility. I’m highly motivated and hope to give back on the pitch.” The 22-year-old Brazilian has been handed the No 9 shirt, leaving the Bundesliga club after four years – two of those spent on loan at Rapid Vienna. “The kid’s got an exciting time ahead of him,” Steve Bruce, the Newcastle manager, said. “He’s a smashing young player and we’re obviously delighted to get him. “It’s been going on for a little bit now, so to get him is great for everybody,” Bruce added. “He’s got everything that a modern-day player wants. He’s big, strong and athletic, and of course he’s got age on his side too, which is vitally important. “He’s learned the history and wanted [the No 9 shirt] ... in his eyes, it was ‘Bring it on – it’s what I’m here for.’ I’m sure he will be a big favourite of the supporters. He’s got an incredible work rate, he’s got a really good humility about him and all the attributes a top striker needs.” Joelinton is the first arrival in a turbulent summer in which the former manager, Rafael Benítez, left after his contract was not renewed. Newcastle have confirmed that the fee is a club record, exceeding the £21m paid for Miguel Almirón in January. The signing of Joelinton was announced after the Premier League received a formal complaint from Sheffield Wednesday about Newcastle’s alleged conduct leading to the appointment of Steve Bruce as manager last week. The Premier League does have rules governing the ways in which clubs can make approaches for managers under contract, as Bruce was at Wednesday before he resigned, and there is an overriding duty for clubs to act “with the utmost good faith”. Wednesday have said that some legal issues were outstanding when Bruce was appointed to manage Newcastle, two days after resigning from his job at Hillsborough. The league’s rules provide for a wide range of possible disciplinary processes if breaches of the rules are proven, including the appointment of an independent commission which can impose the most serious penalties. The league will examine Wednesday’s complaint and decide how it should be handled, although disputes over approaches for players or managers rarely reach a disciplinary stage and tend to be settled between the clubs. Striker Vincent Janssen has left Tottenham after agreeing a deal to join Mexican side Monterrey. The 25-year-old Netherlands international joined Spurs from AZ Alkmaar in 2016 but failed to make an impact at White Hart Lane. Janssen arrived at Spurs for a reported £17m having topped the Eredivisie scoring charts in 2015-16 with 27 goals. In his three years at the club he made just 42 appearances, scoring six goals, and spent the 2017-18 season on loan at Fenerbahce. The reported transfer fee is €7m (£6.3m). PA