Mana, the Māori phrase for power and authority, perfectly encapsulated New Zealand’s potent Netball World Cup-winning performance in Liverpool as they beat the reigning champions, Australia, 52-51, a scoreline that inexplicably flattered the Diamonds. The Ferns, rebuilt piece by piece, process by process by the master coach, Noeline Taurua, after shocking the netball world by missing a medal at the Commonwealth Games last year, were simply too good for Australia. Taurua struggled to put her nation’s first World Cup win in 16 years into words. “I’m quite speechless. I don’t know what to say.” Australia, the world’s No 1 team, shuffled the deck numerous times during the high-tension match, trying to find a combination that could overcome the suffocating defensive zone from the veteran Casey Kopua at goal defence and the World Cup debutante Jane Watson or disrupt the two long‑bomb queens in black, Maria Folau and Ameliaranne Ekenasio. Folau – one of Taurua’s “fossils”, her phrase for veterans – put in a first-class performance, finishing with 28 from 35. Ekenasio replicated her sparkling semi-final form, when she shot 25 from 26, to finish with 24 from 26. The young Australian defence line – the goal defence Jo Weston and Courtney Bruce, and then Sarah Klau, who replaced Bruce at keeper – had no answers and spent far too much time out of play and watching balls sail into Folau’s outstretched arms. Australia looked switched-on from the off and converted through Bassett after waiting patiently for the space required to open up. The Ferns were nervier and had to work hard to make their first, through Ekenasio, who started the final with heavy strapping on her upper thigh. Early on Laura Langman looked set for a repeat of her semi-final brilliance, when she took the English centre Serena Guthrie to the cleaners, and she duly delivered. It was going goal-for-goal until an uncharacteristic Folau miss but, after Bruce reeled in the rebound, the Diamonds could not convert – and it was a foretaste of things to come. It took five minutes for a centre pass to be broken and it was the Australians who did it, thanks to another Folau mistake and a Bassett conversion. The Ferns’ jack-in-the-box keeper Watson got two quick intercepts on Bassett and the game was back to level pegging in a flash. Bassett and Wood finished the opening stanza without a miss, while the Ferns pair missed four. It was to be their worst quarter. As is antipodean tradition in big matches, it was tied up at the first break, 10-10. In the second the Australian attack line had to work infinitely harder to make anything happen, care of the disciplined Kiwi zone, and down the other end an Aussie defensive meltdown began. In an apparent attempt not to draw whistle from the two English umpires, Bruce gave Folau far too much room on the baseline and the 32-year-old goaler gladlytook full advantage, shooting 11 from 13 for the quarter. She gave her side the ascendancy and, vitally, the momentum it rode until the final whistle. Ekenasio chipped in another seven without a blemish in that second quarter. The Australia captain, Caitlin Bassett, stood up in the circle under smothering defence. She made bad feeds look good and even chased a few loose balls down, but she missed four for the quarter, letting the Ferns pull away. Wood missed only one. After a three-goal run just before the break the Kiwis led at half-time 28-25. The Australia coach, Lisa Alexander, made two significant personnel changes at the main break, replacing Bruce with the Cup debutant Klau and Wood with the rising star, Gretel Tippett, at goal attack. Folau continued on her merry way at GS on Klau, knocking down another eight for the quarter, missing just one. In her first minutes since injuring her ear earlier in the tournament April Brandley replaced Jamie-Lee Price at wing defence for Australia with two minutes left in the third but the Ferns still found easy avenues to goal – normally Folau all alone on the baseline. While Tippett tried to inject herself into the game, including a trademark high-release feed to Bassett, she did not have much help, as the Kiwi defenders picked off bounces, passes and high balls, helping create a six‑goal run for the Ferns midway through the quarter. At three-quarter-time the Ferns led 41-37. Australia started the last with three straight, narrowing the margin to just one, but the Ferns – driven by that mana – never looked like losing and clung on. Bassett was straight to the point post-game. “It’s obviously not the result we wanted today. It was such a close finish. I don’t think you could have asked for any more from any of the girls in our team. It’s one goal.” One goal; enough to change history.