Michel Barnier has warned that Boris Johnson’s “combative” rhetoric on becoming prime minister is an attempt to crack the EU’s unity as he rejected the new UK government’s central demand over the Irish backstop. In a note sent to diplomats in Brussels on Thursday, the bloc’s chief negotiator counselled the EU27 to stick to its principles in the face of the prime minister’s no deal threats. Johnson had insisted that the UK would leave “no ifs or buts” on 31 October in his speech on the steps of Downing Street. In his first address to the Commons as prime minister, he further warned on Thursday that his government would not accept any agreement containing the “undemocratic” Irish backstop. In Barnier’s note following “the appointment of Boris Johnson as PM and his speech today”, he informs the EU member states that he will not engage in talks with the British government over binning of the backstop, an arrangement designed to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland under any circumstances. Barnier writes: “PM Johnson has stated that if an agreement is to be reached it goes by way of eliminating the backstop. This is of course unacceptable and not within the mandate of the European council. “While he has declared that he will only engage with the EU on this basis, we are on our side ready to work constructively, within our own mandate. “We will analyse any UK idea on withdrawal issues that are compatible with the existing [withdrawal agreement], and we are of course ready to rework the political declaration, in line with the EUCO guidelines. “But as suggested by his rather combative speech, we have to be ready for a situation where he gives priority to the planning for ‘no deal’, partly to heap pressure on the unity of the EU27. No deal will never be the EU’s choice, but we all have to be ready for all scenarios.” The backstop contained in the withdrawal agreement agreed by Theresa May would keep Northern Ireland under large swathes of single market regulations and the whole of the UK in a shared customs territory “unless and until” an alternative arrangement can be found to avoid the need for border checks on the island of Ireland. Some conservative MPs are opposed to the arrangement in the belief that it will trap the UK into a close economic relationship with the EU that would prevent the British government developing an independent trade policy. But Barnier notes in his email to diplomats the rejection by many MPs of an attempt by the new prime minister to take the UK out of the EU without a deal. In comments that signal the growing belief in Brussels that the UK is heading towards a general election, Barnier writes: “I note also the many strong reactions to the speech in the House of Commons. In this context we must follow carefully the further political and economic reactions and developments in the UK following this speech. “In any case, what remains essential on our side is to remain calm, stick to our principles and guidelines and show solidarity and unity of the 27. “I remain available throughout the summer for talks with the UK and of course with you should you have questions.” Barnier ends his missive by promising to send an analysis of any British proposals to the member states on receiving them. Johnson is due to speak on the phone to the outgoing European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, on Thursday afternoon. Juncker declined to speak to Johnson on Wednesday when it emerged the earliest opening for a conversation was past midnight in Brussels.