Rebranded this year as Adventure Parc Snowdonia, this converted aluminium factory in the Conwy valley started in 2015 as Surf Snowdonia, with an inland artificial surf lagoon. It has expanded, in time for the summer holidays, with the opening of the Adrenaline Indoors adventure experience. A new building opposite the surf lagoon houses activities including an artificial caving course, a parkour trail and freefall jumps, plus a soft-play area for younger kids. Many activities are suitable for ages five-plus (some from age seven). There are also camping pods (from £65 a night). The parc has the only kicker slide in the UK whereby you fly 2m into the air before landing on an air bag. The activities are no pushover, so it really tests your limits. I’ve still got bruises from contorting my limbs around the fibreglass tunnels of the caving system. Olivia, my nine-year-old daughter, proved to be a natural on the climbing wall, building her confidence while I could only look on. For many, though, the highlight is the zipwire (from £18) over the surf lagoon, with views across Snowdonia. The Surf Side Deli, Bar & Diner has an energy-fuelling range of meals, including panini (£4.75) and burgers (£12.50), plus vegan options and kids’ meals (£5.95). If you need a drink to steady the nerves after a freefall jump, a pint of Surf Snowdonia lager is £4. There’s a small shop for surf-dude essentials, including rows of colourful Havaianas flip flops and Adventure Parc Snowdonia-branded Mizu water bottles. Serious waxheads can pick up the latest copy of Wavelength surf magazine for inspiration. It’s on the B5106 between Conwy and Llanwrst and around 20 minutes from the A55 (North Wales Expressway) that runs from Chester to Holyhead. Otherwise, it’s a taxi ride from Llandudno Junction station on the west coast mainline, or a half-hour walk from Dolgarrog station, a request stop on the Conwy Valley Line from Llandudno Junction to Blaenau Ffestiniog. It’s a self-contained day out and not weather-dependent, with plenty to keep all ages occupied. However, it is possible to rack up costs by doing multiple activities, such as £12 for the climbing wall. If you’re happy with this, additional activities such as the via ferrata (from £25) or high-rise challenges (from £30) make a day of it. Daily 9am-11pm (surf lagoon 10am to sunset). 8/10. If you’ve already done the Point Break thing, this is a new set of challenges and great for some family-bonding. Adrenaline Indoors opens 1 August, although bookings are now open. • adventureparcsnowdonia.com