Summer reads, beach reads, holiday reads … at this time of year, the publishing world works itself into a sweat trying to force its novels into our carry-on luggage, or over the ether on to our Kindles. There are more books sold in the summer than during any other season: the well-established publishing calendar tends to see hardbacks released in the autumn to be given as gifts at Christmas, then repackaged as paperbacks in late spring. As Donna Harrington-Lueker sets out in her history of the beach read, Books for Idle Hours, the summer publishing rush is at least a century old, and has typically aimed “airy and froth-like” books on “young ladies” (the quote is from an 1888 work on summer books by Arlo Bates). The summer fiction market is changing, though, with more and more “serious”, “literary” novels showing up where once there were only thrillers and crime novels, bonkbusters and romances. So it is that Normal People by Sally Rooney is currently piled high on the tables of WH Smith’s Travel alongside Lee Child, Jodi Picoult and Bernard Cornwell. I’m aware of how contentious and porous discussions of genre can be. Generic labels, though, are the terms that booksellers and publishers think in and for literary novels, the chances of summer success are still relatively slim. Tom Tivnan, managing editor of the Bookseller, points to Nielsen BookScan data that shows that of the top 100 bestselling summer fiction titles in 2018 only seven were literary books. 2017 fared a bit better (12 of the top 100), 2016 had 10 of the top 100. While this may make for sobering reading for “serious” novelists looking to finance the Provençal writing retreat, their lot is significantly better than it used to be. Precise numbers for previous decades are hard to come by, but in the 1990s, for example, it was almost unheard of for a literary novel to cross over into the mainstream. Sebastian Faulks enjoyed just such a commercial success with his second book. “It was very unusual for something to cross over like The Girl at the Lion d’Or did,” Faulks says. “There was a much greater separation between the literary ghetto and the mainstream back then. The average sales of a literary novel in hardback were 1,500 and if you sold 10,000 in paperback, that was considered enormous. Only the very rare novel, like Hotel du Lac by Anita Brookner, would then get out of that literary niche.” The wild success of Faulks’s French trilogy – The Girl at the Lion d’Or (1989), Birdsong (1993), and Charlotte Grey (1998) – were early proof of a fact now widely accepted in publishing: that literary novels would sell by the boatload if they were packaged and promoted correctly. Readerly adventurousness has been driven in part by the proliferation of prizes and partly through the enduring impact of book clubs like Richard and Judy’s in the UK and Oprah’s in the US. It’s this latter phenomenon that Tom Tivnan believes to be of critical importance. “The books selected were not always literary fiction but often were – Brick Lane, Half of a Yellow Sun, Cloud Atlas – and sold in quantities they never would have had they not been selected for the list. This moved the goalposts for consumers – and retailers – in terms of what was a ‘summer read’.” Another factor has been the renaissance of Waterstones and, in particular, the fiction book of the month promotion, which Tivnan says is “more important than prizes” in that the book becomes “a guaranteed bestseller for the month it is promoted by the chain. Almost every literary fiction title in the summer months in the past few years is there because it has been featured as a Waterstones book of the month.” Sharmaine Lovegrove, publisher at Dialogue Books, agrees with Tivnan that serious summer reading is a new phenomenon. “I think the concept of a summer hit within literary fiction is still quite a new one. It only really happens once a book has found its legs as a hardback and had the autumn to pick up awards. When it comes out in paperback it needs to have enough awards, accolades and quotes attached to it that it makes the reader think ‘This is something that I’m going to try’, rather than picking up something more commercial because that’s what a summer read is, and that’s what WH Smith is pushing.” Naomi Alderman’s The Power won the 2017 Baileys prize, sold many hundreds of thousands of copies and is being adapted for TV by Amazon. In an email, I asked her what it was about The Power that she thought propelled it over the parapet. “The Power is one of a type of literary novel that tries to talk about a large subject,” she replied, “one that many people have probably wondered and thought about, in my case: why are men and women’s lives and social positions so different? It’s got some things in common with books that discuss real-world news events like the wonderful Room. Many of us who heard about Josef Fritzl could not stop trying to imagine what it was like to be in that awful basement room – we can never go there and we very much hope that the new identities of the people in the room are never revealed, so the only way to journey is in fiction and Emma Donoghue made the crossing for us.” Jessie Burton’s first novel, The Miniaturist, experienced a similar crossover success in 2014-15. It’s not an obvious summer hit – a cool, eerie tale set in 17th-century Amsterdam. I asked Burton if the book’s extraordinary sales – it was a No 1 bestseller in hardback and paperback – came as a surprise to her. “Of course!” she laughed. “As a debut novelist you’re told again and again, ‘You’ll be lucky if you sell 500 hardbacks.’ Before it was published, I’d struggled to find the right agent for the book – it wasn’t a given, this success. When something like that blows up, your initial reaction is gratitude, astonishment and not a little disorientation. Because you’d never expected it to happen.” Was there a particular moment when the book’s spectacular rise hit home, I asked. She told me of seeing a huge billboard of the novel in Waterloo station and asking a train guard to take a picture of her in front of it. “But actually,” she continued, “it was when Geri Halliwell tweeted a picture of herself on her yacht, saying how much she had loved the book… ludicrous!” Burton’s next novel, The Confession, is out in September and already feels like a nailed-on hit for summer 2020. “It’s the story of Connie and Elise,” she said, “two women who go to California and hire a bungalow in West Hollywood. I wanted to set it among these Hockney swimming pools, where people were exhausted by 6pm because of the heat. It’s a very heat-centric novel.” The definitive summer smash of the past decade, David Nicholls’s 2009 novel, One Day, is a high-concept love story that sold 5m copies and was turned into a 2011 film starring Anne Hathaway. Nicholls’s latest novel, Sweet Sorrow, is cut from the same cloth, and achieves the same powerful nostalgic sweep as its predecessor. I asked Nicholls what he enjoyed most about that glorious summer, when One Day often appeared to be the only book anyone was reading – on poolside loungers, under beach parasols, on the commuter trains of those left behind for the summer. “The high-water mark for me was seeing Audrey reading a copy in an episode of Coronation Street,” he said. What does it feel like to see people reading his book in public, I wondered. “It’s always extremely exciting and gratifying. I’m sometimes tempted to say something – thank you very much – though you have to take on the possibility that they’re absolutely hating it, that they’re about to tut or sigh and give up, or hurl it to the floor. What if they have notes?” Compiling our list of crossover hits of the past 10 years, it’s striking that all but one of those to make the leap from literary to mainstream are by female authors. At one level it’s not surprising – Tom Tivnan quotes a study that suggests that more than 70% of novels are bought by women. It used to be standard publishing lore that women bought fiction while men bought nonfiction. We ought to have moved beyond such blunt distinctions, argues Francis Bickmore, publishing director at Canongate. “I find this gendering of fiction and nonfiction such a tiresome cliche,” he says. “So many of our big contemporary novelists appeal across the board. In 2019, the idea that men want to read serious nonfiction while women should distract themselves with a frivolous novel makes me want to be sick down myself. It’s something that the book trade could do more about, from the way children’s books are published to the way books are advertised.” As far as this summer goes, it’s been all about Faber & Faber to date. Two novels – Normal People and Anna Burns’s Booker-winning Milkman have sold in extraordinary numbers, with both books routinely shifting 10,000 copies a week. Their success partly confirms many of the points made above – a combination of prizes, Waterstones and word of mouth. Alex Bowler, publisher at Faber, admits that such transformative successes can often come as a surprise even to the editors who commissioned them. “You hope that it’s happening because of your publishing act, but more often than not it’s outside that: the alchemical thing where a book connects with a culture and a zeitgeist and means it’s piled high in summer promotions.” What’s important, though, is how the publisher responds to any initial signs of momentum building. “When we sense that opportunity as publishers, when you feel it happening, you seize it and it informs how you publish the paperback.” Returning to the thorny question of genre, it’s clear that it’s not all one-way traffic here – readers suddenly discarding the traditional staples of summer fiction in favour of more serious fare. It’s also the case that literary fiction has been stepping more and more boldly into traditionally generic worlds. Tivnan notes that many of the most popular “crossover” titles that have made the leap from literary to mainstream markets borrow elements from genre fiction that “can make them seem more mainstream”. He cites “the science-fiction/speculative bits of [Colson Whitehead’s] The Underground Railroad and [Naomi Alderman’s] The Power; the gothic, horror elements of Andrew Michael Hurley’s The Loney”. To this you might add the supernatural subplot of The Miniaturist, and the way that, in another writer’s hands, Eleanor Oliphant Is Completely Fine or One Day might have been generic romance novels. Perhaps what we’re really talking about when we refer to literary fiction is work that pays attention to the sentence, to the choice of words, novels driven by art as well as plot. This makes for a broad church, taking in the best of genre fiction (and excluding many novels that think of themselves as “literary”). That kind of summer reading is surely something we can all celebrate. 2010 David Nicholls, One Day (published 2009)  The quintessential summer hit, One Day told the story of Emma and Dexter, dropping into their lives every year on St Swithin’s Day. High concept and beautifully written (like another big summer seller, Kate Atkinson’s Life After Life (2013), One Day was named Galaxy book of the year and adapted by Nicholls into a film starring Anne Hathaway. 2011 Emma Donoghue, Room (published 2010) Inspired by the Josef Fritzl case, Room is told in the voice of the five-year-old Jack, trapped with his mother in a basement. S hortlisted for the Orange prize and the Booker, and was turned into a successful film in 2015. 2012 Madeleine Miller, The Song of Achilles (published 2011)  Miller worked as a teacher of classics for the 10 years she spent writing this sexually charged retelling of the Iliad. A winner of the Orange prize, the novel was the bestselling debut novel of the year. 2013 Rachel Joyce, The Unlikely Pilgrimage of Harold Fry (published 2012)  Another surprise hit, this quiet, charming novel of an old man’s journey to see a former colleague on her deathbed was also the bestselling debut of the year, and longlisted for the Booker prize. An early incarnation of the “up-lit” (optimistic fiction) genre. 2014 Donna Tartt, The Goldfinch (published 2013)  Tartt’s debut, The Secret History, was a crossover 21 years earlier. The Goldfinch made the Bailey’s shortlist, and became a global bestseller. A film starring Nicole Kidman is out in September. 2015 Jessie Burton, The Miniaturist (published 2014)  Burton’s novel of 17th-century Amsterdam, part coming-of-age narrative, part ghost story, was given a further boost by the excellent 2017 BBC adaptation. 2016 Hanya Yanagihara, A Little Life (published 2015)  A hit in hardback and paperback, Yanagihara’s brutal novel of sexual abuse and the long shadow it casts on the life of a New York lawyer was an unlikely bestseller. Shortlisted for the Booker and National Book Award and awarded a Kirkus prize, it offered proof that novels can be challenging and still draw in readers. 2017 Naomi Alderman, The Power (published 2016)  The best feminist sci-fi story since The Handmaid’s Tale, The Power is the fruit of Alderman’s time being mentored by Margaret Atwood. It won the Bailey’s prize, was chosen by Barack Obama as one of his books of the year and is to be filmed as a TV series after an 11-way rights auction. 2018 Gail Honeyman, Eleanor Oliphant Is Completely Fine (published 2017)  A surprise bestseller, Honeyman’s first novel won the Costa debut novel award and has been optioned by Reese Witherspoon’s film production company. 2019 Sally Rooney, Normal People (published 2018)  The follow up to the superb Conversations With Friends, Rooney’s second novel confirmed the 28-year-old as the biggest new name in literary fiction. The winner of the Costa best novel award, it was also longlisted for the Booker and chosen as the Waterstones book of the year. AP