Frank Lampard urged Chelsea’s fans to drop a chant that contains an offensive reference to the travelling community after his side continued their encouraging form with victory over Reading at the Madejski Stadium. While the chant celebrates Lampard’s goalscoring exploits during his playing days for Chelsea, it also contains an insulting description of West Ham as “pikeys”. Chelsea’s new manager began his career at West Ham and he had a troubled relationship with his boyhood team after leaving for Stamford Bridge in 2001. “I didn’t hear the song in question and of course, if there’s a song in the modern day or any day that has offensive words, I don’t want to hear that,” Lampard said. “That’s me saying that as a big Chelsea man who really appreciates the support. “We don’t want songs with offensive words. If the fans could sing other songs, then I’ll back that. The club are very clear with the work we do off the pitch about anything that’s offensive or prejudiced and we’ve made a big mark on that in modern years.” There were also concerns for Lampard on the pitch, even though he was delighted to see Ross Barkley score a stunning free-kick and Mason Mount press his claims for regular involvement this season with a ruthless double. Chelsea struggled to strike the right balance between defence and attack against their Championship opponents and must sharpen up before opening their Premier League campaign with a trip to Manchester United on 11 August. Their defensive flaws were exposed by the absence of N’Golo Kanté and Lampard could do with the Frenchman recovering from his knee injury in time to face United. “I am hopeful he will be ready,” Lampard said. “He’s dipped into training with us in the last couple of days. There’s still a lot more he needs to do physically without us. But the signs are good. “I’ll have to assess next week whether we throw him straight in.He has a natural base of fitness but there’s 50- or 60-odd games to come this season. We have to be slightly careful.” It is unlikely Lampard was impressed with what he saw from Tiémoué Bakayoko and Danny Drinkwater in central midfield. A poor miss from Bakayoko demonstrated why he could be sold before the transfer window shuts next month. Reading were a goal to the good when the Frenchman blazed over from close range, Josh Barrett’s looping volley giving them a deserved lead in the 13th minute, and the hosts were a constant threat from set pieces. Chelsea restored some order when Barkley whipped a free-kick past João Virginia, who was at fault when Kenedy beat him from long range shortly before the interval. Reading, who begin their campaign with a home game against Sheffield Wednesday on Saturday, pegged them back when Mark Morrison tapped in Charlie Adam’s corner. Chelsea regained the lead when Mount blasted home and the midfielder added a farcical second after Sam Walker, on for Virginia, made a doomed attempt to play out from the back. There is hope for Chelsea’s academy products under Lampard. Mount was assured in midfield, Fikayo Tomori started in central defence and Tammy Abraham had a positive impact in attack in the second half. No wonder Callum Hudson-Odoi is close to signing a new five-year deal. “Talks moved on very well in the last week or two but it’s not done yet,” Lampard said. “I want to keep him here. He’s a player we cherish.” Chelsea still made life difficult for themselves after Mount’s second, letting Sam Baldock pull one back in the dying stages and leaving Lampard to ponder what to do with his squad’s lesser lights. “There are decisions I have to make,” he said. “Without a doubt. I’ll make them in due course. They’re not absolutely clear.”