Now’s the time when we all head outdoors to soak up every last bit of rare sunshine, like a bunch of cold-blooded reptiles. It’s only natural, then, to take food outside with us. Any outdoor meal for a crowd is no easy feat, however, so those you can plan and prepare ahead of time are lifesavers. For my alfresco spread today, the pork can be left pretty much to its own devices, the slaw can be set aside for a good few hours (add the herbs and garnishes at the last minute) and the pudding can be tucked in the freezer the night before. All at the ready for a jolly summer feast. The zingy dressing makes this a great side for the spicy vindaloo, but it’s also a wonderful standalone dish. If you’re short on time, use regular salted cashews or peanuts instead of the turmeric cashews. They are pretty special, though, so it won’t hurt to double the amounts here – they keep in a sealed container for up to a week. Prep 25 minCook 40 minServes 8 1 white cabbage (850g), finely shredded1-2 carrots (180g), peeled, cut in half widthways, then thinly sliced and julienned1 red onion (120g), peeled, halved and very thinly sliced15g coriander leaves, with some stalks attached5g mint leaves, picked For the turmeric cashews2 tbsp light soft brown sugar2½ tsp olive oil¾ tsp turmeric200g roasted and salted cashews2 tsp cumin seeds For the curry leaf oil1 red chilli, thinly sliced seeds and all3 tbsp olive oil2 stems fresh curry leaves (ie, about 20 leaves) For the lime dressing70ml lime juice (ie, from about 4 limes)2 tsp dijon mustard2 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed1 tbsp poppy seedsSalt and black pepper75ml olive oil Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. First make the cashews. Put the sugar, oil, turmeric and two tablespoons of water in a small saucepan, bring to a boil on a medium heat, stirring often, then add the cashews and cumin. Cook for three to four minutes more, stirring constantly, until the seeds and nuts are coated in a sticky glaze, then transfer to an oven tray lined with greaseproof paper and spread the nuts out over it. Bake for 14 minutes, stirring once halfway, until golden, then remove and leave to cool completely. Meanwhile, make the curry leaf oil. Put the chilli and oil in a small frying pan on a medium heat, and cook for seven minutes, or until the chilli starts to develop a shine. Add the curry leaves, cook for two to three minutes more, stirring often, until they turn translucent, then tip into a bowl. For the dressing, whisk the lime juice, mustard, garlic, poppy seeds and a quarter-teaspoon of salt in a small bowl, then whisk in the oil in a steady drizzle, until incorporated. In a large bowl, mix the cabbage, carrots, onion, half a teaspoon of salt and a good grind of pepper. Pour over the dressing, mix well to combine, then leave to soften for about 15 minutes. Fold in the herbs, then transfer to a platter. Drizzle the curry leaf oil all over and sprinkle on a third of the turmeric cashews, serving the rest in a bowl alongside. Whenever I’m feeding a crowd, I am a huge fan of large cuts of meat or large whole vegetables, slow-cooked with minimal work and maximum flavour. Serve this pork with the lime and poppy seed slaw above, or save time and use a good-quality, shop-bought slaw. Prep 20 minCook 6 hr 15 minServes 8 2.2kg pork shoulder, boned and rolled – ask the butcher to do this for youSalt and black pepper3 tbsp sunflower oil3 medium onions, peeled and roughly chopped20g coriander, roughly chopped2 tbsp lime juice For the spice mix3 cinnamon sticks, roughly broken15 cardamom pods1½ tsp black peppercorns10 dried red chillies – the long, finger-length variety1½ tbsp cumin seeds2 tsp black mustard seeds¼ tsp ground cloves10 garlic cloves, peeled50g ginger, peeled and roughly chopped1 tbsp caster sugar2 tbsp tomato paste90ml apple cider vinegar150ml full-fat coconut milk To serve500g Greek-style yoghurt120g mango chutney, store-bought or homemade8 white soft bread rolls, store-bought or homemade Put the spice mix ingredients in a medium bowl and toss to combine. Leave to soak for 30 minutes, then transfer to a blender and blitz for three or four minutes, until smooth. Heat the oven to 170C (150C fan)/335F/gas 3. Pat dry the pork, then sprinkle a teaspoon of salt all over it. Put two tablespoons of oil in a large, heavy-based, cast-iron saucepan for which you have a lid. Turn on the heat to medium-high, sear the pork, turning occasionally, until lightly browned all over – about eight minutes in all – then transfer the meat to a plate or board. Add the final tablespoon of oil to the pot, then fry the onions, stirring, until lightly coloured – about three minutes. Add the blitzed spice mixture, 400ml water and a teaspoon of salt, return the pork to the pan and bring to a boil. Cover the pan, transfer to the oven and slow-roast for four hours, basting every hour or so, until quite tender. Remove the lid, roast uncovered for 80 minutes more, basting once or twice, until the meat is well browned and the sauce thick and rich. Use two forks to shred the pork into the pan juices (do the same with the skin, too, if you want, or just discard it), then stir in the coriander and lime juice. Put the yoghurt in a small bowl and swirl through the mango chutney, so it’s rippled. Serve the pork with the yoghurt, bread rolls and slaw (see next recipe), leaving your guests to build their own plate or sandwich as they please. This couldn’t be easier to whip up for a crowd and, after the spiced richness of the vindaloo, provides welcome refreshment, too. It’s not totally smooth, but rather a delicious mix of flaky, icy and creamy. If you want to get ahead, make it up to a week ahead and keep in the freezer; transfer to the fridge half an hour before serving, so it softens enough to scoop. Prep 15 minCook 10 minFreeze 9 hrServes 10 800g tinned sweetened alphonso mango pulp (I use the East End brand)400g coconut cream5 limes – grated, to get 4 tsp zest, juiced, to get 80ml, and the rest cut into wedges, to serve For the lime sugar6 makrut lime leaves, stripped and stalks discarded1 tbsp caster sugar½ tsp lime zest Put the mango pulp, coconut cream, lime zest and juice in a blender and blitz completely smooth. Transfer to a two-litre container, seal and freeze for at least nine hours, giving it a good stir now and then, until well set but still scoopable. Blitz all the sugar ingredients in a spice grinder (or finely chop the lime leaves, then mix with everything else). Scoop the pudding into individual bowls or ice-cream glasses, sprinkle with the sugar and squeeze a lime wedge on top.