Ladbrokes Coral will pay a £5.9m penalty, one of the largest imposed by the Gambling Commission, over multiple failures to step in as problem gamblers lost hundreds of thousands of pounds. “These were systemic failings at a large operator, which resulted in consumers being harmed and stolen money flowing though the business and this is unacceptable,” the commission’s executive director, Richard Watson, said. The regulator detailed a litany of transgressions by Ladbrokes Coral, owned by the Isle of Man-based GVC, to fulfil its social responsibility obligations and prevent money laundering. The failures include neglecting to ask one customer about their source of funds over nearly three years, as they lost £1.5m. Coral did not carry out any “social responsibility interactions” despite the customer displaying clear signs of problem gambling, such as logging into their account 10 times a day and losing £64,000 in a month. Online casino 888 fined a record £7.8m for failures in its duty to protect more than 7,000 vulnerable customers. SkyBet hit with £1m penalty for allowing gamblers who had self-excluded to keep betting and sending them marketing material. Leo Vegas receives £600,000 penalty for accepting bets from problem gamblers and sending them marketing material. Three online casinos pay out £14m in regulatory penalties over failures in money laundering and problem gambling controls. Ladbrokes is revealed to have paid £1m to victims of a problem gambler who had stolen from them, in return for a pledge not to inform the industry regulator. Bookies withdraw new games after they are accused of trying to bypass laws cutting stakes on fixed-odds betting terminals from £100 a spin to £2. Rob Davies In a separate case, Ladbrokes did not ask any questions of a customer who lost £98,000 over two and a half years, had 460 attempted deposits into their account declined and even asked the operator to stop sending promotions. The bookmaker also could not provide any evidence of carrying out social responsibility interactions with a customer who deposited more than £140,000 in the first four months of their account being open. The commission said that in one case Ladbrokes identified “significant concerns” about a customer but continued to allow them to place large wagers, adding that failings continued even after the company should have been aware of them. The failures took place between 2014 and 2017, before GVC bought Ladbrokes Coral for £3.2bn. As part of this settlement, the Ladbrokes Coral Group’s new owners, GVC, will pay £4.8m towards responsible gambling causes and will forfeit £1.1m to “affected parties” including victims of crime, in cases where stolen money was used to bet. The penalties relate to seven customers but a further five cases are being investigated by independent solicitors. GVC will also review the top 50 customers for the years 2015-17 to consider whether any further failings can be identified and, if so, they have to give up more of their profits. Its chief executive, Kenny Alexander, said: “Soon after the acquisition of Ladbrokes Coral following meetings and ongoing inquiries by the Gambling Commission, it became clear to GVC that there had been historic compliance failures within certain areas of the operations. “Working closely with the Gambling Commission and an independent firm of solicitors, GVC facilitated a thorough, prompt and far-reaching investigation, which has led to today’s settlement. “These historical failings were unacceptable and since the acquisition I have overseen a systematic review of the enlarged group’s player protection procedures and the individuals responsible for these problems have exited the business.” The commission said GVC had cooperated with its investigations and “proposed a regulatory settlement on acceptable terms”. The Labour MP Carolyn Harris, who leads a cross-party group on problem gambling, said: “I’m pleased that the Gambling Commission has acted on this issue but fear that these are not isolated cases. “I believe that the industry does not act in a reasonable manner in how they deal with problem gambling or excessive gambling. “Every day I hear from individuals and families whose lives have been blighted by the industry’s quest for profit and its disregard for customers. Although this is a substantial fine, to Ladbrokes Coral it’s loose change and I double they will learn any lessons.” GVC said it had made significant investments to ramp up the checks it does to ensure customers can afford to bet, including a fivefold increase in the number of staff dedicated to compliance and responsible gambling. The commission has increased the level of financial penalties on firms that breach their licensing obligations in recent years amid a string of scandals involving problem gambling. The tougher stance has led to companies including William Hill, Ladbrokes, Paddy Power and SkyBet paying millions of pounds in penalties for failures relating to money laundering and problem gambling. The largest penalty imposed by the industry regulator resulted in the online casino firm 888 paying out £7.8m in 2017 after more than 7,000 people who had voluntarily banned themselves from the site were allowed to continue betting.