For his second Prom with the BBC Philharmonic, the orchestra’s new chief conductor Omer Meir Wellber turned to Haydn for a performance of his oratorio The Creation. Wellber is passionate about the composer’s work, and is concerned that “apart from period ensembles, hardly anyone plays much Haydn these days”. “I’m going,” he adds, “to be conducting a lot of Haydn with the BBC Philharmonic.” His enthusiasm was palpable throughout, though his approach had its idiosyncrasies. He directed the performance energetically from the keyboard, using a harpsichord for Part I and a fortepiano, stronger in sound, for Parts 2 and 3. He took liberties with the score. The big recitative for Adam and Eve was spoken rather than sung, as was Uriel’s cryptic pronouncement on the “happy pair” in their prelapsarian state. The latter was delivered in English, as was the final chorus, at the end of a performance that was otherwise given in German – a reminder, perhaps, that the oratorio was originally planned to an English text. Wellber clearly regards Haydn as malleable and far from sacrosanct. Against that must be set the excitement he generated in a work that celebrates the glory of God not only in the act of creation but in the wonder of the natural world. Though the balance took time to settle, the playing was splendid. Orchestral textures and instrumental solos teemed with life as it comes into being, burgeons and grows. The woodwind sounded exquisite and genuinely magical at the start of Part 3 as they ushered us into Eden. The soloists were strong. Baritone Christoph Pohl finely contrasted Raphael’s lofty detachment with Adam’s human warmth. Soprano Sarah-Jane Brandon took a while to get into her stride but sounded lovely both in Nun Beut Die Flur and her duets with Pohl. Tenor Benjamin Hulett delivered his arias with ease, elegance and fervour. The performance’s chief glory, however, was the BBC Proms Youth Choir, whose singing blended enthusiasm and commitment with superb dynamic control and polyphonic clarity. An evening of occasional eccentricities, perhaps, though the best of it was magnificent. • Available on BBC Sounds. The Proms continue until 14 September.