Warning: this article contains spoilers. Like Anne Lister herself, the Gentleman Jack finale strode its way to a happy ending with plenty of charm to spare. It galloped through its best episode yet with enough pace to put its quick-footed heroine in the shade. It was a shameless crowd-pleaser, and as a drama, it seemed as if the show had found its confidence and its stride. There will be another season, and though the marriage (of sorts) wrapped everything up in as traditional a manner as possible, it left the impression that there are plenty of adventures to come for the happy couple, and some of those will involve the surprisingly gripping world of early 19th-century coal mining. As always, Gentleman Jack balanced sly humour and subtle pain. Lister gambolled around Copenhagen wooing aristocracy and royalty, when she finally worked out who the queen was (if only the queen had been wearing her Faroese jumper), even casting off her mournful black for a white and uncharacteristically exuberant concoction. Sofie Gråbøl’s mischievous “Time you got over it, perhaps?” burst Anne’s self-indulgently doomy bubble, and was much needed. For most of the series, Anne has been tightly wound and driven, barely able to relax in the company of Ann Walker. It was a joy to see her dancing so freely at the birthday ball, embracing her role as a provocateur. Suranne Jones has been excellent at conveying Anne’s more fractious side – poor Marian, who only wants someone to pay attention to her – but at last we got a real sense of her famous charisma, too. It was a pity the Danish excursion had to end so soon, but both Anne and Ann were being rushed towards home. Miss Walker’s miserable Scottish confinement came to an end, with Ann presumably having had enough of staring into the sea swathed in the contents of an Edinburgh Woollen Mill sale basket. Sally Wainwright always writes sisters into her shows, and here, it was a beautiful act of self-sacrifice that set Ann back on the right path. Elizabeth (a brilliant, too-brief appearance from Katherine Kelly) realised that her sister might never recover if her own dastardly husband married her off to his broke and dishonest cousin and attempted to cure her mental troubles with motherhood. Elizabeth, no doubt, will suffer the consequences, but it allowed Ann to find her autonomy at last. As Ann finally insisted that she would deal with Captain Sutherland, and then she did, it was a gentle and deserved moment of defiance. The episode was full of these delicate twists and turns. By the time Anne and Ann were reunited, it was the seemingly weaker woman who had found her strength, while the stronger had found humility in defeat. When Anne howled into the air, with a scream that might come to rival Meryl Streep’s Big Little Lies roar, it was she who was about to be rescued, not the other way round, as it might have seemed at the start of the series. Just as we had seen Anne liberated in Copenhagen, back in Halifax, she was fragile and vulnerable. “Don’t hurt me. I’m not as strong as you think I am,” she said, sweetly, before adding with predictable bluntness: “Well, I am, obviously.” Though it has been willing to follow its heart at times, Gentleman Jack has always resisted excess sentiment. When the strings began to swell on that hillside kiss, though, I found myself taking a moment to marvel that a lesbian storyline so unapologetically romantic has been managing to pull in six million or so viewers every week, in one of the most prestigious primetime slots on television. LGBTQ+ audiences usually have to settle for seeing themselves as minor characters or in what scraps of subtext they can find, and there’s a long history of gay characters meeting premature endings (the lamentable “bury your gays” trope, which even Wainwright fell into when she killed Kate in Last Tango in Halifax; she later said she regretted the storyline). What is wonderful about Gentleman Jack is how cleverly it manages to hold contradictory ideas true at once. This is the story of two women committing to a romantic relationship in 1832, well aware that they have already been gossiped about and condemned, and that the full extent of their companionship must now be kept secret from the wider world. And yet, as a series, it is also simply a romantic period drama that just happens to have two women at the centre. Its ending is either as traditional as it is radical, or as radical as it is traditional. The gender of the two protagonists is both everything and nothing. It is a complex balancing act, and Gentleman Jack has made it look easy.