Rafael Behr rightly says: “To the 92,153 party members who voted for him”, Boris Johnson “offers a remedy to ... shrunken Tory popularity” (Brace yourself Britain, for a long stint of bad government, Journal, 23 July). However, making him leader is a panicked move that could easily lead the Tories into electoral oblivion. Brexit was always a huge gamble, with the very survival of the UK at stake. The intense difficulty in delivering it screams: “Stop! Think again!” But instead of being cautious and wise – calling another referendum or a general election – the Tories have recklessly rolled the dice again. They have appointed an unsuitable, divisive and wayward figure to lead them, and now look more like a self-serving ruling clique than a stable party of government. Behr suggests that Boris might be “effective at staying” in No 10. But the new leader’s sloppy acceptance speech, the giddy scenes of joy among senior ministers in the QE2 centre and the reported rapturous reception for Johnson at the 1922 Committee all hint at a political party in crisis. Their manic glee suggests a terrified inner knowledge that the enemies are already crashing at the gate.Joe McCarthyDublin • Like a lot of people, I was horrified when I heard that Boris Johnson was now prime minister. But then I thought about it for a bit. The country is already going to hell in a handcart, and at least now one of the main people responsible for this nightmare is going to have to clean up the mess he created. This might be the first time in Boris’s charmed (and hugely pampered) existence that he will have to do some actual work. He won’t be able to pass the buck to anyone else. He won’t be able to delegate to underlings. He won’t be able to hide behind someone else and snigger. He won’t be able to stand back and say: “I could have done it better.” Stand or fall, whatever happens to the UK from now on is on his head. And, like David Cameron has discovered to his cost, Johnson might just be about to discover that being from Eton and knowing all the right people won’t prevent him from having to reap what he has sown. Damned if I didn’t smile all the way home on a hot, overcrowded train.Kate AlleyLondon • Boris Johnson’s acceptance speech (theguardian.com, 23 July) advocated taking advantage of “all the opportunities” that leaving the EU on 31 October will bring “in a new spirit of can-do”. Soon our country will learn that there is nothing remotely “new” about Mr Johnson’s “can-do” spirit. He has spent his whole life thinking he “can-do” whatever he wants and that others will bear the cost of his mistakes and clear up his messes. Plus ça change.Michael McParlandLondon • Boris Johnson tells us that over the past 200 years it is the Conservatives who have understood best how to build a great society, look after the poorest and the neediest and to share and give everyone a fair chance in life. I hadn’t known Gladstone, Asquith, Lloyd George, Attlee and Wilson were all Conservatives.Rupert BesleyNewport, Isle of Wight  • It looks as if we are about to be treated to another Eton mess. Is that our just desserts?Anthony BronOxford • How long before the American ambassador to London is forced to resign for briefing the White House on a dysfunctional and chaotic 10 Downing Street?Michael GraftonWoking, Surrey • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition