Twenty-nine years ago this week I carried out an investigation for the Guardian about the endemic levels of sexism in parliament. A generation later, although much has been done, it is shocking to discover that so little has changed. Last week’s reports on bullying and harassment in the Commons and Lords by the QCs Gemma White and Naomi Ellenbogen reveal a parliament that is still chauvinistic, lecherous and patriarchal. In 1990, when just 42 of the 650 MPs were women, this was unacceptable but perhaps less surprising. We hoped having more women MPs and friendlier sitting hours would transform the environment. “We mustn’t be deceived by the numbers game,” says Helena Kennedy QC, the Labour peer and author of Eve Was Shamed: How British Justice is Failing Women. “Yes we have more women in both houses and almost everywhere in society, but that alone isn’t enough to bring about change. Deeply held attitudes of entitlement and misogyny persist because our patriarchal culture is so deeply ingrained.” Emma Nicholson, who I interviewed when she was a Conservative MP for my original piece, and who now sits in the Lords, says the situation has got worse. She points to how PMQs has replaced two brief and containable sessions of debate with a single gladiatorial dual: “If parliamentary debate’s centrepiece is one woman being pelted with mud for up to an hour by predominantly male opponents it sets the tone for the whole week: it’s a bear pit.” Emma Dent Coad – elected the Labour MP for Kensington in 2017 – says she’s never experienced such blatant sexism. She cites the rise of Donald Trump and Boris Johnson as evidence that conditions are regressing: “If you have no moral integrity you can’t be a good leader. To treat women as expendable objects is misogyny.” The Labour MP Jess Phillips says she’s supporting a number of women who have experienced groping, persistent inappropriate messaging and one incident of rape. The processes aren’t easy for women, she says, because they have to decide which flawed complaints process – parliamentary, legal, party – to pursue. Complainants are also worried about the political harm speaking out might do, she tells me. That’s a dilemma I can relate to. As a radical young reporter, I was pounced on by a member of the Greater London Council. Although I was horrified I remained silent because of the potential damage speaking out might do to the wider political cause. For those who choose to take their complaints to their party, there’s an inherent flaw. The party’s purpose is to succeed politically and therefore to protect its public image. So the odds are stacked against women who do pursue a complaint, not least because it is often their word against that of a much more powerful and politically “significant” man. White’s and Ellenbogen’s reports contain strong recommendations to safeguard the working conditions of staff in parliament and these must be adopted. But they won’t be enough unless we also address the wider picture. Bullying – and gender-based harassment – are what people with power do to those they perceive to have less power. And our whole political system is built on it. Take the whipping system, which nearly all parties rely on. Whips are chosen for their prowess at bullying MPs into voting “with the party” (rather than for the country). Do we honestly think we can eradicate bullying elsewhere in political life whilst leaving the whipping system intact? Then there’s the first-past-the-post electoral system, which results in millions of voters’ preferences being ignored because their party wasn’t “first”. It’s a winner-takes-all system that thrives on competitive self-interest rather than cooperation and collaboration. And even more basic is the way MPs conduct themselves in debate. Why are politicians allowed to shout, jeer and howl in a way that wouldn’t be tolerated in any classroom, board meeting or family home? At Compassion in Politics – the organisation I co-founded – we are working with MPs and peers across six political parties as well as organisations such as 50:50 Parliament, Make Votes Matter, Compass, the Compassionate Mind Foundation and the Jo Cox Foundation to create a better way of doing politics. It matters not just because bullying and sexism are wrong but also because we can’t expect good policies to emerge from a toxic system. Polling conducted for the campaign by Opinium reveals that voters too want radical reforms. For example, two-thirds of the public (67%) would like to see MPs carry out three weeks of work experience in their constituency and 70% would like to see ministers complete a similar amount of on-the-ground training in the portfolio they are appointed to. Such a change could see ministers helping out in schools, hospitals and on the railways. They also want to be involved in the reforms with 69% wanting public involvement in the rewriting of MPs code of conduct. If we are serious about stamping out gender-based abuses of power in parliament it’s time for radical solutions and zero tolerance of practices that enshrine a bullying culture, no matter how longstanding and historic. It is also time for wider societal measures. If misogyny were to be made a hate crime a clear message would be sent to politicians and public alike that the unacceptable will no longer be tolerated. We need to reach beyond the symptoms to the systemic and cultural causes. It’s time to stop rearranging the deckchairs and to shift the whole way we do politics. • Jennifer Nadel is a writer and journalist and the co-founder of Compassion in Politics