As viral stunts go, getting the weather onside for your collaboration with the world’s most famous environmental activist is quite the coup. But, unlike newsagents hawking two-for-one lollies and tabloid front pages extolling fun in the sun, the 1975 and Greta Thunberg aren’t pretending there’s any silver lining to this heatwave. “Unless we recognise the overall failures of our current systems, we most probably don’t stand a chance,” says Thunberg on the track (confusingly, also called The 1975), a rallying cry for action on the climate crisis. Over on Twitter, the band’s frontman, Matt Healy, has pointed out that “Steves” and “Marys” identifying themselves as “Brexiteers” have been united in their dismissal of the track. The BBC has helpfully stated that the band will more than likely take international flights to complete their upcoming tour dates, “despite air travel being a significant contributor to climate change”. (Manager Jamie Oborne told the Guardian that they couldn’t fix touring overnight, but that it was no reason not to act.) Sure, an ambient, spoken-word song is probably not going to do much about the “overall failures of our current systems” that Thunberg speaks of. But what it does is to intelligently weaponise the “current systems” within which the 1975 exist. They may not be the world’s most commercially successful band, but – with their stylish aesthetic, unfiltered intimacy with fans and success with a post-genre mix of everything from soft rock to emo – they are one of the most mimicked, and so Thunberg’s message could spread far beyond their network. Spotify’s recommendation algorithms work by assigning thousands of intricate data points to every song, then using that data to link a track you already like, to another one you haven’t heard but would probably like as well. So, it’s easily a short leap from, say, shameless 1975 imitators Catfish and the Bottlemen to the extremely 1975-aping tracks on the new Kaiser Chiefs album to the actual band’s five-minute speech about the imperative to act on the climate emergency. Songs can’t change the world, but they can change minds. Teaming up with Thunberg is also a canny subversion of the music industry’s obsession with “features”, where artists combine star power to sweep up maximum streams and radio playlisting (especially in the US, where radio tends to be segregated by genre). See: the latest albums by Ed Sheeran, Mark Ronson and DJ Khaled, and the charts, where such tracks make up half of the current UK Top 40. The 1975 have never done a feature before, and have criticised it as a shameless grab for chart positions. That they made an exception to centre Thunberg’s vital message shows them using their platform to amplify women’s voices (something they did earlier this year when Healy read, well, something I wrote about misogyny in music at the Brits) instead of coining it in themselves. They are not just ceding the floor: the band and Thunberg’s proceeds from the track are going to Extinction Rebellion. Track features are always timely, and often fleeting things, striking while a trend or artist is hot. And Thunberg is nothing if not the voice of our time. But her track with the 1975 will ultimately open their forthcoming album, Notes on a Conditional Form – an album that, going by their last few, may end up being considered one of the defining records of the 21st century, outlasting this moment. In years to come, their collaboration may stand as a bellwether: will our offspring’s offspring be dumpster diving for old vinyl with which to construct shelter from the sun, or will they live in a world where they can listen back to it and feel relieved that we made it after all?