David BatchelorThis fine artist of colour celebrates the centenary of the Bauhaus in his own idiosyncratic way.• Ingleby Gallery, Edinburgh, 25 July to 25 August. Stories for An Uncertain WorldNew commissions for the Edinburgh art festival include a film by Rosalind Nashashibi, political wallpaper by Nathan Coley and a public intervention by Alfredo Jaar.• Various venues, Edinburgh, 25 July to 25 August. Last Supper in PompeiiThis eerie journey to Pompeii on the eve of destruction reveals what people ate and drank in the city’s last hours.• Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, 25 July to 12 January. Grayson PerryTapestries in which Perry tells the story of a character named Julie Cope are examined as craft as well as art.• Dovecot Studios, Edinburgh, 25 July to 2 November. Leonardo da VinciDon’t miss the most beautiful and profound works of art in Britain, and arguably the world.• Queen’s Gallery, London, until 13 October. A Woman in Bed (detail), circa 1647, by RembrandtThis painting of a woman pulling back the red curtain of her bed and looking out at – who? The artist? – is not so much an erotic scene as a sensitive study of vulnerability. Rembrandt focuses on the intimacy and mystery of the moment, as she waits for her companion. She is alone even as she greets her visitor. Her nakedness is emotional as well as fleshly. This is an anxious, unnerving depiction of the self as it is exposed to the tender mercies of the night.• Scottish National Gallery, Edinburgh. Buzz Aldrin on the moon, 20 July 1969, by Neil Armstrong Were the Apollo astronauts the most influential photographers ever? The celebrated “moonrise” picture by Apollo 8’s Bill Anders is credited with kicking off the modern environmental movement. While Neil Armstrong’s 70mm photo of Buzz Aldrin – 50 years old this week – took the imaginations of all humankind, adults and children, to another plane. Read the full story. The Stirling prize contenders were announced … … and we visit its first council-housing contender, in Norwich Ghana’s Ibrahim Mahama talked about his ghostly Manchester installation Helene Schjerfbeck’s Nordic noir is a tough watch Banksy turns out to be Britons’ favourite painter of all time Evangelia Kranioti documents a world of lost souls If you want to find rare Roman artefacts, paddle your canoe London’s “Tulip tower” plan came tumbling down … … while past architectural treasures are slowly rotting Loadsamoney! Our economics editor invests in the Bank of England’s anniversary show The British Museum will trace Islam’s impact on western art … … while America’s railroad was built with Chinese muscle Young artists are aiming to move Caribbean art “away from trauma” Fashion designer Liam Hodges is going back to futurism We set out to find the world’s most vertical city Australia’s Great Barrier Reef may get an underwater gallery Leo Villareal has lit up the Thames Little-known British surrealist Ithell Colquhoun could get a boost from the Tate April Dawn Alison takes a good look at herself Zack Seckler has a wild time flying with the birds A new exhibition examines how we see science Queen Victoria made the monarchy feminist London’s Charles Dickens Museum acquired the recently found portrait of the young writer Photographers are exploring a different side of Beirut Mitch Jones turns self-harm into an art in new show AutoCannibal The LAPD raided its true crime archive To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. If you’d like to receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here.