The New Zealand coach, Gary Stead, has shrugged off the debate over whether an umpiring error denied the Black Caps World Cup final glory against England, saying umpires are “human”. However, he added that sharing the trophy when teams cannot be separated should be considered. England beat New Zealand on boundaries scored after a tied super over, but the former Australian umpire Simon Taufel suggested the umpires had incorrectly awarded an extra overthrow run to Ben Stokes in the 50th over when the ball deflected off his bat and sped to the boundary. While Taufel said it was an “error of judgment” by the umpires, he added that it was “unfair” to say the extra run had decided the outcome. Stead was also sympathetic with the officials and said he had accepted his team’s heartbreaking defeat at Lord’s. “At the end of the day the umpires are there to rule and they’re human as well and, like players, sometimes errors are made,” he told New Zealand media. “That’s just the human aspect of sport and probably why we care so much as well.” Stead said he expected the International Cricket Council to review the way future finals were decided but added there was nothing New Zealand could do now. “I’m sure there’s going to be many things they will look at over the whole tournament,” he said. I’m sure when they’re writing the rules they never expect the World Cup final to happen like that so I’m sure it’ll be reviewed, absolutely. “It’s a very, very hollow feeling that you can play 100 overs and score the same amount of runs and still lose the game. But that’s the technicalities of sport sometimes.” On sharing the trophy, he added: “Perhaps when you play over a seven-week period and you can’t be separated on the final day then that is something that should be considered.” The manner of England’s win has sparked fierce debate around the world and some level of angst in New Zealand. The extra run aside, the former New Zealand coach Mike Hesson was unhappy that the super over was used as a tiebreaker, followed by total boundaries scored. “Using a super over to decide it was farcical and the International Cricket Council needs to give itself an uppercut for even entertaining it as a tiebreaker,” he wrote in a column for Fairfax media.