Suzanna van Moyland misses the scientific point when she criticises moth trapping (Letters, 27 July). If we are to overturn the significant decline in moth numbers, we need to understand what is still out there. It is not just a matter of seeing the odd moth. We need to know numbers, species, locations and time of year, and we need to know them year in, year out. This enables us to track changes in the size and location of populations, and provides necessary evidence for targeted conservation efforts. Unfortunately most moths fly by night so the counting methods used for butterflies are not available. Successful conservation requires the sustained science provided by the many moth trappers who routinely catch, photograph, identify and release. It is not helped by well-meaning anthropomorphism.Simon RushallWorcester, Worcestershire • If you care about conserving these species, moths require more understanding and monitoring, not to be “left alone”. The original article (Country diary, Journal, 20 July) did not explain the process or the steps to take to avoid harming their catch, but responsible trappers would take these steps. So, please, trap moths but only do so after understanding why and how to do it. Take precautions to ensure your moths are released alive, learn to identify your moths correctly, and always share accurate data with your county recorder, so that the collective efforts of moth trappers around the country can record species ranges, range shifts and declines to produce evidence-based conservation strategies. One article won’t produce an army of careless, harmful moth trappers, but it might spark the interest of future conservationists. So a plea – be curious and learn about nature so that we can better protect it.Dr Kate DurrantBeeston, Nottinghamshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition