Tiger Woods looked to be moving into Muhammad Ali territory this summer. He was not Ali in his pomp but the 1974 Rumble-in-the-Jungle Ali, the magician who shook up the world again at 32, convincing millions that destroying George Foreman proved to everyone there was more to come. Was Tiger’s Augusta triumph in April his Kinshasa? Or would there be a Joe Frazier waiting to make him suffer in Portrush this week? Joe was the wind and the rain and one of the best links courses in the world. An underdone Woods, knocked out in the second round, six over, was in no shape to tame his nemesis. “I’m going to take a couple of weeks off and get ready for the play-offs [8-25 August],” he said later. “After that, have a break. I just want to go home.” Exhaustion dripped from every word. On a morning milder than the on-off wet chill of Thursday, Woods was 12 shots behind the overnight leader, JB Holmes, and, at seven over, five or so shots beyond the estimated cut. As with his career, the clock was ticking louder and faster than before. Five hours later, he was 14 behind Holmes and going home. Woods was characteristically tough on himself, and candid. “I had a chance to get it back to even par for the tournament. I didn’t handle the par-fives well. I was in perfect condition all three of them. If I handled those par-fives, well, I would be right there. Let’s be honest, I don’t have the flexibility I used to have, and never will. So I’m going to have to make those adaptations.” For Woods, golf has become a dual calibration: of what he can do with a golf ball, and what he can ask his body to endure. The former is technical and he was able to harness his revamped swing at Augusta. However, although the tailor probably needed no more than minor tweaks to fit his green jacket, there would forever be vulnerability in his broad back and his unreliable knees. Before departing Portrush, he said: “One of the hardest things to accept as an older athlete is that you’re not going to be as consistent as you were at 23. I’m going to have my hot weeks. I’m going to be in contention, and I will win tournaments. But there are times when I’m just not going to be there. That wasn’t the case 20-some years ago. I had a different body.” So, maybe Woods was not so much Ali – who could find the self-destruct button in the dark and punched his way into a palsied abyss – but the more measured Roger Federer. The Swiss, 38 next month, has husbanded his resources like a war-time sugar thief. He plays when he has to, and no more. “When you start playing just for the money,” he said last year, “it’s time to wonder.” Woods, one of the first billionaire athletes, is not playing “just for the money”. He is playing to keep the last embers of his fire going. Like Federer, he loves his sport to distraction. Like Federer, he hates to lose. And like Federer at Wimbledon last Sunday, he has learned to cope with disappointment. Yet mortals always demand miracles from their heroes. Golf fans wanted the old Tiger back. He won his fifth Masters at 43, after all, the 15th major of his career. “Why not?” they ask. Jack won it in ‘86 at 46, his 18th and last major. Other numbers told a different story. Between 1998 and 2005 Woods made a record 142 cuts in a row, one of the most astonishing records in the history of the game; Byron Nelson’s 113 and Nicklaus’s 105 are way in the distance, next best. But three of Woods’s missed cuts in majors have come at the Open – in 2009, 2015 and here. There were flickers of greatness before he left. He looked every inch a champion in a white top and black trousers – then shoved his first tee-shot into the semi-rough. The lie was decent. The approach was better. The putt, curving like a longbow over about 25 feet, was magnificent, dropping gently into the hole for a birdie. The place went crazy. Woods was not trying to win the tournament. He was battling to stay in it. Early in his round, the breeze could do no more than tug at his thinning curls. In the space of 20 minutes, he had a Kinshasa moment: back-to-back birdies for four over, three outside the cut with seven holes left. Tiger had rope-a-doped the event, had he? He needed a spectacular finish. Five holes left, four shots to make up. The temperature dropped, the wind got up and it rained again. In his weather-proof jacket, Woods thrashed out of fairway rubbish on 17, livid with the result and a bogey five buried him. On the 18th, a tired approach shot left him way short and he made bogey again. As he made the long, forlorn walk to the clubhouse, the faithful applauded him generously, which he surely appreciated. As would David Duval, four years older than Tiger, and his only real rival 20 years ago. On day one, the 2001 champion shot 91, confirming the bookies’ pre-tournament judgment that he was the worst player in the field, a 1-7 favourite to miss the cut. On Friday Duval shot 78 (including two birdies) and left town with 169, 27 over par and dead last. At least he was not as bad as the unfortunately monikered Guy McQuitty, from Exeter, who didn’t quit but could have, at Turnberry in 1986, when he staggered away 42 over par after two days, leaving 182 shots on a course that withstood 45mph winds.