There was a distinctive air of pageant around Mercedes at the German Grand Prix on Sunday. With Hockenheim their stage, the team were determined to mark their home race with a flourish. They had made an admirable effort to ensure it was memorable and it was. Yet few will remember their attempt to bring a sense of racing’s history to the grid but rather their very public failure in Formula One’s here and now, an event made all the more striking by its rarity. Mercedes were celebrating their 200th grand prix as a constructor at what will probably be their last home race for some time because Hockenheim is highly unlikely to be on the F1 calendar next year. They were running a new white livery to celebrate 125 years of motor racing. The white gave way to the traditional silver at the rear of the car in homage to the legend that the team had scraped off the white paint to save weight from their car in 1934 – the birth of the Silver Arrows. Equally striking was the decision for the entire team to dress in period costume to mark their first Formula One entry in 1954. Here then were mechanics in white boiler suits and flat caps, the team principal,Toto Wolff, in braces and a fedora, indeed the entire organisation decked out by London’s Angels Costumes, the supplier of choice for the film industry. Had things gone to plan it would have been the perfect piece of PR to accompany their decision to allow Netflix to film them for the new series of its F1 documentary – access that they had not allowed last season. Only instead of an old-fashioned drama with a happy ending Mercedes found themselves in their own hellish episode of Black Mirror. Max Verstappen won in Germany, a fine drive for Red Bull; Mercedes were riveting for all the wrong reasons. Lewis Hamilton finished 11th on the track. He had led the race but went off being given slick tyres just as the rain returned. It precipitated an unplanned pit stop at which the team had neither a new front wing nor tyres ready. Insult to injury followed as the team failed to pit him under a late safety car, fearful of losing track position. These were unprecedented operational problems. Then, as if to heighten the sense of distorted reality in Baden-Württemberg, Hamilton – the team’s rock, their five-times world champion whose driving has been defined by metronomic, ruthless, precision execution – spun off and almost binned his car at turn one. Shortly afterwards Valtteri Bottas did the same at the same corner and ended in the wall. Day done, neither driver was in the top 10 on the track and the lighthearted outfits stood in stark contrast to the ashen-faced grimaces of the team. Hamilton, it was later revealed, had been so disillusioned with 11 laps to go that he had urged the team over the radio to retire the car. Wolff, usually congenial and witty even in adversity, appeared almost shell-shocked and admitted that perhaps Mercedes had wanted too much from Germany. “I do believe in karma,” he said. “When you want to do particularly well things can go wrong, maybe you get distracted and maybe you are doing things differently to how you would normally do.” There have been accusations of arrogance levelled at Mercedes, that their elaborate plans were predicated on expectations of another win to add to the nine they had already taken this season. This is unfair. Given their performances thus far they had every right to expect to be strong at Hockenheim and should be applauded for their initiative in bringing fun and innovation to the grid. Whether it all proved a distraction will be a subject the team will investigate fully but it seems this was simply a bad day at the office, one which spiralled out of control. Hamilton referred to a domino effect after the decision to send him out on slicks. It was to be fair a 50-50 decision; other teams had done the same in conditions that were devilishly difficult to call. The pit stop that followed Hamilton’s off was unplanned, unexpected and unsurprisingly chaotic. The team were not culpable but they were for that final decision not to pit, a misjudgment in a moment of pure pressure where their process was found wanting. It was a pressure to which they have been subjected infrequently over the past five years; their dominance has only rarely been challenged and it raises the intriguing question of just how well the team might perform were they regularly in a tooth-and-nail scrap or on the back foot. Neither is likely to be the case for the rest of the season. Other teams know the Mercedes juggernaut will not be remotely impeded by these events. In the past they have emerged from adversity stronger. Yet this is not the way the team want to go forward and, with Germany consigned to the dustbin of history, clearly some very blunt talking will define their immediate future. Wolff said: “You never go home and say: ‘Why didn’t we win?’ You say: ‘Why did we lose?’ This is going to be the discussion we are going to have.”