The bookmakers have spent the past few weeks dodging Frankie Dettori’s mounts whenever possible. On Saturday, they ran into Ryan Moore instead. Ten Sovereigns, Moore’s ride from the three Aidan O’Brien-trained runners in the Group One July Cup, was a 10-1 chance in the morning, the 3-1 clear favourite by lunchtime and a 9-2 shot at the off, when he quickly grabbed a lead he never looked likely to surrender. This was a hugely significant and lucrative success for O’Brien and the Coolmore Stud operation that backs his stable, not so much for the £280,000 first prize as it was for the huge boost to the stud value of Ten Sovereigns. Last season, he was an unbeaten, Group One-winning two-year-old. His second campaign, though, had delivered defeats in two starts at Newmarket and Ascot before this emphatic success. Advertise, who beat Ten Sovereigns with something to spare in the Commonwealth Cup at Royal Ascot, was the only runner to launch himself out of the chasing pack but Dettori’s urgings could carry him no closer than two and a half lengths adrift of the easy winner. Listening to O’Brien in the winner’s enclosure, it was difficult to believe that Ten Sovereigns had sat almost friendless in the betting at a double-figure price for 24 hours after the final declarations. “His works and times were unbelievable,” he said. “His last piece of work, he broke 11 seconds every furlong for four furlongs, so for a horse to be doing that, it’s very, very quick. “We knew he was very good from last year but we trained him for a Guineas [over a mile] and he hadn’t really clicked into sprinting at Ascot. We knew his last few works before coming here that he was right there again. He’s like all those good athletes, he goes a very high pace very easily, and when you ask him, he quickens.” While Advertise and Dettori set off as the favourites, the early gamble on Ten Sovereigns left a big dent in the bookies’ profits on the busiest day of Flat racing’s summer. “Turnover on the day was grand, but the July Cup result was a shocker,” Paul Binfield of Paddy Power said. “We laid Ten Sovereigns all day from the word go.” Perth 2.05 Bialco 2.40 Amalfi Doug 3.15 General Allenby (nb) 3.50 Theflyingportrait 4.25 Middlebrow 5.00 Cake De L’Isle 5.35 Outcrop Stratford-On-Avon 2.25 What Will Be 3.00 Iusetaluvheronce 3.35 Swaffham Bulbeck (nap) 4.10 Arthur’s Sixpence 4.45 Simply Loveleh 5.20 Regulation 5.55 Rasasee A successful afternoon for the King Power Racing operation, founded by the late Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha, turned sour in a single stride at Ascot as Beat The Bank, one of the first horses to carry their blue and white colours, broke down shortly after winning the Summer Mile Stakes. Silvestre de Sousa, King Power’s retained jockey, pulled up Beat The Bank immediately but he was found to have suffered an injury to his hind pastern and could not be saved. The same colours had earlier come home in front in the Superlative Stakes at Newmarket and the John Smith’s Diamond Jubilee Cup at York, one of the season’s most valuable handicaps. Mystery Power was a convincing winner on the July course as King’s Command, the favourite, finished last of eight while Pivoine, at 14-1, held off Setting Sail on the Knavesmire to secure the £125,000 first prize.