Enable is one of those horses who’s so good, you try to tell your non-racing friends about her. But if your friends can read a racecard, the conversation may take a tricky turn.“Hang on. She’s carrying less weight than most of the other runners.”“Uh, yeah.”“But you said she was good. Is she not as good as these other ones?” “Yes, she is. It’s the mares’ allowance. They always carry 3lb less than the colts in these races, because on average mares aren’t as strong or as quick as the males.”“I see. She needs help to compete.”“No, definitely not. If they all had the same weight to carry, she’d still be favourite.”“So why’s she carrying less, then?”Most of the time, the mares’ allowance works perfectly well, encouraging some females to compete against males for quality prizes and helping to create interesting, competitive races. But in the very best races, it becomes a problem, in my view. The whole point about Group One contests is to identify the best horse. If Enable beats Crystal Ocean a neck in the King George & Queen Elizabeth Stakes on Saturday, that would make him the best horse in the race. Are you going to tell yourself she’d have won anyway? There can’t be many other sports that would hand a competitive advantage to the best player. It is absurd that the winner of the last two Arcs is getting weight from a horse like Hunting Horn, a serial pacemaker whose best win was in the Hampton Court Stakes.If we were to change the system, it would require worldwide agreement, so I asked the British Horseracing Authority if it could detect any interest in change from within its walls. The answer was a clear ‘no’.“The fillies’ allowance is based on the likely allowance that would statistically be required for an average horse to receive (from another average horse) for lack of physical attributes, in order to try to create fair competition,” I was told. “Of course, there are very occasionally fillies who prove to be beyond average.“To change the entire system based on these occasional cases would potentially impact a far larger number of horses for whom the relative allowances are a key factor in deciding whether they take on colts, and could actually have the effect of making these races less competitive overall.”Which is sensible, if lacking in imagination. One could dispense with the allowance in Group Ones, or in a select handful of the very best Group Ones. That line about “occasional cases” rings a bit hollow in relation to the Arc, won by fillies in seven of the last eight years.Or, we could say that a horse gets the mares allowance only until she wins a Group One against males. After that, she must race against males on level terms. It would be a pretty simple tweak to make and there’s no way it would stop a horse like Enable from going back to the Arc after she’s won it once.Before someone mentions weight for age, no, I’m not asking for three-year-olds to take on their elders at level weights. The weight-for-age system seems to me to work fairly well and is necessary in a way that I don’t think the mares allowance always is. To Catterick, where my enthusiasm for their seven-furlong handicaps is only slightly dented by a couple of bad experiences last week. Ambyfaeirvine (3.10) is napped, having impressed in powering home at Pontefract on his handicap debut this month. He couldn’t quite get there when asked to follow up under a claimer at Nottingham but this extra furlong should help and David Allan returns to the saddle. The 4-1 is fair and I think he still has a few pounds in hand.At the end of the card, Calliope (5.45) is 7-2 for a race she won last year from a 2lb lower mark. She ran encouragingly at Hamilton last month, her first Flat run of the year, and the stable is going well.At Bath, Canal Rocks (4.30) appeals at 15-8, although obviously the early 11-4 would have been better. Henry Candy’s miler is going the right way, judged by his recent Newbury win, when he was also well supported.Pick of tonight’s card at Sandown could be Machine Learner (8.40) at 11-4. He won over course and distance a couple of years ago and is 1lb below the mark from which he scored at Ascot last summer. There was renewed promise in his second place at the last meeting here. Bath 2.00 Uncertain Smile 2.30 Fanzone 3.00 Devils Roc 3.30 Street Jester 4.00 Storm Melody 4.30 Canal Rocks 5.00 Bader Catterick 2.10 Frost At Midnight 2.40 Gold Venture 3.10 Ambyfaeirvine (nap) 3.40 Ollivander 4.10 Timetodock 4.40 Chickenfortea 5.10 Mr Greenlight 5.45 Calliope Lingfield 2.20 Savitar 2.50 Sharp Operator 3.20 Zuba 3.50 Nkosikazi 4.20 Fashion Free 4.50 Sweet Sixteen 5.20 Betsey Trotter Leicester 5.40 Chetan 6.10 Real Smooth 6.40 Izvestia 7.15 Volcanic Sky 7.45 Swiss Chill 8.20 Perfect Grace 8.50 Alicia Darcy Sandown 6.00 Grange Walk 6.30 Poets Dance 7.05 Han Solo Berger 7.35 Moraawed 8.10 Motawaj 8.40 Machine Learner (nb)