Donald Trump was not yet elected US president when the UK voted to leave the European Union but those two ballot-box shocks of 2016 have become historically intertwined. For Conservative Eurosceptics, quitting the EU was inseparable from the ambition to strike a trade deal with Washington, and the arrival in the White House of a maverick economic protectionist did not change that calculation. On the contrary, the pro-Brexit side of British politics was soon captured by a Trumpian ethos, marked by contempt for international institutions, democratic norms and diplomatic protocol. The resignation of Sir Kim Darroch as UK ambassador to Washington marks a significant and sinister escalation of this trend. Sir Kim was the target of a hostile act – the leaking of confidential reports that had criticised President Trump’s administration. The observations were unremarkable to the extent that they faithfully described a dysfunctional presidency. The ambassador did nothing wrong in passing that information back to London and, while the breach of confidentiality was embarrassing, it was not his fault and no reason for him to resign. Downing Street correctly supported him, despite President Trump lashing out on Twitter in reaction. To dismiss an ambassador at the behest of a foreign leader would be a national dishonour. Sir Kim nonetheless decided that his ability to perform his duties had been fatally compromised and resigned. Notably, in his letter of resignation, he located the critical damage not in the leak itself but in the ensuing speculation about his future. The distinction is important. If Britain’s likely next prime minister – Boris Johnson – had offered unequivocal support the situation would have been different. A united political front from the UK, resisting President Trump’s petulant outburst, would have contained the episode as awkward but not irrecoverably damaging to transatlantic relations. But Mr Johnson broke ranks, boasting of his intimacy with Mr Trump and failing to defend the ambassador. Sir Kim plainly concluded that Downing Street under Mr Johnson would not respect or protect officials – even the most senior envoys of Her Majesty’s government – if it was expedient to see them traduced. The episode is a warning to anyone in British public service and to Mr Johnson’s current allies. He has no discernible concept of loyalty. It also follows the ideological trajectory on which Brexit has propelled the Tory party. What was advertised as a project to “take back control” has become a project of unquestioning submission to the whim of a US president who exhibits a despotic temperament and despises the rules-based global order that has underpinned the stability of western Europe since the end of the second world war. Mr Johnson would make a grimly suitable prime minister for this agenda of constitutional vandalism and casual Europhobia. His disregard for truth was well established in the referendum campaign; his disdain for diplomacy was proved during his disastrous stint as foreign secretary. Even his supporters struggle to praise his character, admiring instead his commitment to Brexit and hoping that will revive the Tories’ electoral fortunes. The voracity of Mr Johnson’s ambition has never been a secret, nor has his willingness to sacrifice anything and anyone to satisfy that appetite. In that context, his handling of the Darroch case is unsurprising. But in one respect it represents an exceptional achievement: Mr Johnson has managed to diminish the office of prime minister before even reaching it.