With England facing arguably their biggest one-day international in a generation on Thursday, against Australia, perhaps it should be no surprise Jonny Bairstow is in such reticent mood. After all, the opener played enough shots last week when scoring the back-to-back centuries that propelled Eoin Morgan’s team into the World Cup semi-finals. Those innings, which set up victories against India and New Zealand, had come after Bairstow’s very public row with the former England captain Michael Vaughan. It is a war of words the 29-year-old is clearly keen to move on from, even if it appeared to have had the desired effect on a player who always seems to reach greater heights when he has a point to prove. “I don’t need to comment on that” is Bairstow’s blunt reply when that hypothesis is put to him. “People are bringing up news that is no news – I got misinterpreted and misunderstood. I play better when XYZ happens – no, the fact is we had two massive games to win and we’ve won them.” Vaughan had labelled his fellow Yorkshireman “negative and pathetic” for lashing out after the back-to-back defeats by Sri Lanka and Australia that pushed England to the brink of a humiliating early World Cup exit. For clarity Bairstow’s comments left no room for ambiguity. “People were waiting for us to fail,” he said. “They are not willing us on to win, in many ways, they are waiting for you to get that loss, so they can jump on your throat. It’s a typical English thing to do, in every sport.” There appeared to be an escalation in the spat after Bairstow celebrated his century against New Zealand at Chester-le-Street on Wednesday by rubbing his head. It has been verified privately by those close to the England dressing room that it was a clear reference to Vaughan’s well-publicised work for a hair transplant company. Not that Bairstow was in the mood to elaborate on the matter. “It was just a crack with a few of the lads, that’s all,” he says. However, Bairstow is rather more forthcoming when it comes to his bromance at the top of the order in this one-day side with Jason Roy. It is no coincidence that England managed to secure their passage to a first World Cup semi-final since 1992 only after Bairstow and Roy, who had torn a hamstring earlier in the tournament, were reunited for last Sunday’s must-win match against India at Edgbaston. The last week has been massive, knowing we had two games we had to win, and now we've got another massive week Back-to-back century stands ensued and the pair are now their country’s most-prolific opening partnership, with 2,099 runs in only 31 innings together. Since they first paired up two years ago they have also averaged 67.70 for the first wicket, which is 15 runs ahead of the next closest opening stand in the all-time top 20 – between the West Indies greats Desmond Haynes and Gordon Greenidge. “It’s just a good crack,” Bairstow says of the partnership with Roy. “That’s what it is. It is genuinely good fun. Pretty relaxed, good fun and communication is important all the way through. We just keep each other going. It’s nice, it’s relaxed and we just try and crack on and do what we do. “Of course, you’ve got to have trust in each other, in an opening partnership. I’m sure that Strauss and Cook were the same when they opened in Tests, Hayden and Langer were the same for Australia. Along the way there’s going to be ups and downs but throughout it you’ve got to have trust within yourselves.” Roy’s form for England has been phenomenal this year, with his 60 against New Zealand the eighth time he has passed 50 in 10 ODI innings. His aggressive style has also had an impact beyond mere runs: it has set the tone for his team and seemingly demoralised opponents. With the Ashes less than a month away and England’s timid top order in Test cricket in a constant state of flux, could Roy have a similar impact in the longer format? “There’s no reason why not,” says Bairstow. “But, look, that’s something down the line. You hope that’s the case but it’s down the line. It’ll potentially take place but there’s a lot of cricket to come until then.” It is understandable that Bairstow’s thoughts are elsewhere now. After all, history beckons over the next seven days for Morgan’s players as they attempt to secure their passage to Lord’s for next Sunday’s final and become the first England team to win a 50-over World Cup. “Naturally the last week has been massive, knowing that we had two games we had to win to get through to the semis and now we’ve got another massive week,” says Bairstow. “It’s very exciting. Yes, there have been ups and downs and there’s going to be upsets and people playing well and not playing well. But we’re now at the important end of it and we’ve played really well in the last two games. Everyone will be excited about this week. We know that hopefully we’ve got another massive performance in us to get us to the final.”