When you hear the word pride, what feelings does it call up for you? Until this year, I didn’t understand the meaning of the word in terms of being proud of a facet of your identity. I stand at the crossroads of a barrage of intersections and can feel fragmented at times. I am constantly defined as not white, not straight, not something, instead of being defined by what I am. I now understand pride as a celebration of otherness. To be proud of being queer is to be proud of shattering expectations and norms, and embracing whatever expression, whatever love, we need in order to feel whole. When do you feel most at peace with your identity? Bringing together those who I am in a community with by curating events like The Hen-nah Party and platforming as many queer South Asians and people of colour as possible. When you’re able to speak and know that your words are being met with open hearts and minds, you can talk about identity in more interesting ways. Running these events has allowed me to come to terms with my “labels”. Instead of thinking “I’m a woman first, I’m queer first, I’m Muslim first”, I now understand that I can be all of these things at once. I’ve learned to stop viewing this identity as something fragmented and instead celebrate it for what it is: rich, multifaceted, and something to be truly proud of. How do you centre yourself when you’re having a bad day? A good friend of mine taught me a trick. Draw a grid with three columns and ten rows. The columns are for small, medium and large things you can do to feel good. Small for me is making mint tea or a hot water bottle, medium is cooking a proper meal or reading a chapter of a book, and large is going to a museum or open mic night with a friend. You have to do one thing from each column, and at least one of them has to be with another person. The small and medium things help me check in with my body – am I fed, hydrated and comfortable? The big things help me check in with my mind. What’s your hope for the future? That difference is no longer simply tolerated, but celebrated. Can you recall a moment when you felt completely at peace with your identity? Singing with my partner and my choir, The Pink Singers, at the opening ceremony of an LGBT+ festival in San Jose, California for the largest gay and lesbian choral event in history. It was humbling to be surrounded by so many singers from all walks of life, many of whom had been treated harshly by their family, employers and community because of their sexuality. In this moment they could be themselves and feel united with people who had gone through similar experiences. Singing songs like Something Inside so Strong and I Will Survive was very uplifting. How would you describe Pride for anyone who hasn’t been? You will find yourself surrounded by love, acceptance, joy and the realisation that we are everywhere! Pride gives the community the chance to celebrate, show visibility and support people still coming out. How do you centre yourself when you’re having a bad day? I remember my mother’s advice: never lose your nerve. If you do, you panic and become too afraid to do what you were about to do. My mother believed you should always have a go at something. What’s your hope for the future? That we make worldwide progress on the decriminalisation of same-sex relations, implementing effective anti-discrimination measures and ensuring legal recognition of gender identity. That we continue to break down the myths, lies and stereotypes about queer people and get the chance to tell our own stories. When you hear the word pride, what feelings does it call up for you? For me it’s both a celebration and a protest. A celebration of the huge diversity of human gender and sexuality, and of the lives of LGBT+ people, and a protest at the injustice, prejudice and discrimination we face for being part of that minority. So the feelings are mixed: joy and anger, hope and frustration, excitement and contemplation. Can you recall a moment when you felt completely at peace with your identity? I don’t think I’ve ever felt at peace with it. I don’t see that as a problem, more as an expression of the flux and fluidity that my identity has gone through. How would you describe Pride for anyone who hasn’t been? I remember my first Pride (in 94 or 95 I think) as a student coming to London with a group of friends and being blown away by the sheer number of people, the cheers, whistles, drums and sound systems, and the incredible joy of the event. I had just begun my transition as a young trans woman and remember feeling so free and liberated amongst all these people. We were protesting against the awful prejudice that was widespread; we still had section 28 in force at that time. That made me understand that there was more to Pride than just a big party. How do you centre yourself when you’re having a bad day? I’m naturally an introvert so I find my peace through solitude. Finding somewhere quiet to retreat, meditate or just be alone. What’s your hope for the future? A world where we as human beings can live together harmoniously with ourselves and with our planet. When you hear the word pride, what feelings does it call up for you? As a trans person in the UK right now, it feels like a call to action. Brave and defiant action, not just a feeling. Pride despite relentless attack from the media, the political right and a vociferous minority, supposedly on the left. Pride despite rising populist hostility to LGBT+ people the world over. Pride as a united front because homophobia, misogyny, racism and transphobia are all variations on the same hate-filled, shame-ridden theme. Can you recall a moment when you felt completely at peace with your identity? Before starting to transition, I realised that my path in life really was mine alone to choose. I stopped needing permission or a magical ability to know my future, and felt relief, followed by peace and clarity. I still have that peace, but living openly as trans means it gets battered and bruised. As Munroe Bergdorf recently said: “The best thing about being trans is being trans. The worst thing about being trans is other people.” How would you describe Pride for anyone who hasn’t been? It feels so special, almost magical, because you never get to be surrounded by people who experience life in similar ways to you. For me, it’s about savouring just being together, acknowledging each other, feeling safety and strength in numbers, and sensing what’s truly possible. How do you centre yourself when you’re having a bad day? Sitting on a wide open beach tends to force things into perspective. Also, when you have a toddler, it’s useful to ask yourself whether they care about the thing you’re fretting about because the answer is almost certainly “no”. What’s your hope for the future? That children like mine never have to question the pride they feel in themselves and their rainbow families. I hope his whole generation is empowered to implement the radical changes needed to save the natural world and we get out of their way. How would you define the term pride? Pride is the vital, gorgeous and frantic celebration at the centre of our revolution. It is about resistance, perseverance and survival, but it is also about connection and queer joy. Can you recall a moment when you felt completely at peace with your identity? The times I’ve revelled most in my identity have been when I’m kissing friends and lovers and strangers in queer clubs: a dancing, kaleidoscopic shower of lights, campy disco and intimacy. There’s no room for shame, just the glorious consonance of loving freely; the rightness, the desirousness, and the music of it. How would you describe Pride to someone who hasn’t been? Riotous, joyful, colourful. The most pleasant kind of chaos. How do you centre yourself when you’re having a bad day? Big dinners with people I love; reread passages from my favourite writers; hot showers; dirty martinis; fresh sheets; dancing! What’s your hope for the future? That queerness does away with our binaries, our bizarre fixation on fixedness. My hope for the future is that it is truly, unabashedly queer. Queerness is evidence of more. It is a peek into the cauldron at the beginning of the universe. Evidence that we, in acting purportedly “against nature”, might ourselves expand it. It is evidence of the divine. Queerness is water from the stone, Lazarus from the depths, something from nothing. When you hear the word pride, what feelings does it call up for you? Transgender people have begun to have the sort of pride in themselves that they can share with the rest of the world , but only really in the last decade. Pride means standing tall, with your LGBT+ family, with friends and allies. It’s positive defiance to anyone who challenges our right to live, love and succeed just as we are and without apology. Can you recall a moment when you felt completely at peace with your identity? Flying my helicopter, I guess. When it’s just me, my aircraft and the environment, there’s a peace and a focus that transcends identity. I adore how tactile physics is in those moments and the beauty of an incredibly designed aircraft. How do you centre yourself when you’re having a bad day? Cider. Wife. Cats. Garden! What’s your hope for the future? For everyone to be less tense around identity – both their own and others. Humans are full of wonderful and natural variation, and we should welcome the ability to evolve without excess concern over how we categorise one another. It’s a toolkit, not a rule book!