Just a matter of days into his tenure in Downing Street, and it’s clear Boris Johnson will have a very different approach to Theresa May. Here are 10 things we have learned so far. Margaret Thatcher’s first cabinet was well-stocked with Tory “wets”who were sceptical about her radical economic policies, and with whom she fought a series of running battles. With less than 100 days to go until the Brexit deadline, and after three years of bitter internecine wrangling at the top table in Downing Street, Johnson has decided to go all out – and that meant a wholesale purge of any ministers who might harbour doubts. Quite a few Brexit wets – Philip Hammond, David Gauke and Rory Stewart – had already dispatched themselves into exile on the backbenches – but Johnson sent plenty more to join them. So much for his pledge to unify the party. The Boris Johnson on display during the Conservative leadership campaign was more self-disciplined and less dishevelled than his colleagues were accustomed to. But since he clinched victory, his trademark attention-seeking quips have crept in once again – most jarringly, when he promised the audience at the results event in Westminster: “Dude, we’re going to energise the country!” “You’re not going to change him,” one senior aide shrugged afterwards. Johnson’s free-and-easy use of language has often landed him in trouble, but he defended his approach during the campaign, conceding that sometimes “plaster comes off the ceiling” because of his remarks – but “I will continue to speak as directly as I can.” Johnson’s relationship with his partner, Carrie Symonds, had been in some doubt since the Guardian revealed that police had been called to the flat they shared after a raucous late-night row. Unlike Philip with Theresa May, Symonds did not accompany the new prime minister to Buckingham Palace for his audience with the Queen on Wednesday – but she was awaiting him outside No 10, alongside key members of his team. It has emerged that the pair recently purchased a house in Camberwell – but the prime minister’s official spokesman confirmed on Friday that Symonds would move into the Downing Street flat with Johnson next week. Even before Johnson’s arrival in Downing Street, it was hard to see a route through the Brexit morass that didn’t end with the new prime minister going to the polls to ask for his own electoral mandate. But since he arrived in No 10, his resolutely tough rhetoric on the “anti-democratic” Irish backstop appears to have knocked out the “lipstick on a pig” scenario, which would have seen him negotiate modest changes to Theresa May’s deal and then bring it back to parliament. Instead, many MPs on both sides of the political spectrum believe he is now engaged in little more than a diplomatic charade, after which he will accuse Brussels of intransigence, and trigger a general election. The arrival of the Vote Leave strategist Dominic Cummings in Downing Street, and the inclusion of a string of voter-friendly pledges in Johnson’s first speeches, only increased that speculation. The impression of a campaign government has increased after Cummings’ appointment was followed by the arrival of a series of other Vote Leave alumni into Downing Street. At least five former former Vote Leave staff are part of the new Downing Street team, including Johnson’s two most senior communications advisers. And while Johnson’s double act with Michael Gove in the campaign did not end well – Gove torpedoed Johnson’s 2016 leadership bid by standing himself – Gove has also been brought on board, being put in charge of no-deal planning in a non-portfolio cabinet role. Johnson might have already exchanged personal phone numbers with the European commission boss, Jean-Claude Juncker, but that does not mean dates are in the diary for extensive official talks. The new PM’s stance is that while he will be “energetic and front-footed” is seeking a deal, talks can only begin under the terms that the existing withdrawal agreement is torn up, including the Irish backstop. Given that the EU has repeatedly said this cannot happen, it would seem to herald an impasse, one leading – unless blocked by the Commons – to a no-deal Brexit on 31 October. One of the standout moments in Rory Stewart’s ill-fated campaign for No 10 was when he compared his rivals’ defiant optimism about Brexit to a man trying to cram three bags of rubbish in in an impossibly-full dustbin while yelling, “Believe in the bin bags!” Johnson’s promise to prove “the doubters, the doomsters, the gloomsters” wrong, and his claim that “no one in the last few centuries has succeeded in betting against the pluck and nerve and ambition of this country”, is in exactly that vein. In the House of Commons on Thursday he was also keen to attack Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn – and quite a few of the MPs who asked questions of him – for being insufficiently optimistic, or resolute. The head of the Brexit-ultra European Research Group, Jacob Rees-Mogg, might be safely in the cabinet, but that does not mean Johnson has all the die-hards on side. Steve Baker, one of their leading number, turned down a junior minister’s role, saying he did not want to return to the “powerlessness” of a previous role, while another, Mark Francois, has already warned Johnson his feet will be held to the fire in ditching all the current withdrawal agreement. Johnson looks set to push ahead with the lavish spending plans outlined in his campaign, starting with a pledge to produce 20,000 new police. Asked if the official policy is still to reduce the deficit, No 10 now says this is “under review”. The important caveat is that many observers believe the spending and tax cut plans are aimed at an autumn election and might well never happen – particularly in the current parliament.