Jason Roy is more than a talisman. When he scores runs England tend to win, which is why they are so delighted he is back and 100% fit – almost. Roy feared the worst when his hamstring rebelled on 14 June against West Indies. But in two vital games on his return to the side he has hit a couple of 60s and is looking for more. Like the rest of the squad he hopes he has two more matches to play in this tournament. “I’ll be honest, there was a bit of a fear I might be out,” he admitted on Sunday. “Having been dropped in the Champions Trophy [in 2017] and then working my backside off to get here for the World Cup and being in good form only to then get injured, I was like: ‘Give me a break!’ I thought I was having no luck so that was frustrating and a bit hard to deal with, but I kept things relaxed, worked hard and thankfully I got back and was able to play. I’m as close to 100% as I’m going to be. It was a decent injury which was a shame, but I was overworking it a touch and these things happen. I’ll be able to get through the next two games, for sure.” His fielding duties may be reduced a bit although he will have to stay on the field. Before the injury he was England’s dedicated backward point, a key position in ODI cricket. But he may not return there in this tournament. “I’m quite enjoying being at mid‑off and chatting to the bowlers. It is not quite as stressful as point either. But I don’t think it will be long before I’m back there.” Roy was out for 16 days with his injury which had the support staff working overtime. On his return to the crease he still looked in sublime form but that was not quite his assessment. “I still felt a little bit rusty. Now that I’ve had those games I feel back to where I want to be. I feel like I’ve got some good rhythm.” His batting against the white ball has been so impressive recently that the possibility of Roy being chosen for the Test team is getting stronger despite his limited opportunities against a red ball, especially at the top of the order. Trevor Bayliss admitted he is under consideration for a place in the Ashes squad next month. “I think so,” the head coach replied when asked if Roy could make the move to Test cricket. “Whether it is at the top of the order or at No 3, there is no secret that in Test cricket we have been looking for a solid combination at the top of the order, especially since Cooky [Alastair Cook] retired last year. Jason has had success at international cricket and that goes a long way to being able to handle the pressure, so it is a definite option and one we have spoken about around the selection table for the last 12 months or so and I’m quite sure that will be a big discussion point over the next few weeks.” Roy certainly does not appear to be intimidated by that prospect. “There has been a bit of chat and you can’t avoid it but playing Test cricket and in the Ashes has been an ambition of mine for years. It hasn’t just come about in the last couple of months. When you’re young you don’t understand a huge amount about batting; you just go out there and bat. But now I feel like I know myself a lot better as a batsman. If the call comes, then great, it comes but, if it doesn’t, then so be it. Of course my ambition is to play Test cricket and see how I go. Most of my batting in first class cricket has been at 4, 5, or 6, but I played at three twice last year so I’m happy wherever they want to put me. I think I’m better off at the top of the order and then I can give it a go from there.” Of course, that is where the vacancies lie. For the moment his focus is inevitably on England’s semi-final against Australia at Edgbaston on Thursday. “It should be a great game,” he said. “I think them losing to South Africa might have knocked their confidence a bit. Although when you get to the semi-final stage any team you come up against is going to be a tough ask, mentally and physically.They hammered us at Lord’s but who knows what Thursday is going to bring? It is still just cricket at the end of the day.”