Shares in Mike Ashley’s Sports Direct crashed by more than a quarter after the retailer’s disastrous annual results announcement on Friday, a chaotic day during which there were several delays and shock financial revelations. The shares plummeted by as much as 27%, to 166.6p, when trading opened on Monday, in the stock market’s first response to the shambolic annual statement that included a warning that the group’s House of Fraser chain has “terminal” problems and a shock €674m (£605m) tax bill from the Belgian authorities. They later recovered to 208p, reducing the loss to 9%. The results were published after the stock market closed on Friday and revealed that Sports Direct was struggling amid tough trading conditions on the high street. A £54.6m operating loss at House of Fraser was compounded by a 1.6% fall in sales at established UK sports stores as Sports Direct admitted that its relationship with key brands was “currently challenging.” “The home truths about the core Sports Direct business were pretty shocking and management seems to be out of ideas,” said analysts at brokerage Peel Hunt. “Whilst Sports Direct may have done all the likes of Nike and Adidas asked them to do in the flagship stores, the premium product that maybe it was expecting as a consequence has not emerged. And it doesn’t sound like that is about to change.” “We are disappointed how Friday played out but it’s far more worrying that Sports Direct now seems to be strategically snookered, checkmated and clean bowled. The shares are hard to value, but are surely only for the very brave.” David Cumming, the chief investment officer for equities and head of UK equities at Aviva Investors, told the BBC on Monday: “Sports Direct is almost a case study in failed corporate governance.” He said Ashley “has obviously got retail talent – or had retail talent”, but the firm had “lost its way”. Justin Urquhart Stewart, a fund manager at Seven Investment Management, said the delayed publication of the results was “frankly a pathetic way to run a business”. “Mike Ashley doesn’t care about the City [investors] very much. As far as he is concerned he is used to running a business his way,” he told the BBC’s Wake Up to Money. In the annual results, Ashley warned that the state of House of Fraser, which his company bought out of administration last year, had created “significant uncertainty” as to the future profitability of the entire group. He warned of further store closures at House of Fraser and said he regretted the acquisition. The billionaire retail tycoon has gone on a buying spree in the past 18 months, with Sports Direct also acquiring Evans Cycles, Sofa.com and Game Digital.