If a reality TV star sees a map and knows the names of all the capital cities, and where the major rivers flow, and which oceans lap the coasts, are they even allowed to be on reality TV? Or does a trapdoor open below them, with Mephistopheles dragging them into hell, ie obscurity, with all its attendant miseries: no viral fame, no charcoal toothpaste endorsement deals, and absolutely no paid nightclub appearances, not even one – it’s off to hell with you. It’s hard to tell, but I think it must be so. Because, truly, has any reality TV star in the history of the genre deserved more than an F+ when it comes to trivia? In Saturday’s episode of Love Island’s spin-off show, Love Island: Unseen Bits, three contestants – Joanna Chimonides, Jourdan Riane, and Belle Hassan – were filmed discussing the whereabouts of various European cities. “We cleared up that Edinburgh is actually in Scotland last night,” Hassan volunteered to the others. “Is it?” responded Chimonides, before asking her fellow housemates whether Italy is in Rome or Rome is in Italy. Riane answered, proudly: “Rome is in Italy. Rome is the capital of Italy.” It was all going so well for Riane, until Hassan asked the location of Barcelona. Confidently came the response from Riane: “Barcelona is in Italy.” You may despair, but displays of performative ignorance are woven into the fabric of reality TV. If we were to stitch the genre a tapestry à la Bayeux, it would start with Jade Goody referring to East Anglia as “East Angular” in 2002’s Big Brother (the Norman invasion), wind past the 2016 Celebrity Big Brother fiasco, in which the contestants mistakenly thought their fellow housemate David Gest was dead, as opposed to sleeping in his own bed (the arrow in King Harold’s eye), and unfurl towards today’s goldfish-brained Love Island contestants (the reign of William the Conqueror.) Riane isn’t to be despised or mocked for not knowing where Barcelona is. She is to be commended as a noble custodian of the rich heritage of reality TV. Laughing at reality TV stars as they attempt to cut an ice-cube with a butter knife or are coached through making a cup of tea (both of which happened to Love Island contestant and all-round sweetheart Tommy Fury earlier this season) is about as pure as pleasure comes, up there with the scent of newborn babies or freshly cut grass. It is what makes reality TV so great. The hero of the genre is, of course, the late Goody. Her permanent bafflement (“Rio de Janeiro, ain’t that a person?”) catapulted her to fame. Goody is the Madonna to Joey Essex’s Lady Gaga. Without her, Essex – a man who once said that a square has six sides and Wales borders Russia – wouldn’t have a career. (See also: Nikki Grahame.) Producers of the current wave of reality TV shows are well aware of this lineage and will give the public what they want – the opportunity to feel smarter than the chiselled gods and goddesses on our screens – by inventing scenarios in which contestants bungle their way through general-knowledge quizzes. (This has the added benefit of being immensely shareable on social media.) Hence the 2015 Love Island episode in which the contestant Josh Ritchie was asked how many countries make up the UK, as part of a back-to-school-themed quiz. Ritchie looked pained. “If you don’t get this, you are the biggest prick I’ve ever met in my life,” said quizmaster and fellow contestant Jon Clark. “How can you be this thick?” You live there!” Ritchie – with the encouragement of his fellow islanders, who were in accord – answered: one country. “You’re wrong, you prat,” Clark exclaimed. In reality TV, contestants have their roles – typically, for every nine Ritchies, there is one Clark – meaning that there is an opportunity for savvier contestants to set themselves apart from the dunces. In this year’s Love Island, it is Curtis Pritchard patiently explaining things to Fury; in season four of Big Brother, it was Jon Tickle inventing a time-delay toaster. All reality TV is a stage, and the men and women upon it are mere players. It is impossible to know whether the Love Island contestants know where Barcelona and Rome are, but are performing ignorance for the amusement of viewers, or if they really don’t know. It doesn’t matter. Are you not entertained?