The Conservative party can only succeed if it’s in the centre ground of British politics and offers an antidote to Jeremy Corbyn’s hard-left Labour party. We must be seen as the party of opportunity, as we were when I was a working-class teenager growing up in Rotherham. Yet the current Conservative party leadership battle – a candidate from Eton pitting himself against one from Charterhouse – makes us look like the party of privilege. When I was education secretary, I saw first-hand how privilege bias is hardwired into our education system and then beyond into business and careers. Any party committed to equality of opportunity should be determined to change this. That means decisive action from the incoming prime minister, tackling the privilege hoarding we have built into society. We should take immediate action via a social mobility emergency budget, followed by wider steps to address the systemic privilege bias that means opportunity tends to flow to those who already have it. It’s perverse just to lend finance for a degree but not for an apprenticeship, training or starting a business An emergency budget should target the country’s social mobility cold spots with extra education support, announce a reform of student finance and the reintroduction of maintenance grants. It could introduce an opportunity capital fund to provide capital to a new generation so they can pursue more opportunities. It’s perverse just to lend them finance for a degree but not for other opportunities, such as an apprenticeship, training or starting a business. The Treasury badly needs reform, too, because it has no strategy to value investment in Britain’s most valuable asset – our people. Simple steps can help as well, such as allowing 15 million renters to get more affordable finance by making their monthly rent count towards their credit score, as it already does for mortgage payers. And the additional education investment blocked for the past two years must now be made available. However, even this won’t be the system fix that Britain needs to solve our social mobility crisis. Conservatives believe in the free market but we should recognise that for the most precious commodities, opportunity and talent, the market’s broken. That’s bad for all of us. The forward-thinking businesses and organisations I’ve met since I left cabinet and set up the social mobility pledge don’t care about privilege. Today I’m meeting some of them in the north-east. These are companies that have stopped fishing in a narrow talent pool and started accessing wider, stronger talent. Time after time, they tell me that other strengths beyond academic qualifications mark out the best talent and potential of young people they recruit. One major professional services business employing thousands of people worldwide redesigned its recruitment process because it found there was little correlation between its best performers and their academic attainment. Instead, these employees had three other non-academic attributes in common. First, they experienced and overcame early setbacks in life. Second, they’d had motivation to get Saturday jobs or earn extra pocket money in other ways. Third, they had all accomplished something significant by being part of a team. The way many of Britain’s institutions principally use academic achievement to decide who gets what opportunities is systematically flawed. Academic achievement as a proxy for talent and potential only gives at best a partial picture. It means an institutional and automatic bias against young people from more ordinary and disadvantaged backgrounds in favour of those from better off ones likely to get better grades. The university admissions points approach compounds the problem. One underperforming subject and a student may miss out on a place. A strong, rounded academic achievement counts. But we should recognise that this approach biases the system against young people from disadvantaged and ordinary backgrounds who are most likely to be at sixth forms and colleges that have fewer resources, or find it hard to recruit a full slate of excellent teachers across the board. And it matters because the best employers tend to pick from the best regarded universities, even though their entrance approach self-selects a narrower group of young people. Currently, universities attempt to correct for this by outreach work, but it’s the system that needs recalibrating. The privilege of access to opportunity is one that must be afforded to all across the country. The present problem of privilege hoarding – where too many opportunities are closed off from people because of implicit, often unintended barriers – must be transformed to become privilege opened up and shared. If the door to opportunity isn’t open to all, the talent market is undermined. Potential gets lost. A social mobility emergency budget can kickstart the ambitious, values-based system change Britain needs. But the Conservative party should renew itself, too. By the time of the next leadership contest, we need a new, younger generation of Conservative members, who share this mission to free up Britain’s talent, free up opportunity and make it fairly available to all. We succeed for Britain, as before, by having those who drive for change become part of who we are and what we stand for as a party. • Justine Greening is the Conservative MP for Putney