In theory, I like the idea of living in a sleek minimalist box,” says Ruthie Hudson. “But in reality, I’m too sentimental. I like collecting ‘stuff’, especially things that feel as if they have a back story.” With second-hand furniture, artists’ prints and end-of-line fabrics, her 1930s house in Stamford, Lincolnshire, might be short on echoey white spaces, but it’s got plenty of personality. Ruthie, her husband Michael and their sons Jasper, seven, and Felix, five, live in a house that was originally built as accommodation for a police officer. It hadn’t been lived in for many years, but instead had been used as an overflow storage space for the police station a few doors down. “The rooms were full of recovered stolen bikes,” Ruthie says. “And I don’t mean just one or two – there were about 50, all in different shapes and sizes.” Weeds and plants had taken root in the window frames and the garden was so overgrown they couldn’t see where it ended. That abundance of space out the back was a bonus, as it meant that over the next few years they could extend the original two-up, two-down house, adding a larger kitchen, a garden room and two bedrooms. The newest addition is the garden room, a space that was inspired by a 1969 photograph of David Hockney and Sir Cecil Beaton, taken in Beaton’s conservatory at Reddish House. “Ever since I saw that image of the two men surrounded by plants in a room with an elegant black and white tiled floor I’d thought, ‘I’d love to sit in a space like that,’” Ruthie says. In her version, leafy fronds drape down from shelves, but in lieu of Beaton’s mass of pink geraniums, Ruthie opted for a flowing floral wallpaper. “Some patterns look lovely as a small sample, but when you get them on the wall the repeat can look too orderly. This one feels more natural, as if there’s no beginning and no end.” Ruthie has furnished this room with an old cabinet that she painted dark green and a vintage French table, a baby version of one in the kitchen. “Both tables came from Newark antiques fair, but bought 10 years apart,” says Ruthie. She found the larger one first, at a time when she was buying and selling vintage and mid-century furniture for a living. “When we were furnishing our first house I kept finding really beautiful pieces of old furniture and couldn’t resist buying a few extras, which I put in the garage,” she says. She began doing this when mid-century sideboards were having a moment and Stamford, Peterborough and the surrounding areas proved to be a rich – and cheap – hunting ground. “I shopped at vintage fairs, auctions and charity shops and prices were far better than in other parts of the country,” Ruthie says. Some of her best finds have been at auctions, both in Stamford and at more ramshackle barns out in the countryside. “You tend to get better things when you’re there in person, rather than bidding over the phone or online,” Ruthie says. “And there’s something about the buzz of being there that’s great. Well, once your lots come up. In between, there’s lots of just waiting, often in the cold…” Ruthie progressed from selling to friends to taking pitches at pop-up fairs. “It coincided with people we knew getting their first homes and wanting to furnish them stylishly but without spending loads of money,” she adds. But some items never made it on to her stall. “There were a fair few things that I put in our house to photograph in order to sell them, but liked them so much that I kept them. It wasn’t exactly a ruthless business plan,” she says. A stall in Stamford market has also been a good source of fabrics, which Ruthie has used to re-cover old furniture. “Almost all our chairs, the footstool and a sofa have been given new life with end-of-roll materials I’ve bought there,” she says. Other fabrics came via Ruthie’s first job. She worked in the production department of a publishing company, where samples and offcuts were sold off for charity once they had been photographed. A square of embroidered silk on the couple’s bed is one such cast-off. “It had its moment in the news pages of the World of Interiors and is just beautiful. I’d never have come across it if I hadn’t worked there,” she says. Ruthie now works as an artist and a printmaker, making linocuts and using a 19th-century lithograph press that she bought on eBay. “It dates from 1856 so it’s slightly temperamental and results can vary each time I make a print,” she says. “But that lack of identikit perfection appeals to me. You know that each print is done by hand.” It’s that love of personality over production-line “perfection” that characterises Ruthie and Michael’s home. “Whether it’s furniture, clothes or art, I think it’s far more interesting to see some signs of a life well lived.” Ruthie Hudson Prints, rhprints.com