Tomatoes are nearing full glory and I’m eating them with almost every meal. Soft ones get squashed or grated (no skins) on to garlic-rubbed toasts with a dousing of good olive oil and lots of salt (pan con tomate). While I still make my warm confit tomatoes with Indian spices and cold yoghurt recipe from last year, today’s recipes are getting the most frequent airing this summer. Both are simple: one is a salad inspired by food writer Ed Smith’s tomato tonnato (but no tonnato for me) with capers, herbs and a thick tahini dressing; the other is a new way with tomatoes on toast that works as a salad, too, or on top of flatbreads. Summer tomatoes in all their glory, eaten simply. It virtually goes without saying that the better the tomatoes, the better the toasts. I love Ligurian bull’s heart tomatoes and, of course, our rainbow ones from the Isle of Wight. If your tomatoes are less tasty, roasting them intensifies the sweetness so I have included an option for roasting the tomatoes, too. Prep 10 minCook 5 min Makes 4 toasts 400g large, ripe heritage tomatoes Flaked sea salt85ml extra-virgin olive oil1 tbsp fennel seeds½ tsp chilli flakes3 tbsp red-wine vinegar1 garlic clove, peeled and halved4 slices good-quality bread Slice the tomatoes, season generously with salt, then put them in a colander on top of a plate and leave for as long as it takes for the tomatoes to drain some of their liquid and for their flavour to intensify. Warm the oil in a pan, then add the fennel seeds and chilli flakes. Warm gently for two minutes, until the seeds infuse the oil, then whisk in the vinegar. Arrange the tomatoes on a plate, drizzle over the warm dressing, then sprinkle with plenty of sea salt. Serve on top of garlic-rubbed, toasted bread, or scatter with feta or some toasted breadcrumbs for extra crunch, if you like. For a roasted version that’s equally good, heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Toss the sliced tomatoes in the oil with the fennel, chilli and a good sprinkle of salt, then roast for 15 minutes, until softened and gooey. Serve on its own or stirred through pasta. Tahini and tomatoes is an unexpectedly good combination. A smooth, light tahini is what you want here (I like Belazu) and, again, the better the tomatoes, the better this will taste. Prep 15 minMarinate 40 minServes 4 as a starter 350g mixed ripe tomatoes1 tsp flaked sea salt1 tbsp red wine vinegar1 grind black pepper1 generous drizzle extra-virgin olive oil1 handful chopped parsley leaves1 small bunch basil leaves, torn, plus extra to serve80g smooth tahini (I use Belazu)4 tbsp capers, drained Chop the tomatoes, and toss in a colander with the salt and vinegar. Put the colander on top of a plate or bowl and leave to marinate for as long as you have, and at least 10 minutes. Drain, then season with freshly ground black pepper, the oil and herbs. Leave to marinate again for 30 minutes, then plate up and spoon over generous dollops of the tahini and capers.