The all-female W Series has taken a major step towards its goal of a woman in a Formula One car with the announcement that from next season the FIA will award super licence points to the drivers. The points are required before any driver can compete in F1. The publicity the series has engendered has already proved positive for several competitors, who are convinced it will ultimately deliver an F1 driver. A woman has not raced in F1 since Lella Lombardi 43 years ago. The six-race W Series season began in May, with 18 drivers taking part in the single-make F3 championship, in which they do not have to pay any costs. Forty super licence points are required to race in F1, with 25 to take part in a free practice session. There is only one woman currently racing with points, the British driver Katherine Legge and they are about to expire. The number that are expected to be allocated in the W Series is between 12 and 18 for first place. The series hopes that as the calendar expands in future the points will increase. Vicky Piria, the 25-year old Italian who is ninth in the championship, was convinced the series would deliver. “There will be a girl in F1 and I am positive she will have passed through the W series,” she said. “One will bring more, it is about getting the ball rolling. It’s only a matter of time.” Britain’s Jamie Chadwick, who leads the championship, has already been taken on by the Williams F1 team as a development driver. Another competitor, Fabienne Wohlwend, races while also working as a compliance officer for a bank in her home country of Liechtenstein. In fourth place of the championship, and in with an outside chance of the title, the 21-year-old said she will now be able to pursue a full-time racing career next season, thanks to the attention she has attracted in the W Series. Piria described Wohlwend, now recognised everywhere in her home country, as “Liechtenstein’s Beyoncé”. Wohlwend said the series had been a “huge step” for her career and echoed Piria’s belief that the W Series would be pivotal in taking a woman to F1. “We are all developing, getting closer and closer,” she said. “There will be a girl in F1. As soon as one team has a successful woman in F1 other teams will want to have it.” The chief executive of W Series, Catherine Bond Muir, emphasised just how important the FIA recognition with points was. “If what we are about is getting drivers into the upper echelons of motor sport, especially F1, this represents an absolute sea change in the opportunities for women in motor sport,” she said. “Being involved in W Series is giving the drivers the real chance to get into F1 because they need those points.” Two championship rounds remain, this weekend’s meeting at Assen in the Netherlands and then the season finale at Brands Hatch on 11 August.