Andy Murray is set to begin his Wimbledon campaign on either Centre Court or Court No 1 because of concerns over his safety. Murray will make his return to grand-slam action in the men’s doubles alongside Pierre-Hugues Herbert, five months after undergoing hip surgery. Tournament organisers have been deliberating over where to schedule his opening match, looking to balance the need to make singles matches a priority and the surge in interest Murray’s appearance will prompt. In addition, with men’s doubles matches played over the best of five sets, there is the potential for early damage to the playing surface on the show courts. None were played last year until the second Monday. Ultimately, however, Richard Lewis believes Murray’s safety will prove the decisive factor, highlighting the difficulties in using courts further away. “One of the major considerations for Andy, I think first match in particular, is safety,” said the All England Club chief executive, who hinted the match could take place under Court No 1’s new £70m roof. “That restricts the number of courts he can be on. He’s very popular. [It’s for the players] getting them to and from court. Getting them to court two for example, is a long way in the public area. “Obviously Centre and No 1 are easy. I think once you get beyond Centre and One it’s more problematic. After the first match, if the interest dies down a little bit we might be able to have more flexibility where he plays. But it will be probable he will be on one of the show courts.” Lewis moved to play down the controversy over the decision to seed Roger Federer higher than Rafael Nadal because of their comparative recent records on grass. Nadal is ranked second in the world but seeded third and has complained about the All England Club’s policy. “There’s always going to be disappointed players,” Lewis said. “It’s a formula, it’s not discretionary. It’s been in place for a long time. From our point of view, it wasn’t controversial because we had no choice.” Lewis also confirmed Wimbledon will not be showing England’s semi-final against USA at the Women’s World Cup on Tuesday night. As was the case 12 months ago when Gareth Southgate’s side reached the last four during Wimbledon, the big screens will only be showing tennis. “People can watch the football on their mobile devices, we’re very relaxed about that, but the big screen will stick to the tennis as in previous years,” he said.