Angelo Alessio endured a nightmare home debut as Kilmarnock manager, as the hosts crashed out of the Europa League qualifiers with a 3-2 aggregate defeat to Connah’s Quay Nomads. Rugby Park was hosting its first European tie in 18 years, with Kilmarnock looking to build on their 2-1 first-leg lead and secure an intriguing tie against Partizan Belgrade in the second qualifying round. Instead, second-half goals from Ryan Wignall and Callum Morris from the penalty spot sent the Welsh part-timers through. A 2-0 victory on the night was enough to overturn their first-leg deficit and set up a trip to the Serbian capital to face former European Cup finalists. Kilmarnock had worked wonders to qualify for Europe, finishing third in last season’s Scottish Premiership under Steve Clarke, but this was a humiliating exit. It was also the worst possible start for Alessio, who took responsibility for the shock defeat after the game. “I’m sorry. I’m sorry for this result, this is a bad result for us,” Alessio said. “In the first half we have three opportunities to score and their goalkeeper made great saves, this can happen. “At the same time, in the second half it’s important, don’t lose your head and stay in the game. We conceded two goals, the second a penalty, but this is football,” he added. “I don’t feel like I have lost the good feeling from the fans. It is important to remember that this is only the first game.” The Connah’s Quay Nomads manager, Andy Morrison, hailed the result as one of the best in Welsh football history. “Liverpool beat Barcelona 4-0 and people said that was remarkable but that was on a par with it,” Morrison said. “The gulf between the two teams is huge. We were written off and were 66/1 to win 2-0; nobody gave us a hope in hell. It is a special night in Welsh football.” The hosts were punished for missed chances in the first half when Andy Morrison’s side struck five minutes after the interval. Declan Poole swung in a dangerous cross from the right flank and Wignall glanced a header beyond the despairing dive of Killie keeper Jamie MacDonald. Kilmarnock were still ahead on the away goals rule but the tie was on a knife-edge, and the pressure told 11 minutes from time. Subsitute Jamie Insall got in behind the home defence and was hauled down inside the box by Stuart Findlay. Morris made no mistake from 12 yards, while Findlay was shown a straight red card. Both sides ended the match with 10 men as Wignall was sent packing in the closing stages. The goalscorer picked up a second yellow card for a foul on Alan Power, but Connah’s Quay held on for a historic win. Rangers thrashed St Joseph’s 6-0 at Ibrox to complete a 10-0 victory and set up a rematch with Progrès Niederkorn. The Luxembourg side who famously eliminated Rangers two seasons ago progressed with a 3-2 aggregate win over Cork City. Summer signing Joe Aribo put the hosts ahead early before Alfredo Morelos’s hat-trick and Jermain Defoe’s double sealed a one-sided victory – although the manager, Steven Gerrard, was unimpressed by his side’s slow start.“The first half was quite boring, slow and predictable but the second half was really entertaining and much better,” Gerrard said. “Certain players were quite nervous and tentative and went for the safe option, but we were a lot more positive in the second half and entertained the fans.” Crusaders will take on Premier League side Wolves in the next round after completing a 5-2 aggregate win over Faroese side B36 Torshavn, while Aberdeen knocked out Finland’s RoPS, Lewis Ferguson’s late strike completing a 4-2 aggregate victory. The Dons will play Georgia’s Chikhura Sachkhere in the next round. Late goals from Jack Byrne and Garry O’Neill helped Shamrock Rovers to a comeback victory over Norway’s Brann, setting up a tie with Cypriot side Apollon Limassol in the next round. Shamrock’s fellow Dubliners, St Patricks Athletic, were knocked out by IFK Norrkoping, and there were heavy aggregate defeats for Northern Ireland’s Ballymena (11-0 against Malmö) and Cliftonville (6-1 against Haugesund). 