“London and its strange ways are far, far away!” Ah Demelza. London is not the only place with strange ways, or at least where a great deal of things happen in unimaginably rapid succession. This was a great episode for fans of primitive cave bombs, reckless chasm-jumping, ill-advised derring-do, amateur beachside amputations and bedside waterboarding. My heart was softened by the reappearance of Horace the Pug early on, and as events raced by I alternated between mildly weepy and completely broken. Then Valentine met his half-siblings and I was all puddle. It’s hard to know where to start with this episode, where as many things happened in one hour’s screen time as have happened in the previous four series. And yet it was masterfully managed. Most importantly, though, Horace the Pug returned! He’s put on weight. But obviously that’s his prerogative. Not content with addressing each other in the third person, Dr Enys and Sindy Doll were now speaking to each other exclusively through the dog. I do love these two – and their chemistry is a great compliment to that of Aidan Turner and Eleanor Tomlinson. These pairings – alongside the contrasting charms of Jack Farthing (Sir Evil George) and Heida (Ghost Elizabeth) – have been the backbone of this show. Horace is just the plump cherry on the cake. The scenes at Caroline’s party were delicious; I almost needed a reviving tincture to keep up with it. Questions about the treatment of Sir Evil George’s lunacy. An encounter between Morwenna and the mother of the pig’s-tail-buttocked vicar about Morwenna’s sickly child who has acquired some mastery in fencing. A warning to Demelza about the malice of Tess. Some extraordinary cakes. A brilliant moment between the slave trader and Kitty Despard. And if that weren’t enough plot, here was an accident at the mine with various opportunities for showcasing gore and corpses. Meanwhile Sir Evil George was in an increasingly bad way. “These will relieve the melancholic congestion of the brain.” Leeches! No! They’re as bad as the terrible tincture Elizabeth took. Bring Dr Enys and his unproven methods to Sir Evil George. A hearty salute to Jack Farthing for inhabiting this difficult role so excellently; even Cary Warleggan thought the waterboarding was a bit much. Thank goodness for a second opinion. “I thought you were about to fall.” “Would it matter?” “I wonder, would you allow me to accompany you back to Trenwith?” Put Dr Enys in charge of all hostage negotiation situations immediately. “The only lunatic in this room is here. His methods will induce madness, not cure it.” Yes, Dr Enys, speak ye loud! I love the anti-American narrative building up around Prudie in the fragmentary glimpses we get of her. (Not enough Prudie in this series. We demand a Prudie spinoff series, please, alongside the spinoff series for Sir Evil George’s chin.) And moody Tess is superb. “We aren’t all lucky enough to sell our body to our master for the price of a wedding ring.” Way to tell Demelza to check her privilege. The learnin’ and the smashin’ of prejudice around mental illness, gender and race weigh heavy this series. Was Demelza and Morwenna’s literacy project a step too far? Probably, but never mind. “Truly difference betwixt commons and learned is simply that: learnin’.” Fortunately Poldark has earned the privilege to preach like this and they’re just about getting away with it so far. We shall see if it all gets a bit much as the series progresses. T’is a shameful fact that until now, the music has never been mentioned here over five series. Time to remedy that. This week I want to give a melodic tavern shout-out to the composer of the soaring Poldark earworm, Anne Dudley. The theme tune that plays over the title credits is an orchestral arrangement designed “to underscore the Cornish sweeping landscapes and passionate love story.” Top marks to Dudley, who won an Oscar for best score for The Full Monty and has worked on arrangements for The Pet Shop Boys, Elton John and Pulp. May many over-filled tankards be raised aloft to all the excellent musicians involved, and especially to lead violinist Chris Garrick. I have such a Pavlovian response to this theme now (causing immediate lowering of blood pressure) that I am going to miss the music almost as much as Demelza’s National Velvet outfit. • “Ned, I think we’re wanted elsewhere.” The best way ever to say to someone, “It’s time to leave.” • “Sir George has been called away to the … north … of England.” AKA: his bedroom from which banging can be heard. The barbaric north! Genius prevarication. • “Meanwhile I’m supposed to look Morwenna and Caroline in the face and tell them you’ve all gone fishing?” “Excellent idea.” Ross and Demelza’s relationship in a nutshell. • “I’ve lost one son to greedy mine-owners, I won’t lose another to highfalutin nonsense.” I would give an Academy Award to John Macneill (Jacka Hoblyn, father of Tommy) purely for his delivery of this line which was beyond reproach in impossible circumstances. One of the great things about Poldark is the strong ensemble cast, many of whom have been in the series since the beginning and inhabit their background roles as if they really are living in the period. Tricorns off to all. • “I do hold a finger to my tongue. I do hold a finger waiting.” A strange song, t’were indeed, but Demelza sang it well. As I have predicted, due to the intervention of Aidan Turner’s agent, all of Ross’s feats of derring-do in a hot and sweaty underground cave were conducted not only fully clothed but wearing a fully buttoned-up shirt and an extra waistcoat. Instead we got naked Demelza in the bath. We don’t want naked Demelza in the bath, we want her in her National Velvet costume! Sir Evil George has taken refuge in a world of shadows. Morwenna goes back to her son. Ned goes on the attack. It’s all kicking off, as we would expect as we approach the midway point …