Increasingly in flamenco, it’s the women who wear the trousers, literally and metaphorically. You only need look to this year’s Flamenco festival for evidence, where almost all of the dance shows are female-led, and to the festival’s opening diva, Sara Baras, to see how it’s done. Baras arrives in black trouser suit and scarlet frock coat, and immediately shows us who’s boss. Her show, Sombras, meaning “shadows”, marks 20 years of Baras’s company, one of the best-loved in Spain. The 48-year-old is a dancer who often remains emotionally opaque (except when warmly talking to the audience at the end of the show). Not for her the deep dive into a tortured soul. Instead she is a powerful authority of complete assurance, and we have the slightly intimidating pleasure of watching someone who is utterly in charge. It’s in the way her shoulders swell magnanimously, the almighty crack of a heel splitting the air, and her regal dramatic restraint. What Baras is in charge of more than anything is her feet. She’s famed for farruca, a dance of extremely rapid-fire footwork, traditionally performed by men. Her precision beats are astonishing in their speed and definition, she’s a machine, albeit one able to subtly colour that percussive torrent. What Baras does better than anyone I’ve seen is the perfectly measured ritardando, silences between diminuendoing beats increasing a millisecond at a time, until we’re in pin-drop territory. Through alegrías and zapateado, dancing shadows on the wall, sweeping whirls of her shawl, poetic interludes and lighting theatrics, the most potent parts of Sombras are the stripped-back early sections, Baras black-clad in the shadows of the stage, our attention zoomed close, led by our ears as much as our eyes. Six supporting dancers, often choreographed in striking unison, mostly serve to give Baras a break from the stage. The seven top-flight musicians, however, are fundamental to every scene. The best moment of the night might be Diego Villegas’s soprano sax (not a traditional flamenco instrument) in cajoling one-on-one with Baras, the pair at once challenging each other and in delighted cahoots. The slickly controlled dance star is suddenly at her most vitally alive. • Baras is at Sadler’s Wells, London, until 7 July. Flamenco festival London runs until 14 July.