“You live like this?” Ross Kemp is saying, as your dad – newly divorced, living in that static home – walks the dog for the fourth time today. The dog is exhausted. “Leave the dog at home today,” Ross is saying, soothingly. “Come on, mate. Countdown can watch itself.” Ross and your dad meander along a cliff saying mostly nothing for a whole afternoon, before going home to smoke roll-ups and eat un-reheated chicken escalopes. Away from your dad, straight to camera, Kemp muses on the reality of man. “Unanchored from meaning, away from hope, newly divorced from Debra … what is a man when he has nothing? He is just a shell and a dog lead.” He opens the cupboard where your dad keeps all those old bottles of piss. “I’m off, mate,” he says. “Maybe download an app.” “You live like this?” Ross Kemp is saying, as a six-berth houseshare full of drama students screech awake and start leaping around the living room in leotards. Technically, this episode is too on the nose (“Yeah, I trained,” Ross says, arms folded firmly across his chest, as half a dozen 20-year-olds pretend to be cats. “Not like this, though. Nothing like this”). But footage of Kemp and his roving gang of actors delivering Shakespeare monologues outside city-centre pubs in the desperate hope for beer money, and getting quietly but firmly bounced out of there by two men with walkie talkies, earns him a long-deserved Bafta nod. “You live like this?” Ross Kemp is saying, as Luciana Berger strolls into the Workspace Formerly Known As Change UK HQ and casually adds another five or six words to its increasingly unwieldy name. After another aborted we’re-just-like-you-are! photo op – Heidi Allen and Mike Gapes emerge sweating from a whiteboard brainstorm session called “What Do People Do?” and decide to get a group selfie in the candles bit of TK Maxx – Kemp calls time on the episode. “It’s basically just a grown-up kids’ club,” he whispers on hidden cam. “They’re two weeks away from making each other hand-written ‘Spy Cards’.” “You live like this?” Ross Kemp is saying, as this week’s subject – a 32-year-old man who calls himself “Valor” – wakes at 4pm and immediately drinks a can of Monster. After a complicated 45-minute routine of feeding his various pet rats, Valor gets ready to leave the house and convinces Ross to try a wallet chain on. “It feels heavy,” Kemp says, as they walk beneath three bridges to get into town to avoid some bigger boys who throw chips at Valor; “I don’t see the point of it.” After practising some diabolo and meeting some fellow goths – “We just like drinking cider and having a laugh!” one says, joylessly – Kemp retires for the evening. “All they do is talk about corsets and forum threads,” he whispers. “I don’t want my taxes funding their lifestyles.” “You live like this?” Ross Kemp is saying, as a 22-year-old Chelsea native poses for 400 consecutive photos outside Peggy Porschen with a jacket draped over her shoulders, 200 photos with the sunglasses on and 200 off. “And what is this, this … engagement?” he asks, squinting at a screen with Instagram notifications pinging constantly off it. After being shown what a Boomerang is – he inelegantly flosses inside a Junkyard Golf – and attending a press party for exactly one drink and a goodie bag, Kemp fully relaxes into the Instagram life. Inevitably, he pivots to putting Facetuned selfies of him at the Palm Jumeirah, and using the discount code “GANGS” for 10% off Bootea. “You live like this?” Ross Kemp is saying, as I wake up at 9am despite a 7.34am alarm and somehow spend 25 minutes getting dressed. Breakfast is: a rough sort of smoothie I make with a frozen banana and coffee. I then forget to eat for five more hours. Kemp turns a chair around and sits on it cool teacher-style and watches, quietly, as I look at Twitter from 10am until 4pm. “I don’t know how he makes any money,” he whispers in the hallway, to a conspiratorial camera planted at chest-height. “Nobody has texted him all day.” Harrowing scene where he watches over my shoulder as I write this sentence and says firmly: “That’s not funny.” Ross Kemp Living With is on ITV Hub now