The smell of runner beans, warm from the pan, competes with barbecues and damp grass for the scent of summer. When I was growing up, bowl after bowl of hot, buttered beans would turn up on my mum’s kitchen table all summer. They are one of the easiest vegetables to grow in our climate, so at this time of year there are bundles. While I love them just warmed, herbed and buttered, a little more imagination is needed to last the next few weeks. We often eat them in a curry – Sri Lankan flavours are my favourite – but here I’ve braised them with tomato, feta, butter beans and oregano for a delicious Turkish-inspired stew, which I eat for dinner with bread or flatbreads to mop up the tomatoey liquor. For something quick but different, I char them on a griddle or barbecue with lemon, yoghurt and coriander seeds for contrast. These are the new smells of summer. A super-simple recipe that sings of summer. Use a griddle pan or barbecue; if you have neither, a dry frying pan will do the trick, too. Prep 10 minCook 10 minServes 2 as a side 400g runner beans, tops trimmed 2 lemons, halved1 tsp coriander seeds 4 tbsp olive oil200g Greek yoghurt Salt and pepper Heat a griddle pan or barbecue until very hot, then, working in batches, cook the runner beans until charred on both sides and a little soft – two to three minutes. While the griddle pan is still hot, add the lemons, cut side down, and char for about a minute. Toast the coriander seeds in another pan over a medium heat for a few minutes, until fragrant, then set aside. When cool enough to handle, squeeze the juice from the charred lemons into a small bowl, and mix with the olive oil, yoghurt and salt and pepper. Serve with the beans, topped with the toasted coriander seeds. I serve these for lunch or dinner with feta, flatbreads and salad. They also make a good starter for a more substantial meal with good bread for mopping up the juices. Prep 15 minCook 30 minServes 4 400g runner beans150ml good extra-virgin olive oil1 medium onion, peeled and finely chopped2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped4 ripe tomatoes (about 400g), roughly chopped1 tbsp red-wine vinegar2 tsp dried oreganoSalt and black pepper 1 x 400g tin butter beans15 green olives (about 85g), pitted and roughly chopped1 unwaxed lemon, juiced1 small bunch dill1 x 200g block feta cheeseFlatbreads, to serve Use a green bean stringer, peeler or small knife to peel the strings from the sides of the beans; some beans are stringless, so if you have bought this kind, then you can skip this step. Cut the beans into thin strips using a knife or a bean cutter. Heat the oil in a deep, heavy-based pan over a medium heat. Add the onions and cook for five to eight minutes, until softened but not browned, then add the garlic and cook for another minute or two. Add the chopped tomatoes, vinegar, runner beans, oregano and a good pinch of salt. You are braising these beans, so you want them to be covered in the oil and tomato mixture: if they are not, add a little water until they are. Turn the heat down to low and cook the beans for 15-20 minutes, then add the butterbeans and olives. Check every now and then to make sure that the beans aren’t dry, adding more water if needed. The beans are done when they are soft but not falling apart. Squeeze in half the lemon juice and grind in some black pepper. Taste, adding more salt, pepper and lemon as needed. Sprinkle over the dill, crumble in the feta, and serve at room temperature with some flatbreads for the best flavour.