The broadcasting watchdog Ofcom has called for new laws to ensure that shows made by UK broadcasters including the BBC, ITV and Channel 4 continue to get top billing on on-demand services such as Sky – but the rules will not apply to Netflix and Amazon. The regulator has recommended that the government bring in legislation to guarantee that the content and streaming services of iPlayer, ITV Hub and All4 are not buried deep in the on-demand services of competitors such as Sky and Virgin Media or through smart TVs such as Samsung. Traditionally, the UK’s public service broadcasters have been guaranteed top slots on TV guides, thanks to legislation introduced in 2003, but the laws do not extend to the on-demand world. The shift in viewing habits – from the arrival of Netflix and Amazon to the introduction of recommendation algorithms and “top picks” – has meant that viewers increasingly bypass the traditional electronic programme guide. Ofcom said: “Public service broadcasting is now at a crucial juncture, as broadcasters face unprecedented competition from global on-demand and internet services such as Netflix, Amazon Prime Video and YouTube. “We are recommending to government that new rules are established to ensure that PSB [public service broadcasting] content is clearly visible on major viewing platforms, such as smart TVs, set-top boxes and streaming sticks.” However, any legislation brought in by the government would not force Netflix and Amazon to give top billing to public service UK broadcasters’ shows, as they do not hold licences with Ofcom and therefore do not have to adhere to UK broadcasting regulation. There are now more than 17 million UK subscribers to Netflix and Amazon. Ofcom acknowledged the “initial focus” was on the increasingly popular method of viewing through smart and connected TVs with the possibility that “other TV platforms and services may be subject to the prominence rules in the future, as technology and viewing habits change”. The chiefs of the UK’s PSBs have accused commercial players of championing their own content, while making rival shows and players more difficult to find. They have also accused Netflix and Amazon of “buying prominence” by paying for highly-visible, branded buttons on the remote controls of some smart TV services to increase the chances viewers go to their services first. If the government elects to implement new legislation it will be a fillip for public service broadcasters as their shows and players will be promoted ahead of those of Netflix and Amazon on services such as Sky Q. Commercial players have claimed they do promote individual shows from PSBs fairly but said that being forced to do the same for their on-demand and streaming players is unfair. For example, the ITV Hub, which aggregates all of ITV’s content, would include shows such as Love Island, Coronation Street, X Factor and Family Guy, which are outside current PSB regulations. “Highly regulated British platforms like Sky already give prominence to on demand content from public service broadcasters,” said Stephen van Rooyen, chief executive of Sky UK & Ireland. “The government should not seek to further regulate the regulated, but instead level the playing field with other platforms.” Ofcom has said that in order to qualify to be promoted by the new laws, broadcasters’ on-demand services would need to deliver an “appropriate range” of high-quality PSB content which may include requirements around particular genres such as children’s shows, current affairs and factual content and programmes “made specifically for UK viewers”. Kevin Bakhurst, the group director of content and media policy at Ofcom, said: “Our traditional broadcasters are among the finest in the world but they’re facing unprecedented challenges from competition and new technology. “So we are ensuring their channels remain easy to find on TV guides, and convening a national debate on the future of public service media – including how we safeguard its benefits for future generations.”