From the moment Darren Clarke struck the first shot of thousands to follow, good and bad, in this 148th Open, the 2011 champion, a local resident no less, tried his silver-haired hardest to rekindle old memories while carrying the crowd’s understandably wild expectations. He did OK. “I didn’t think I’d feel the way I did,” he said after a par round that flirted with the ridiculous in the first six holes. “But the support, everything from the crowds, just everything about it when I was about to hit my tee shot. Wow, it’s the Open Championship, we’re back in Portrush. It was amazing. “I probably wasted two or three shots, which is a bit frustrating, but 71 is not a bad start for me.” They say everybody knows everybody on this sainted island and there are not too many who do not know the 53-year-old Clarke, either personally or by legend. Legends are laced with myth, of course; Clarke, for instance, has lived in Portrush for many years but is from Dungannon, an hour and a half south. The nailed-on local hero is G-Mac, Graeme McDowell, whom my cab driver assured me was not only known to him all his life but was “one of my best mates”. A lot of people around here have been saying similar this week. McDowell, a Ryder Cup winner and 2010 US Open champion, nevertheless had to qualify here with a top-10 place at the Canadian Open last month. What a nonsense it would have been had the most homegrown of them all not featured in the Open on its return to Portrush after 68 years. And what an event that was, the only other time the Open has been held outside England or Scotland. As the Union creaks at the edges politically, sport remains the best glue. The Englishman, Herbert Gustavus “Max” Faulkner, a wartime boxing champion in the RAF, won that 1951 Portrush post-war adventure – and a cheque for £300 – with the help of “a mystery guiding light”, according to Peter Alliss. There would not be another English Open champion until Tony Jacklin in 1969. There were dashed Irish hopes in 1951 for Fred Daly, born and bred in Portrush and an Open champion in 1947. Padraig Harrington was the next Irish winner of the Open, in 2007. History and sentiment are a few of the many reasons this Open means much to so many people. It was Clarke who got first crack at the local applause. How they cheered him when he got the tournament under way at 6.35am in a still-aired paradise that someone from a higher place might have created for golf alone. The game’s ageing rock star stormed into the championship with a healthy biff, swinging mighty arms around an even mightier frame, then strode down the 1st, belly proudly leading the way as the early morning sun blessed his cherry-cheeked Santa Claus features. James Sugrue, the 22-year-old Cork man of a quieter demeanour, followed at a respectful distance, alongside Charley Hoffman, the American. Legends, Irish or not, have media obligations too. Within 20 yards of teeing off, Clarke swerved left for an informal chat with Paul McGinlay and Rich Beem, lending their expertise for Sky, as the other two idled anonymously by. But Sugrue, a big unit with a truncated and powerful swing not unlike John Rahm, birdied the 6th to keep him close to Clarke where it matters, on the scoreboard. They got three holes in before the rain made the first of several visits. Had the Londonderry Air sprung up spontaneously from nowhere, it would not have been a huge surprise. In sunshine and shadow, on they smote. Clarke stroked another perfectly judged birdie putt across the damp grass of the 5th and, relaxed as ever, said to Sugrue: “I don’t know if this is good or bad. You come through my Darren Clarke Foundation and, on the 7th tee, I’m leading and you’re second. There’s something not quite right about that.” Cliches were always going to hold this tournament in their grip, and didn’t a full-length rainbow appear for the Irish duo and their American guest just after 8am, plopping down around the 1st tee? And didn’t Santa Claus go and drop a shot at the 7th after leprechauns had tempted his fairway iron into the thick stuff? The Clarke-Sugrue-Hoffman roadshow rolled on, all three two under – with six others – and back on top after 13 holes. If the gallery did not know much about Sugrue when he began, they did now. Heads started popping up over others and through any gap in the gathering to watch the new kid as he kept his size 12s on the neck of the tournament. He had stirred some interest when he qualified for the Open – and next year’s Masters and US Open – by beating the Scot Euan Walker on the last hole to win the Amateur Championship at Portmarnock last month, the first Irishman to prevail since Alan Dunbar seven years ago. It was difficult to believe there were, according to the rankings, 230 amateurs in the world better than Sugrue, who has a couple of passions: golf and milk. The quartermaster organising the players’ food requirements said he had to order an extra fridge for Sugrue’s order of milk. What had looked like Nirvana when the sun came up seemed a bit hellish by 11am, however. Clarke and Sugrue had tumbled to 30th approaching the last hole, even but deflated. And, sure enough, Clarke soaked up the cheers marching up the 18th. Sugrue hung back. His day will come. No crock of golfing gold for the silver fox, then. The Irish have a couple of spare horses. Shane Lowry from Offaly, about three hours away south, kept them excited as a string of birdies got him to four under for a 67. Rory McIlroy, however, suffered. McDowell too was hugely disappointed with a late collapse, compounded by a lost ball on 18, for 73 after flying early. “Getting off that first tee this morning, I literally had a tear in my eye. It was kind of cool stuff. To conduct myself as well as I did all day and play as well as I did, and then to finish like that was … it hurts. It hurts a lot. But it’s golf.” As Clarke said later: “It’s obviously not just me. It’s Rory, G-Mac, all that sort of stuff. But to see all the people coming here, to see them put their arms around it, it’s fabulous.”