Protests calling for the resignation of the Puerto Rican governor, Ricardo Rosselló, have spread from the streets of San Juan to cities across the United States. As mass protests escalate on the island, the Puerto Rican diaspora in cities like Miami, Chicago, Washington DC, and Seattle have come out in droves to pressure the governor into leaving his post. Rosselló has been embroiled in scandal after the leak of derogatory private messages between him and his cabinet. Messages showed the governor calling a local politician “daughter of a bitch” and using homophobic language to describe the Puerto Rican singer Ricky Martin, who is openly gay. Last week, two of Rosselló’s former top officials were arrested by the FBI on corruption charges. Though the governor apologized for the messages, he told the press that he wouldn’t resign because while he engaged in “inappropriate acts”, he did not commit any “illegal acts or ones of corruption”. In New York City, which has one of the largest Puerto Rican populations in the country, over 100 protesters gathered in Union Square in downtown Manhattan on Wednesday night to condemn Rosselló. A similar demonstration took place in the same location on Monday and Tuesday. The playwright Lin-Manuel Miranda attended Wednesday’s demonstration with his father, Luis Miranda Jr, who was born and raised in Puerto Rico. Miranda, wearing a Ricky Martin Foundation T-shirt, chanted and sang with the crowd while waving the Puerto Rican flag. “The governor has lost the support of the people. The people are leading this,” Miranda said. “This is bigger than a political party. The governor has lost their confidence, and every step he takes now should be about the peaceful transition of power.” Support from the Puerto Rican diaspora plays an important role in pushing for changes on the island, the politician Melissa Mark-Viverito told the Guardian at the demonstration. “It’s always been instrumental, the diaspora’s work, to amplify the voice of Puerto Rico because a lot of times what’s happening on the island is not being addressed or being covered extensively,” Mark-Viverito said. “This is an extension of the voice of Puerto Rico.” Mark-Viverito, the former head of the New York City council, was criticized by Rosselló in one of his private messages. Upset that she criticized the Democratic National Committee chairman, Tom Perez, for supporting Puerto Rican statehood, the governor called her the Spanish word for “whore” in one of his chats. “He’s refusing to leave, and I don’t believe this is going away, in terms of the people’s organizing and people out on the streets,” Mark-Viverito said. Demonstrators at the event, many whom were from the island or were of Puerto Rican descent, said they attended to show their solidarity with those living there, including many of their family and friends who are also protesting. “The diaspora is so connected to our land. We have families there. I have brothers, sisters, nephews, nieces and cousins” said Sandra Betancourt, 63, who held a sign that donned the #RickeyRenuncia hashtag. “It is an abuse, what’s happening over there.” Stephannie Fernandez, 28, a native of Puerto Rico who lives in Miami, said she decided to come to the demonstration as part of her vacation in New York. “We want to be part of it. We think it’s not only the people on the island, but we also need to show our support and make our voices be heard,” Fernandez said, adding that it’s not just Rosselló’s derisive chat messages that inspired her to come to the protest, but the overall corruption that has come out of Rosselló’s administration. “It’s more than [the messages], that was just the tip of the iceberg.”