A bloodless coup by a parade of figures so extreme their own faces look like fancy dress; it feels like I’ve seen all this before in a box set. Not this precise set of events, but the emotional [apply Californian accent] journey. So you’re inside the narrative arc; it’s the end of season three; each new turn of events is significantly worse than the last; you reach for a reaction appropriate to the moment, and you’re clean out; you’ve done every response, every combination of eyebrows, tears and keening, every twitch of outrage and misery. You’ve emptied your larder; all you have left is middle-distance staring. I used to think Carrie in the TV thriller series Homeland had it worst, but that was before Line of Duty: poor Steve, dutifully running the gamut from horror to more horror, as events unfolded exactly as they had last time, only double. If the lies exist for a purpose, always go to the purpose rather than the lie The point is not that we all need to prepare to be cast in a major new drama series, rather, that we need to make a few choices in advance about what we’re going to react to. It sounds like choosing your battles, but that idea is about two sides at war making strategic decisions about where to put their resources. So sure, there’s an element of that, but it assumes a transparency, some residual martial honour, which is not exactly where we are. Think of this more like a dark side Tom and Jerry, with rats instead of mice. If we are caught in a perpetual state of reaction, we’ll lose, and keep on losing. Jacob Rees-Mogg is bothering you about full stops and Oxford commas for a reason: he’s wasting your time with the precise intent that you have Donald Tusk’s voice constantly in your ear, muttering: “Do not waste this time.” He’s on a mission to vex and exhaust. Next week he will say something spectacularly chauvinist about boy children or female dogs, and the week after something about how nannies don’t really need to be paid because they gain such a lot from tending to their betters, and we will all go crazy, and whoever it is that has to drink 10 pints of Strongbow just to forget, it won’t be him. Rigorously ignore the trivial. If you see the bright lights of a Twitter surge in the distance, move along. I find it quite restful to remember that most of the worst things this clown show could come up with, they’ve already said. Somewhere in the cabinet, someone already believes in the death penalty, opposes abortion. OK, I wasn’t expecting direct rule for Northern Ireland, but by and large, there’s not much nefarious intent that isn’t already a matter of public record. Nobody needs to react to anything twice. There is no point arguing with anything that is ludicrous, since it is not delivered as a starting point for mature discussion, and invites no argument. Sure, counter an outright lie in the moment, but remember, always, that this is a new kind of speech – its purpose is not to communicate or persuade, but to dominate. The existence of a shared set of agreed facts is democratising, and therefore – for those not in the business of transparency and equality in the political sphere – quite annoying. If the lies exist for a purpose, always go to the purpose rather than the lie. Your purpose, sir/ madam, is to assert your power with the impunity of your bullshit. I reject more than the untruth, I reject the tactic, which I find tinpot and rather dated. The problem with the new status quo is that it cannot be static: authority politics keeps getting worse until it lands at violence. In the US, this is manifested in the cages of children at its borders; in Italy, in the fines introduced to stop people helping refugees who were drowning; here, in the Windrush scandal (Theresa May, bear in mind, is only middle of the road in retrospect; she was no stranger to absolutism). These acts have a corrosive effect on every citizen who exists alongside them. To say dim down the reaction, ignore the quotidian insult, is not an argument for withdrawing from public life. Nobody’s suggesting anybody tend their own garden. There has never been a more important time to engage, but the engagement has to be practical rather than rhetorical, strategic rather than argumentative, concentrating on institutions rather than people. Anger expended on Boris Johnson’s facile capers is, as resentment, like taking poison yourself and waiting for him to die. Time spent critiquing him is time wasted. Those of us who oppose Johnson ruminate about what will happen when the prime minister’s wild assertions meet the red lines of reality; but we have a reality of our own to confront. The time for argument has passed: there is no killer point, no reasoned line, no fact that will change the course of this government. The only way it changes is when it gets voted out. • Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnist