Multiple sources say the Los Angeles Clippers will land Kawhi Leonard as a free agent after they acquire Paul George from the Oklahoma City Thunder in a huge trade. George will be traded for at least four first-round picks a source told the Associated Press. Leonard, who is from LA, made his decision to sign with the Clippers after the team swung the deal to land George, the person said. ESPN, who first reported the trade, also said the Thunder were getting Shai Gilgeous-Alexander and Danilo Gallinari from the Clippers. Leonard’s move to the Clippers means that for the first time a reigning NBA finals MVP will change teams before the following season. Leonard was also being pursued by the Los Angeles Lakers and the Toronto Raptors, the team he led to last season’s NBA title. The most the Clippers can offer Leonard is $142m over four years, which is the deal he is expected to sign. Players can sign with new teams as early as noon Eastern time on Saturday. Leonard, entering his ninth NBA season, is a three-time All-Star, a two-time champion and one of only three players in league history to win the NBA Finals MVP award with multiple franchises. Notoriously a man of few words, at least publicly, Leonard is generally considered to be the best two-way player in the NBA. He is dominant on the offensive end and airtight on the defensive end. He turned 28 last week and is still very much in his prime. So, too, is George. The 29-year-old, who is owed roughly $105m for the next three seasons, spent the last two years alongside Russell Westbrook in Oklahoma City. George averaged a career-best 28 points last season even while dealing with shoulder issues that required surgery, and the Thunder couldn’t get out of the first-round of the playoffs in either of those seasons. He was a finalist for both NBA MVP and Defensive Player of the Year last season, when he led the league with 2.21 steals per contest. The Lakers didn’t wait long before starting to move on from their quest for Leonard. Danny Green announced that he is signing a two-year deal with the Lakers, meaning he, too, is leaving Toronto. “Kawhi has made his decision. Seems like the announcement is out,” Green said in a video he posted to his social media accounts. “It’s time for me to make my announcement ... I will be teaming up with new teammates in LA, the Los Angeles Lakers.” BREAKING: pic.twitter.com/oIPUwiFLmI Leonard was by far the biggest name left on the free agent market. The other marquee names in this class – Kevin Durant, Kyrie Irving, Klay Thompson and Kemba Walker – all made their decisions known relatively quickly. And like Durant, Irving and Walker, Leonard is changing addresses. The Raptors took a major chance in acquiring Leonard last summer, since they weren’t on his original list of preferred teams when he told the Spurs that he wanted to be moved elsewhere after spending his first seven seasons with them and helping them win the 2014 NBA title. DeMar DeRozan was the biggest piece that Toronto gave up in that deal, with Raptors President Masai Ujiri making the biggest move of his career. It delivered a title. But that wasn’t enough to make Leonard stay in Canada for the long haul. Leonard was simply dominant in the postseason, posting 14 games of 30 or more points. Only Michael Jordan, Hakeem Olajuwon and Kobe Bryant had postseasons with more 30-point games. It’s a massive blow to Toronto’s chances of back-to-back titles, and puts a damper on the Lakers’ offseason quest as well, even though they will finalize a trade Saturday to bring in Anthony Davis from New Orleans and landed the sort of shooter than LeBron James craves by adding Green. “I’m going to come out and play the right way,” Leonard said last month. “I’m not trying to make headlines.” Try or not, he’s part of the summer’s biggest headline now. And he may be about to make the Clippers contenders as well.