John Gosden has said that Enable faces “a tall order” in trying to win Saturday’s King George VI & Queen Elizabeth Stakes at Ascot, despite being a hot favourite in the betting. The trainer accused bookmakers of trying to protect themselves by offering unrealistically short odds about his mare, who is unbeaten since April 2017. “I see the betting industry has put her at a price that they don’t want anyone to be backing her,” Gosden said of Enable, a 4-6 shot for Saturday. He thinks that this is partly a consequence of her jockey, Frankie Dettori, winning four races on a single day at Royal Ascot last month, when bookmakers lost heavily to punters backing his mounts in accumulators. It could have been still more expensive for bookies, had Dettori won the Britannia on Turgenev, as briefly seemed likely. “I was told that if Frankie hadn’t got carried away down at the two and a half furlong marker in the Britannia that day, we could have had a couple of institutions with rather a large hole under the waterline,” Gosden added. “So I’m sure that pricing her where she is, is not realistic to her chances. But it is realistic for them trying to protect themselves, I suppose. I see here more as an even-money shot, with the quality of that field.” Enable won the King George two years ago but Gosden explained why she faces a stiffer task this time. “She won it as a three-year-old filly, getting the weight from the others, just as Taghrooda won it as a three-year-old filly. It’s a little different when you’re older and suddenly you’ve got a Derby winner coming at you and he’s getting the weight from you. And you have a wonderful old horse, Crystal Ocean, who ran a blinder in it last year and won the Prince of Wales well. So this is no penalty kick, absolutely not.” But he added that everything had gone smoothly for Enable in the three weeks since she made an impressive comeback success in the Eclipse. And he is pleased by Dettori’s continued excellent form. “I suppose, like Lewis Hamilton, you get in the zone and you get your confidence, you’re not frightened of anything. It doesn’t mean that there’s not a banana skin around every corner. But having said that, he is riding well.” Referring to Dettori’s front-running tactics that sealed victory in Saturday’s Irish Oaks on Star Catcher, Gosden said: “He was concerned that they might go forward and then pull the pace up. We discussed it before and I said, ‘You know, with me, you’ve got a blank canvas, you paint the painting any way you want.’ And he went out there and thought, no, I’m not happy with what’s happening here, I’m going to set my own fractions.” I’m trusting that the forecast overnight rain at Ayr has actually turned up and made an impact, as that would be splendid news for Tadaany (2.00), not least because the expected favourite wants fast ground. All three of Tadaany’s turf wins have come on ground with some cut and he was beaten just a head on heavy going last month. I’m encouraged by the booking of Paul Hanagan, who has not ridden him before and is flying along just now. Tadaany is available at 10-1. A bit later, it might be worth taking an interest in one of those Irish-trained runners that so often do well at Ayr. Duhallow Noelie (3.35) has not been to the Scottish track before but his trainer, Adrian Keatley, knows the place well and has a 20% strike-rate there. A winner at Dundalk in April, this chestnut has since dropped to a mark 2lb below the one he had that day, following defeats at Killarney and Naas. Soft ground is an unknown but his pedigree gives hope. He’s 8-1. The nap runs at Windsor tonight. Gallic (7.50) loves fast ground and put up a big effort when beaten by a well-treated rival at Newmarket last month. She comes from the Ed Walker yard that is having one of its best ever months, with 10 winners so far. She’s 9-2 because the market prefers Birdcage Walk, whose recent win was on heavy. Earlier, Junior Rip (5.45) looks big at 13-2 from the Roger Charlton yard that might finally be hitting some form. Leo Minor (7.20) could be overpriced at 9-1 for the sprint series final, having dropped a stone in three months and been unlucky in running last time. Ayr 1.30 Dick Datchery 2.00 Tadaany 2.30 Dream House 3.05 Cameo Star 3.35 Duhallow Noelie (nb) 4.10 Betty Grable 4.45 Asian Angel 5.15 Burn Some Dust Cartmel 2.15 Mistiroc 2.45 Justatenner     3.20 Black Anthem 3.50 No Hassle Hoff 4.25 Ink Master 5.00 Winter Lion 5.30 Snowed In Windsor 5.45 Junior Rip 6.15 Mild Illusion 6.50 Elizabeth Bennet 7.20 Leo Minor 7.50 Gallic (nap) 8.20 Two Bids 8.50 I’lletyougonow Beverley 5.55 Whims Of Desire 6.25 Up To Speed 7.00 Ginger Jam 7.30 Detachment 8.00 I Am A Dreamer 8.30 Fard 9.00 Jimmy Krankyar