Cherries are a summer fruit I find hard to resist, with their scarlet juices and rich, berry flavour. They’re labour-intensive to harvest, which makes them relatively expensive, but they are so special, I think they are worth every penny. You don’t need a huge amount for this almondy bundt cake, but they lend it a beautiful, crimson hue and, of course, give it that delectable cherry taste. Gently poaching the cherries in star anise and kirsch does wonders for their flavour. Prep 55 minCook 1 hr 5 minServes 12-14 250g unsalted butter, at room temperature, plus extra for greasing325g plain flour, plus extra for dusting200g fresh cherries, stems removed3 tbsp maple syrup1 star anise, ground in a spice grinder or mortar1 tbsp kirsch (optional)500g caster sugar6 large eggs½ tsp salt¼ tsp almond extract2 tsp baking powder300ml whole milk100g ground almonds1 lemon, finely grated zest For the drizzle1 lemon, finely grated zest and juice175g icing sugar Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/ 350F/gas 4. Using the butter wrapper (or kitchen towel), thoroughly grease a large bundt tin (or a 26-28cm round cake tin) with butter, then dust generously with flour and shake out the excess. Put the cherries, maple syrup, star anise and kirsch (if using) in a small pan with a splash of water, and simmer for four to five minutes until soft, pressing down on the cherries with a potato masher or wooden spoon to release the stones. Cool slightly, then remove the stones. Whizz the cherries to a puree with a stick blender, then set aside. Beat the sugar and butter in an electric mixer until pale – three to four minutes – then incorporate the eggs one at a time until just mixed in. Next, being careful not to over-beat the mixture, fold in half the flour, the salt, almond extract and baking powder, until just incorporated, then stir in the milk. Fold in the remaining flour, followed by the ground almonds and lemon zest. Spoon a third of the mixture into the cake tin, then spoon over half the cherry puree, swirling it in a little. Top with another third of the cake mixture, and swirl in the remaining cherry puree. Top with the last of the cake mixture, then bake on the middle shelf for 50-60 minutes, or until golden and a skewer inserted into the middle section of the cake comes out clean. Cool in the tin for 15 minutes, then turn out on to a wire rack to cool completely. While the cake is cooling, whisk the lemon zest and juice into the icing sugar to make a pourable drizzle (you may need to add a splash of water). Once the cake is cool, spoon over the icing, allowing the drips to fall down the sides. Serve with a pot of tea and a bowl of whipped cream or creme fraiche. Swirl excess cherry puree through homemade vanilla ice-cream for a special dessert: homemade ice-cream always makes people smile. I also love the puree served with Greek yoghurt for breakfast, along with some toasted nuts and seeds.