Callum Hudson-Odoi is set to sign a new five-year contract at Chelsea, curtailing Bayern Munich’s protracted pursuit of his services, and will join Ruben Loftus-Cheek and Mason Mount in committing his long-term future to the London club. The teenager, who earned his first international caps in Gareth Southgate’s senior squad earlier this year, had been keen on a move to the Bundesliga club in January having grown frustrated at a perceived lack of opportunities under Maurizio Sarri. Chelsea had rejected a formal transfer request and a series of bids from Bayern but, with Hudson-Odoi having subsequently forced his way into the first-team more regularly before rupturing his achilles tendon in April, the club had been anxious to secure him to new terms this summer. The winger had entered the final 12 months of his previous deal but, with Frank Lampard appointed as head coach, Eden Hazard sold and a transfer ban potentially opening up a passage to regular game-time, the 18-year-old was more receptive to remaining at the club through whose academy he had graduated. A deal worth around £100,000 a week has been agreed in principle, with Chelsea now working on signing off the legalities. Lampard hopes to have the player fit early in the new season and has already spoken glowingly about his prospects. “I am not going to say things that are pie in the sky but, with his talent, he can be central to this team and to England,” said the head coach. “He can show, right here at Chelsea, that he is going to be a world-class player. I truly believe that.” Chelsea are expected to loan Dujon Sterling to Queens Park Rangers, while Jake Clarke-Salter is interesting Birmingham City, Leeds and Swansea City. Fikayo Tomori, who excelled under Lampard at Derby last season, is likely to join a Premier League side for the coming one to further his own development. Matt Miazga has returned to Reading while Lewis Baker is to move to Fortuna Düsseldorf. Meanwhile Lampard believes he is getting his message across to Chelsea’s players following their 2-1 victory against Barcelona in a pre-season friendly in Japan. Chelsea’s record goalscorer said the work his coaching staff and players were putting in on the training ground was beginning to pay dividends after his summer arrival from Derby. “It has been good on pitch and off pitch,” Lampard said in Saitama, north of Tokyo, on Tuesday. “Particularly today I saw a lot of signs from the work we have done, which is really good for me. There is more work to do but it has been a good trip.” Chelsea were much improved from their display against the Japanese champions Kawasaki Frontale, who beat them 1-0 on Friday, with the striker Tammy Abraham and Ross Barkley scoring.