’Tis right and ’tis proper to throw a party as ’tis back, ’Darkers! “These are difficult times. It’s wise to be selective.” Indeed. But who would not select Poldark for their viewing delight? How I have missed this beautiful, honest and charming television. Poldark came back with a bang tonight with an ambitious new storyline about slavery, a reminder of all the old wounds and offences and some attractively shot set pieces. Plus an actual bang, a fireball and the crowning of the Queen of Nampara. First, a reminder of all the trauma and joy we have endured these four series past. “Is he not the very spit and image of Uncle Ross?” The evil tincture. Elizabeth’s demise. The death of Sindy Doll and Enys’ child. Morwenna and Drake’s marriage. The reconciliation of Ross and Demelza. And that was just the last five minutes of series four. But what’s this? Why is Ross in the Americas? And why is Enys there? Virginia, America, 1781: “Stitch him up, Enys, this war’s not over yet.” Oh, we get it. Then we were in London in 1800 and the woman from Scottish Widows was visiting Captain Poldark’s former officer, now in prison, Ned, the cantankerous Irishman. Oh dear, I murmured to myself, I hope this is not going to get too complicated. “When was it ever wise to get embroiled with Ned?” Right. We see. This series is about Getting Embroiled With Ned. This episode, though, was about grief and resilience. And it will always be about the relationship between Ross and Evil George. “Why would I lay out a penny for him?” (Here was Geoffrey Charles, all grown up and floppy-haired.) “Because you loved his mother.” This was a stunning early moment that showcased both the acting chops of Jack Farthing (Evil George) and Aidan Turner (Ross) and the chemistry between them, which has been an underrated force in this show. It was also a nice piece of exposition about the narrative drive and entire point of this story (namely: the fight for the love of the now-dead Elizabeth). Poldark succeeds on a grand scale because it does these small moments so brilliantly. No sooner was the slavery plot obvious than of course a slave trader had convinced Evil George to also become a slave trader. (It’s only natural.) And the Man With the Black Leather Gloves from the Mosquito Shore Mahogany Company just had to be the sworn enemy of Ross’s troublesome Irish friend, Ned. The battle lines are being drawn and we, the ’Darkers, are on the side of the rags, tags and bobtails all the way. The interwoven scenes where The Man With the Black Gloves and Irish Ned narrated their connection were excellent. The setup bodes well. As does the business with the firebrand Tess Tregidden (Sofia Oxenham, showing great promise here). “Bless thee, Lady Bountiful! Alms for the poor to salve thy conscience!” Poor Demelza. No sooner has she got her feet under the master’s table after life as a scullery maid than the lower orders are threatening to torch her house down. “Maybe I’ll come stay with ’e ’til the ructions be abated.” I wasn’t sure how wise it was for Demelza to go to Tess’s farm dressed like something out of National Velvet. Sure enough, by the next night she was wetting bits of blanket for her children to hold over their faces so that they didn’t burn to death. Demelza has always played with fire, but the introduction of Tess is making it all extremely literal. Highlights? The ghost of the pig’s-tailed vicar still haunting the marriage of Morwenna and Drake. (I’m still hoping the vicar and his pig’s tail will appear, ghost-like, just like Elizabeth.) Prudie’s face at the mention of America; I can’t wait to see how she and Tess will survive under one roof. And I loved how “Ross” it was to go to the theatre and casually foil a plot to kill the king before the curtain went up. Overall, Ross and Demelza’s feelings for each other echo our feelings for this show: “Nothing in my life has meaning without you.” “Nor mine.” I already feel traumatised that this is the final series. Evil George’s henchman Cary Warleggan (Pip Torrens) is not oft mentioned here and this must be remedied. He has always been brilliantly evil in the background, skulking, scowling, scheming and majestic with or without his wonderfully powdered wig. “The girl would make an excellent match,” he growled tonight, rubbing his thighs. Now we know Evil George is going a bit mad hearing Elizabeth’s voice everywhere (welcome back, Heida Reed, from beyond the grave!), perhaps Cary Warleggan will have a more prominent role in hatching evil plans on behalf of Evil George. Long may his powdery wig reign! • “Nothing is constant.” “Except me.” Hmm. Demelza, I’m not sure. Are you really a model of constancy? • “Papa, look what I’ve found!” “TAKE IT AWAY.” Evil George not happy to remember Elizabeth. Because, as we are soon to discover, he now thinks she is still alive. • “His Majesty’s government works in ways which we, mere mortals, can scarce comprehend.” Most 2019 reference ever. • “The remedy for a sore heart is a mission.” No, Ross. The remedy for a sore heart is a regulation reverse-sexism bare-chest moment. And ye knows it. Since when does Ross go fishing in a shirt and a waistcoat? I demand the refund of my licence fee. At least he had his nice hat on, I suppose. Do better in this department, BBC, or it’s Tess’s fireballs for breakfast. Tess challenges Prudie. (Bad idea.) The daughter of Mosquito Shore Man becomes more anachronistically woke by the minute. And mad Irish Ned becomes more mad and Irish, this time with swords.