Propelled by the sugar-free movement, it’s time to embrace – and imbibe – the savoury smoothie. As the US writer Sarah Barnes recently observed, “in the realm of edible stuff that might make me immortal, are we all drinking our salads now?” Of course, people have been putting veg – mostly green leaves – in smoothies for ages, but blending them with the likes of dates, bananas, berries, nut butters and milk. With savoury smoothies, veg takes centre stage, and is often the only ingredient. Think of it as a cold soup in a tall glass, your morning smoothie regreened, with no sugar rush and subsequent hunger pangs; the veg’s fibre hasn’t been juiced out of existence and you have a bank of classic salads from which to take inspiration. Most recipes suggest a base – cucumber, tomato, courgette, carrot – then adding greenery (smoothie staples kale and spinach, obviously, but also lettuce, rocket, etc), season to taste, spice it up (fresh chilli, hot sauce, cayenne, ginger) and add a twist (citrus, vinegar). Lastly, texture stops a smoothie being baby food: nuts, seeds, fresh herbs, or a bit of everything, blended in but also torn and scattered on top as a garnish. Here are three ideas to start with. Tomato, courgette, spinach and almond Put one large ripe tomato, a quarter of a large red pepper and a small courgette (all roughly chopped) into a blender with a handful each of mint and spinach (or kale) leaves. Add half a glass of water. Blitz until smooth. Add a handful of almonds and a dash of both Worcestershire sauce and hot sauce to taste. Blitz until the almonds are chopped up, then garnish with finely chopped almonds. Carrot, cucumber, celery and yoghurt Like a cheat’s kanji (a fermented, probiotic Indian drink). Put one carrot, 10cm cucumber and one stick of celery with leaves (all roughly chopped) into a blender with 175g plain yoghurt, 45g oats, 1tsp wholegrain mustard, half a teaspoon of curry powder and a pinch of cayenne pepper and asafoetida. Add a little water and blitz until smooth. Season with salt, pepper and cider vinegar to taste. Garnish with cayenne or fresh coriander. Play around with the spices – you can use beetroot in here, too. Sorrel, lettuce, avocado and lemon Combine one roughly chopped carrot, the juice of one lemon and handfuls of sorrel and lettuce leaves in a blender with a little water and blitz until smooth. Season with more lemon juice, cayenne pepper, salt and black pepper, and garnish with minced ginger.