A handsome chicken with Tourette syndrome becomes a social media superstar but is led into rash behaviour by its overinflated self-belief. A cow, jailed for political protests, later makes a fortune selling distressed denim associated with its youthful rebel image. A turtle dating a blind, one-eyed elephant gets dumped after checking out the elephant’s younger sister’s knickers. Such is the cast populating Wong Ping’s recent series of animated Fables. Inspired by traditional tales in the Aesop vein, they follow Wong’s stylised animal characters through sequences of grotesque violence, shameful thoughts and taboo sexual behaviour, each fable concluding with a pat “moral” that is anything but. “The unhinged positivity is trying hard to control the malfunctioning muscle. Keep laughing even when you are surrounded by corpses,” reads one. “Striving for your own happiness by all means is already better than suffering together with your family,” reads another. Wong’s exhibition Heart Digger runs across two venues in London – Camden Arts Centre and a temporary space on Cork Street in Mayfair – both of which feature animations, outsized inflatables and sneaky architectural interventions. At Camden, a heart-shaped grave has been dug in the back garden from which emerge segments of a giant dismembered inflatable giraffe. A shaft protrudes from the roof, topped off with a bulbous inverted heart shape, as if this prim Victorian building were sporting a cartoon erection. The animations at Camden are heart-chillingly dark. Dear, Can I Lend You a Hand? (2018) is shown on a screen protruding like a tombstone from a mountain of gilded toy false teeth. In it, an old man finds himself slowly edged out of his apartment by his son’s family, and takes consolation in vigorous masturbation fuelled by a fantasy world constructed from VHS porn and his daughter-in-law’s dirty underwear. Eventually he loses his living space altogether when the son realises he can get rich housing Hong Kong’s ageing population: what, on an individual level, posed an inconvenience, as a mass phenomenon becomes a business opportunity. A self-taught animator, Wong started posting work on his blog in 2010. The morbid, sexual and socially critical subjects cached within the simple, childlike animations caught the attention of local bands, who tapped Wong for promo videos. He first showed in a gallery in 2015; only three years later, his work was exhibited at the Guggenheim and New Museum in New York. He is the inaugural recipient of Camden Arts Centre’s emerging artist prize, selected from exhibits at last year’s Frieze London art fair. But Wong has had other things on his mind. Like many of his contemporaries in Hong Kong, for the past few weeks he has been active in pro-democracy protests. On a superficial level, Wong’s animations recall subversive gross-out cartoons in the vein of Happy Tree Friends. But for those of us watching them out of context, it is important to ponder why a politically engaged young man in a region where creative freedom is under threat might start posting animal fables and sexually charged family dramas free online. For a great deal is happening beneath the psychedelic coloured surface of Wong’s animations. They talk of conflicting desires, inexpressible thoughts, Oedipal struggles, cultural shift and regime change. One story, written by the artist in the days ahead of Heart Digger’s opening in London, suggests a potent cocktail of associations that comes with an exhibition staged at the heart of this former colonial power at this moment. This fable explains that the heart-shaped grave is one end of an escape route dug by Hong Kong’s chief executive and officials: the long giraffe’s neck was buried in the backyard of the government headquarters as a tunnel that would naturally decompose and conceal itself after use. At the conclusion of the story, the artist cuts off the section of the giraffe’s neck in which the officials are hiding, and hides it in storage on Cork Street: “Twenty-two years since the handover, at last, they no longer have to act so furtively, now they’ve returned to the embrace of their adoptive mother.” The dismembered giraffe, then, is a conduit of political metaphor: a vessel in which Wong transports aspects of the vexed three-way relationship between Hong Kong, Britain and mainland China into the gallery. It is also a giant, squashy inflatable that looks very much like a child’s toy, just as his grotesquely funny animations look like kids’ cartoons. The jokes, gross-out violence and childlike appeal of Wong’s work is all of a parcel with its social and political symbolism. Pleasure allows it to slip in, like a Trojan Horse reimagined for a cartoon universe. • At Camden Arts Centre and 5-6 Cork Street, London, until 15 September.