France has demanded immediate consular access to a senior French-Iranian academic based at a top Paris university who has been arrested in Iran, the French foreign ministry has said. Fariba Adelkhah, a prominent researcher in anthropology and social sciences based at the Paris political institute Sciences Po, is believed to have been arrested in June. The detention risks increasing tension between Paris and Tehran at a critical moment in the crisis over the Iranian nuclear programme. European foreign ministers have been meeting in Brussels in an attempt to preserve the deal, which the US abandoned unilaterally a year ago leading to an accelerating reciprocal withdrawal by Iran. The French foreign ministry said it had not yet been given “satisfactory” information on the status of Adelkhah, who is seen as one of France’s top academics on Iran. “The French authorities were recently informed of the arrest of Fariba Adelkhah,” the the foreign ministry said in a statement, confirming that she holds dual nationality. “France calls on the Iranian authorities to shed full light on Mrs Adelkhah’s situation and repeats its demands, particularly with regard to an immediate authorisation for consular access. No satisfactory response has been received until now.” Adelkhah is best known for her book Being Modern in Iran, about changes in the country after the 1979 Islamic revolution. Sciences Po, the elite political science institute where Abdelkhah works, confirmed her arrest but refused to comment. Iranian opposition websites abroad have said Abdelkhah disappeared in June. Iran’s state-run Irna news agency quoted government spokesman Ali Rabiei on Sunday acknowledging a dual national had been arrested, without elaborating. Rabiei said he could not confirm any information. Adelkhah is the latest Iranian national also holding a western passport to be arrested in Iran. The UK has advised dual nationals against travel to Iran, saying the “dangers they face include arbitrary detention and lack of access to basic legal rights”. British-Iranian Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, a project manager with the Thomson Reuters Foundation, has been jailed in Tehran since 2016 on espionage charges. Dual Iranian-American nationals Siamak Namazi and his father, Baquer, are serving 10-year sentences for espionage in a case that has outraged Washington. Meanwhile, Chinese-American Xiyue Wang, a Princeton University researcher, is serving a 10-year sentence for espionage and US national Michael White, 46, was this year also sentenced to 10 years. French academic Clotilde Reiss was detained in Iran for 10 months in 2009-10 before being released in a case that attracted widespread attention at the time. At a similar time to her release, French judicial authorities set free Ali Vakili Rad, who had been convicted of the 1991 murder outside Paris of the ousted shah’s former prime minister Shapour Bakhtiar. The timing led to speculation of a deal struck between the countries over the prisoners, though French authorities denied any exchange.