Dina Asher-Smith was given a close-up view of what it will take to become a true sprint champion as she lost the 100m final at the Anniversary Games to Jamaica’s Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce. Asher-Smith was the undoubted draw of this two-day event but the 23-year-old was forced to settle for second place some way behind the double Olympic champion, who left a strong field trailing. There were some notable British successes on the second day of this weekend‑long competition, including Lynsey Sharp winning the women’s 800m and a world‑leading time in the men’s 4x100m relay. There were shocks, too, in the women’s 5,000m and men’s 110m hurdles. In a programme of uneven quality that served mainly as a marker for the forthcoming world championships in Doha there were also some damp squibs. Asher-Smith’s 10.92sec in the 100m final was one-tenth of a second off her best of the year. She held off a late challenge from the Ivorian athlete Marie-Josée Ta Lou to hold on to second place. But she was also able to watch her rival Fraser-Pryce as she crossed the line, the 32-year-old Jamaican finishing 0.14sec ahead in 10.78sec. “To have placed really highly in that kind of field, which could have been a World or Olympic final, I’m really proud of myself, ” Asher-Smith said after the race. “It’s always a privilege to line up against so many fantastic women but particularly against somebody who is double Olympic champion, world champion, been there, done that, got everything and knows how to do it. It’s a learning experience. “I wanted to go 10.8 today, so seeing that time in the final was a bit frustrating. I’m a competitor. I always want to do as well as I can, I always want to run quicker. But to get two low 10.9s [including 10.91 in the heats], I really can’t moan. I haven’t been above 11 all season, I can’t complain.” Fraser-Pryce paid compliments to the field after a race that leaves her well placed for success in Doha. “Female sprinting is at a height right now and it’s incredible to be able to race with these ladies. My aim for Doha is definitely to be on the podium. For me, it’s a long season from here, so I am hoping my experience will come into play.” One notable British success came from Sharp, who won a tightly fought contest in the 800m. In a field lacking the dominant presence of Caster Semenya, Sharp recorded her best time in three years after she pulled away on the final bend from a group that included the Australian Catriona Bisset and Jamaica’s Natoya Goule. The 29-year-old’s time of 1min 56.61sec was four seconds off Semenya’s world-leading time this year. “It’s nice to get a win because I’ve had a lot of losses over the past couple of years,” Sharp said. “I’m still working on different things in training, trying to stitch things together, but I’m learning every race. Me and Catriona are good friends, we wanted to make it a really competitive race and I think we did.” In the opening event of the day the men’s 4x100m relay team recorded a world-leading 37.6sec to finish ahead of Japan and the Netherlands. The race was defined by faultless baton changes and a dominant third leg from Richard Kilty, the 29-year-old informally known as the Teesside Tornado. Kilty described the performance, which is also the team’s fastest since 2017, as “amazing” and said: “We had fun and were relaxed and were able to let loose on every leg.” There was another world best time recorded in the women’s 5,000m race, where Kenya’s Hellen Obiri emerged from a tough duel to win in 14:20.36. As with the 800m, a group of three broke out to lead the race for the majority of the distance and Obiri took the lead with only 200m to go, kicking on ahead of the Dutch star Sifan Hassan. Another Kenyan, Agnes Tirop, came through to finish second one fifth of a second behind Obiri in a personal best. It was a PB too for Hassan, the multi-discipline star who broke the world record in the mile two weeks ago. Elsewhere there was an underwhelming return from Mutaz Barshim in the men’s high jump and an unremarkable women’s long jump despite the strong field. There was also disappointment for the Olympic and world champion Omar McLeod in the 110m hurdles. Running against one of the strongest fields of the weekend, the Jamaican could finish only third after he was caught in the final 10m by the Chinese athlete Xie Wenjun. Xie finished in 13.28, way off the world leading times and symptomatic of a race with a dozen felled hurdles.