The former health minister Stephen Hammond has told the Guardian he is prepared to take decisive action in parliament to stop a no-deal Brexit, revealing he had been unable to sign up to Boris Johnson’s “do or die” pledge to leave on 31 October without a deal. Hammond, who rebelled in parliament in 2017 in order to grant MPs a meaningful vote on the Brexit deal, will join a number of former cabinet ministers who have said they are prepared to work across party lines to stop a no-deal. Those ministers include the former chancellor Philip Hammond, who met Labour’s Sir Keir Starmer last week to work on a parliamentary strategy to thwart efforts to take the UK out without a deal as well as to prevent Johnson from proroguing parliament. In an article for the Guardian, Hammond, who was sacked as health minister, said he was a pro-business Conservative, not a natural rebel, but that he would back attempts to prevent a no-deal exit. “I would not have signed up to Boris Johnson’s pledge to leave the European Union on 31 October with no deal if necessary,” Hammond wrote, saying he had become increasingly concerned about the “confrontational tone” with which Johnson rejected all possibility of negotiations over a time limit to the Irish backstop.“Many in the new government were content to defy the Conservative whip and ultimately destroyed May’s premiership due to their beliefs,” Hammond wrote. “But Brexit and no deal have hugely different consequences. I know many firm Brexiteers who recognise the challenges of no deal so they want us to leave the EU in an orderly way.”In a coded warning to the new prime minister, Hammond said he should not underestimate the strength of feeling on the Tory backbenches. “Johnson knows he has a wafer-thin majority and there are many pro-deal Conservatives, like me, both on the backbenches and in his government, with a passionately held belief that no deal must never happen,” he said.Hammond said he believed a deal was still within reach but that it “would require compromise on the backstop” rather than rewriting the treaty.“Instead of shouting no deal, it is time to recognise that a decision and a plan is required, to put aside ideology and embrace pragmatism,” he said. “Some have called me a rebel and a mutineer for advocating this compromise. The reality is I am an economic pragmatist and pro-business.” Johnson’s majority will be reduced to just one if the Liberal Democrats win the Brecon and Radnorshire byelection on Thursday. In meetings with the Welsh first minister and a phone call with Leo Varadkar, Johnson reiterated that the UK would leave with or without a deal on 31 October “come what may,” telling the Irish taoiseach that a new deal could only be brokered if the Irish backstop was removed from the agreement, something rejected by Varadkar.