How does one cope with being reared by radical parents? It’s a theme that has absorbed many dramatists including, most recently, Alexi Kaye Campbell in Apologia. But, while Jack Thorne’s new play is avowedly personal, always interesting and beautifully staged by John Tiffany, it left me wishing for a deeper connection between the family foreground and the historical background. Thorne arouses such expectations in two ways: by taking the title of Francis Fukuyama’s book about the triumph of liberal democracies, and by using the structure of a famous Royal Court play, Arnold Wesker’s Chicken Soup With Barley, which followed the fortunes of an East End family over a 20-year period. In Thorne’s case, we see the impact of two Newbury-based leftwing parents, Sal and David, on their offspring in three specific years: 1997, 2007 and 2017. Thorne, as he has shown in the past, writes well about the dynamics of family life. What I longed to see was how this combative, switched-on group reacted to public events. You get a hint of this in the first scene, set in October 1997, when Sal rushes to switch off the radio the second she hears the voice of Tony Blair. We quickly learn that she is a socialist whose passionate views are shared by her husband, David: they’ve even named their three children, Carl, Polly and Tom, after would-be revolutionaries. But the focus is on how the family will react to Carl’s introduction of his posh student girlfriend, Harriet. The result says a lot about the embarrassment of inquisitive intellectuals when confronted by wealth and privilege but, the reference to Blair aside, I felt the scene lacked historical particularity. The same can be said of the succeeding episodes. In 2007 we get a fascinating glimpse of how Sal and David, in disposing of their modest inheritance, judge their children. But it seems surprising that there is only the briefest allusion to Gordon Brown’s rise at the expense of Tony Blair. And, although the final scene deals with a death in the family and charts the changed fortunes of the three children, Brexit is referred to obliquely. No dramatist is obliged to deal with the public world: it just seems odd that, in stark contrast to Wesker’s play, the lives of this particular group are only marginally affected by politics. Tiffany, however, stages the play excellently, using Steven Hoggett’s carefully choreographed movement to capture the ongoing domestic life between scenes. The performances, too, are very good. Lesley Sharp captures Sal’s mix of political earnestness and private generosity. David Morrissey suggests shrewdly that his character, though he loves his children, rates them according to their keenness of mind. Both make highly plausible, if somewhat demanding, parents and there is fine work from Kate O’Flynn as the clever, careerist Polly, Laurie Davidson as the renegade Tom, Sam Swainsbury as the underachieving Carl and Zoe Boyle as the outsider, Harriet. Thorne has written an alluring family saga. I simply wish his play had explored more fully the idea that, in the New Labour era and its aftermath, we have witnessed the slow death of radical England. At the Royal Court, London, until 10 August.