There was always music in my childhood home, but only my brothers sang in public. Being a girl, I wasn’t invited. Then one day, aged 13, I was singing to myself in the hallway of our building. A neighbour came down the stairs and said, “My goodness, Gloria, was that you? I thought it was the radio.” I decided then and there I would perform. We never had much money so there was nothing to fight over. I think that’s why we were so happy. Children belonged to the neighbourhood. Our corner of Newark in New Jersey was a happy bubble detached from the outside world. My first gig was a school Christmas show. I was the only kid with a solo. When the piano started playing I was scared stiff and stood looking out at the audience in silence. It took three attempts until I made a sound – but by the end I’d earned my first standing ovation. I’ve never had stage fright since. Having children was always something I wanted, but my ex-husband was just never interested. It’s funny, I was the only one of my siblings who always wanted kids, yet I’m the only one who didn’t have them. I’ve come to terms with it now, plus I wouldn’t have wanted to raise them in a broken marriage. For a while I was at parties every weekend, although I never truly wanted to be there. I was very insecure and felt everyone around me was prettier, more popular, more interesting and better dressed. In my head I was a bore and a wallflower. My greatest regret now is that I wasted all that time. The Holy Spirit grabbed me by the collar in 1985. I was surrounded by drink and drugs and was about to delve into something unholy. I ran, confused, up to the bathroom, crying and shaking, and stared at myself in the mirror. Then I realised I was having an epiphany. God was telling me, “Gloria, that’s enough.” Dancing is my passion, more so than singing. I’ll forever regret giving it up. The strict church I first joined forbade it, along with wearing trousers. I’ve moved church since then, to one where we’re encouraged to live freely. I’m blessed I don’t have as many lines and wrinkles as other people my age. I put that down to genes and Jesus. As I’ve got older I’ve acquired wisdom, although I don’t like the aches and pains. I find that I’m increasingly forgetful, and easily distracted. I start 10 things and end up finishing nothing. I Will Survive’s success makes me truly grateful. I know how much hope and courage it brings to so many. To this day I still feel elated when I sing it, uplifted. I see the song as the cake, and everything else I do is frosting and decorations. Gloria Gaynor’s new album is Testimony; she appears at Rewind North on 3 August