Philip Hammond has quit as chancellor before Boris Johnson enters Downing Street. Hammond, a staunch opponent of a no-deal Brexit, said the new prime minister should be “free to choose a chancellor who is fully aligned with his policy position”. His departure follows other key resignations including David Gauke as justice secretary, Rory Stewart as international development secretary and David Lidington as Cabinet Office minister. Mick Davis, the chief executive and treasurer of the Conservative party, also stood down on Wednesday morning. Johnson has repeatedly promised to take the UK out of the EU on 31 October, with or without a deal. In his resignation letter to Theresa May, Hammond said: “Despite the uncertainty created by the unresolved issue of Brexit, we have been able to make notable progress in rebuilding the public finances and preparing the British economy for the opportunities ahead.” In a pointed message to Johnson, the outgoing chancellor said the headroom built up in the public finances could only be used for tax cuts and spending increases if a Brexit deal were secured. In his letter to May before her resignation as prime minister, he said: “We bequeath to our successors genuine choices, once a Brexit deal is done: the ability to choose, within the fiscal rules, between increased public spending, reduced taxes, higher investment or progress towards faster debt reduction – or some combination of all four. “After a decade when the aftermath of the 2008-09 recession meant we had no choices, this is a luxury which our successors should use wisely.” Hammond handed his resignation to May after her final session of prime minister’s questions. It is highly unlikely he would have been given a job by Johnson even if he had wished to carry on, given their differences over Brexit. In his resignation statement, Davis warned the Tories risked a “very bad outcome” of putting Jeremy Corbyn in No 10 if the party were not properly resourced. The mining executive, who has been one of the party’s most generous donors over the past six years, wrote to Conservative benefactors on Wednesday, saying “one of my greatest bugbears has been the lack of unity in our party”. Johnson is expected to appoint another chief executive within days. John Griffin, the minicab tycoon who has given the party more than £4m over the past six years, said he would consider taking up the role if it were offered. In his letter, Davis said Johnson, who was elected leader on Tuesday and will become prime minister on Wednesday afternoon, “should be free to choose a team at CCHQ”. He added: “Good politics is not a cheap exercise and if we are not properly resourced and financed, we will risk a very bad outcome – Jeremy Corbyn in No 10.” Davis was a pivotal figure in the party’s structure under May and warned supporters in the spring that the Tories urgently needed more donations to stay afloat. In March, Davis and Brandon Lewis, the party’s chair, addressed a private meeting of the 1922 Committee and told MPs the Conservatives were struggling to raise the £32m needed for the European elections campaign. Griffin, a Brexiter and the founder of the cab company Addison Lee, has previously criticised Davis’s fundraising tactics for failing to encourage smaller donations from a wider group of members. On Wednesday, he said: “I would think about it [becoming chief executive] very carefully, but I realise that the new prime minister will have a lot to do right now. But we do need a change in direction to improve the party’s finances.”