I think it’s clear now – and probably has been for several years to those who keep a courageously watchful eye on these things – that the producers of reality TV shows are having a contempt-off. Meetings must now consist of them sitting round a bucket, hurling pieces of dog excrement into it as they call out the most derivative, asinine, morally bankrupt ideas they can think of. When the bucket is full, they mould the contents into a programme. And so to Channel 4’s Shitmates – Shipmates in its official listing, but that need not detain us here. The conceit? It’s Love Island on a ship. Thassit. If you’ve ever seen Love Island – or absorbed its basics through cultural osmosis – and a ship, you have its essence. I watch them all with the fascinated gaze of a time-travelling Victorian anthropologist. I am baffled by but eager to comprehend the social and inner workings of a species superficially the same as my own and yet so far removed from it. I must take copious notes to returning to my Royal Society brethren for further understanding. There is, in these situations, always a MacGuffin that requires lots of young, attractive people to be brought together on camera to be filmed in their swimwear. This time, it has been decreed that two groups on a cruise round the Med will compete to win a trip to Bali by becoming the most popular, as voted for by all 1,500 passengers on board. We are not told how this popularity will be attained. I think it might be by who spreads the least chlamydia. But, notepad and pencil in hand, let me creep closer to watch events unfold. There are 10 of the usual suspects: perfectly buffed, coiffed, occasionally augmented twentysomethings, built from extruded plastic and delivered from the factory with their original settings active. They are all pathologically confident, enthusiastic, up for a shared vision of a good time and dementedly happy (except when sobbing at a slight real or imagined). Five friends – Sean, Charlotte, Maddi, Lewis and Ashley – are on one team. They are also on another team, but this time they are called Ed, Lauren, Georgia, Jay and Jordan. Or maybe they are different people. Charlotte has a thing for Lewis and they once had a thing together. But Lewis is developing a thing for Lauren. Lauren does not have a thing for Lewis, though she might have a thing for Ed even though Georgia might also have a thing for Ed and they nearly once had a thing together, but she might let Lewis think she has a thing for him if it helps them win the MacGuffin. They compete in deck games that not-so-inadvertently bring their primary and secondary sexual characteristics into occasional contact, with much screaming delight among the 10 and many prayers for death from me. They party, which even-less-inadvertently brings their primary and secondary sexual characteristics into contact with other guests’. This occasions much sobbing from Charlotte (who feels “disrespected” by Lewis because he has not brought his sexual characteristics into contact with hers tonight, maybe ever. I am not sure at this point. I am only sure who Charlotte is because she told us she once bruised her feefee and it “swelled up like a golf ball”. I must consult upon what exactly a feefee is on my return.) They deal with unexpected arrivals – “stowaways”, in the parlance of the organisers. One is Maddi’s work colleague Nadine. Everyone likes Nadine, but because Nadine is old enough to remember the first smartphones they do not know how to use Nadine to boost their popularity. Nadine is lucky there are no ice floes in the Med – she would find herself adrift in no time. The other stowaway is Josh, with whom Georgia once had a thing on holiday. He would still have a thing with her but she is not sure she wants another thing with him. I am getting the measure of this tribe and think it may only be a matter of time, especially if she cannot have a thing with Ed. My notebook is full. It is strange. I feel there is much to learn here and yet my brain is starting to leak out of my ears. It is time, I think, to jump ship.