The 2016 referendum continues to cause mayhem. It is unlikely that a change of prime minister will put an end to this chaos. We are lawyers and write, at this pivotal moment, to reiterate unequivocal support for a people’s vote as the enduring and most effective, democratic means to resolve the Brexit crisis. It is important that politicians, policymakers and commentators properly understand the legal position of a further referendum on any agreement reached by parliament over leaving the EU. This confirmatory vote would not be a “betrayal” of democracy, but rather a continuation of the democratic process that began with the 2016 referendum and has continued in parliament over the intervening three years. Such a confirmatory vote is the only way to ensure that the option chosen is indeed acceptable to more people than the alternatives. There are no legal impediments to such a course of action, and suggestions to the contrary are legally unsound and constitutionally mistaken. As the past three years have shown, the binary choice between remain and leave masked the reality that there was not one leave option, but many. The government and parliament have worked hard to respect the outcome of the 2016 vote, but they have been unable to find a leave option that could command majority support. Many politicians consider that the only way out of the present impasse is for parliament to go back to the people. We agree. This time, to ensure that the result can be implemented, ministers must identify the leave option that they consider best serves the interest of the nation, and their constituents, and invite the people to express a choice between that concrete and implementable leave option, and the alternative option of remaining in the EU. Now, more than ever, the country needs certainty. In the national interest, we urge both candidates for the Tory leadership to commit to implement the legal arrangements for a confirmatory vote as an integral part of the Brexit decision.Helena Kennedy QC, Helen Mountfield QC, Ken Macdonald QC, Jemima Stratford QC, Jessica Simor QC, Konrad Schiemann, Fran Swaine, Kirsty Brimelow QC, Tamsin Allen, Christine Chinkin, Shoaib M Khan, David Feldman QC (Hon), Sonali Naik QC, Philippe Sands QC and more than 400 others. Full list at tinyurl.com/lawyersforapeoplesvote