There will be a handshake at 10am on Tuesday, the Mancunian weather permitting, between captains who are also two of the greatest batsmen of this era. But beyond their right-handedness the similarities fade away. Kane Williamson behind his bushy beard could meander down just about any high street in the world without interruption, a luxury long since gone for Virat Kohli. Williamson captains quietly, almost anonymously with just an occasional wave of the arm to put the fielder in the right place; the close-up camera shots reveal neither disgust nor elation at what has just happened; he speaks softly, he bats softly. He has not failed yet in this World Cup, his lowest score being 27 when he was unluckily run out against England as a straight drive deflected from the fingertips of Mark Wood on to the stumps at the bowler’s end. He glides the ball left or right of fielders; then occasionally he hits a six but only when this has become absolutely necessary. He has to keep batting hoping some of his more muscular colleagues can stay with him for a while. Kohli keeps batting in this World Cup, too. He is also happier for his colleagues to play the risky, gob-smacking shots but somehow we cannot take our eyes off him at the crease. He is dynamic even in defence. In the field he is more visible as captain, prowling aggressively at extra cover. He is obviously the man in charge – except when MS Dhoni behind the stumps is waving his arms to some errant fielder. But Kohli does not mind that. He has matured as a captain; he is not quite so belligerent now but the passion is still ever-present and palpable. So here are two great cricketers, hellbent on finding a way to the final and the greatest prize in international cricket. Kohli bears the burden of leading the favourites in Manchester’s semi-final yet as the India captain the weight of expectation is so constant and so much part of his everyday life he seems to carry it lightly. Williamson may relish being the leader of the underdogs. Both of them have some tricky decisions to make regarding the identity of their best XI at Old Trafford. India have juggled with their bowling attack throughout the tournament with Jasprit Bumrah the irreplaceable constant, and various players have been at number four on the scorecard. The early departure of Shikhar Dhawan through injury was a blow but KL Rahul has proven an excellent replacement at the top of the order. Currently the unreliable though potentially destructive Rishabh Pant is at four. For most of the tournament Kohli has employed two wrist-spinners, a bold and enchanting option; at Headingley against Sri Lanka he played Ravindra Jadeja instead of Yuzvendra Chahal, while Kuldeep Yadav has also missed the odd game. Especially if there is a chance that the ball will turn Kohli must be tempted again by Jadeja, who bats and fields so much better than his peers and whose conventional left-arm spinners tend to land in the right place. Or he may opt for only one specialist spinner on a day when there is expected to be plenty of cloud cover. In which case Mohammed Shami and Bhuvneshwar Kumar will play. Generally India’s batting has been reliable throughout the tournament thanks to the consistency of the top order, in which Rohit Sharma has been rolling out the hundreds; so far there have been five which is a World Cup record. The same cannot be said of New Zealand, who have been overly dependent on Williamson stitching their innings together. At the top Martin Guptill – in between taking some outstanding catches – has yet to fire and he has had two opening partners, Colin Munro and Henry Nicholls, both of whom have struggled. There is still time for a late swerve. They could move up Tom Latham to open, which is what he does in red-ball cricket and play Nicholls at five. In this tournament the yearning to have 10 wickets intact after 10 overs has overtaken the desire for a blistering start. It would be a luxury for Williamson, rather than Kohli, to come to the crease after a significant opening partnership. New Zealand will welcome back Lockie Ferguson, whose extra pace has been invaluable and highly entertaining. Coming on at first change he has become Trent Boult’s most potent ally. There are no certainties in cricket, especially in semi-finals, but it does seem the game will hinge on whether New Zealand, most obviously via Boult and Ferguson, can make early inroads into India’s batting. If somehow they can dispatch Sharma and Kohli cheaply – in this World Cup that means anything less than 40 – there could be an upset.