Madagascar’s remarkable run at the Africa Cup of Nations continued with a penalty shootout win over DR Congo, while Algeria progressed to the quarter-finals with a 3-0 victory over Guinea. Nicolas Dupuis’ Madagascar side held their nerve in the shootout in Alexandria, scoring all four spot-kicks as DR Congo’s Marcel Tisserand and Yannick Bolasie blazed their efforts over. The shootout came after a dramatic 2-2 draw, with Chancel Mbemba heading home late on to deny Madagascar victory inside 90 minutes and neither side able to break the deadlock in a tense period of extra time. Ibrahima Amada had put Madagascar ahead after nine minutes, firing the ball beyond Ley Matampi and into the top corner. Cédric Bakambu equalised 12 minutes later, heading home a terrific cross from the left-back, Ngonda Muzinga. Madagascar, who defeated Nigeria on their way to first place in Group B, reclaimed the lead through Faneva Andriatsima’s header after 77 minutes. Despite Mbemba’s leveller, the underdogs ultimately prevailed to set up a meeting with Ghana or Tunisia. In Cairo Algeria were dominant from early on against Guinea, with Baghdad Bounedjah firing over from a good position before Youcef Belaili put the North Africans ahead in style. The forward played a one-two with Bounedjah before slotting the ball inside the far post. Algeria could not add to their tally in the first half but secured a two-goal cushion just before the hour mark. Ramy Bensebaini found Riyad Mahrez with a through-ball and the Manchester City man controlled deftly before finishing clinically. Adam Ounas added a third in the 82nd minute as Algeria avoided the fate that befell fellow North African heavyweights Morocco and Egypt, securing a quarter-final against Mali or Ivory Coast. The Egypt coach, Javier Aguirre, was sacked just hours after the Africa Cup of Nations hosts were bundled out of the tournament by South Africa on Saturday. Hany Abo Rida, president of the Egyptian FA, announced the 60-year-old’s departure and his own resignation less than three hours after the shock 1-0 defeat in the round of 16. Abo Rida called his resignation a “moral obligation” and urged his fellow board members to follow suit. Uganda have also parted company with their coach after exiting the tournament in the last 16. Sébastien Desabre is leaving the role in a decision the Ugandan FA described as “mutually agreed”, despite leading the Cranes to the knockout stages for the first time since 1978.