When Rory Burns and Jason Roy walk out to bat for England against Ireland at Lord’s this week, it will be a Test opening partnership almost two decades in the making. The two Surrey batsmen first met in the summer of 2000, aged 10, shortly after Roy had moved to London from South Africa. Both were playing for an East Surrey representative side. Born five weeks apart, they would soon share the same school – Whitgift in Croydon – and go on to strike up a close friendship that lasts to this day. There is little room for sentiment in international sport but for England, who have struggled to find a successful pairing at the top of the order since the retirement of Andrew Strauss in 2012, there is the hope this old pals’ act will work. A four-day Test against Ireland starting  on Wednesday should be the ideal start for the pair. After that, though, an Ashes series – starting at Edgbaston a week on Thursday – awaits. There is little time then for Burns and Roy to settle in but at least their shared history should help. “It’s going to be good fun, it’s going to be exciting,” said Burns. “I’ve known Jase since he was 10 so to stride out in a Test match with him is a pretty cool feeling. It’ll be an exciting time. “That was East Surrey district cricket [when we first met] and then Surrey up all through the age groups. Bleach blond hair and a massive head is how I remember him and quite an aggressive stroke player. He hasn’t changed much since.” Roy’s aggression was on full display during the World Cup, the 29-year-old scoring 443 runs in seven innings at the top of the order to play an integral part in England’s successful campaign. But having never opened in first-class cricket before – No 3 is the highest he has batted for Surrey – what chance he can translate his dynamic one-day form to the Test arena? “He probably has to tame it slightly,” Burns said. “But if Jase goes out and plays the way he does and makes good decisions, we’ve seen, particularly over the last year and a half to two years, what a wonderful player he is. So I don’t think there’s any reason why he doesn’t translate his white-ball form to his red-ball form.” Despite their long history together on and off the field, Burns admits he cannot remember ever opening with Roy. “In our school days we might have opened the batting but I think very fleetingly,” he says. Burns, though, is in no doubt as to how good Roy is, after being asked to name a more naturally talented batsmen alongside whom he has played. “I think you’d be hard pushed to find one. Even growing up as a kid you saw Jason hit the ball and strike the ball and do things other kids couldn’t do. Over the last couple of years you’ve seen him rein it in, understand his game a bit more and piece it all together. Hopefully he can keep on doing that and he can translate his white-ball form into red ball.” While Roy has the experience of 116 international white-ball matches to fall back on ahead of this week, Burns has just six England appearances to his name after he made his Test debut in Sri Lanka last winter. The Surrey captain, who turns 29 next month, may average only 25 from his six Test appearances to date, yet his composure at the crease during those matches in Sri Lanka and the Caribbean, during which he managed two half‑centuries, suggests he could soon flourish on the biggest stage – and there is no bigger stage than the impending Ashes series. “I didn’t set the world alight from a personal perspective,” Burns says of his winter. “Obviously Test cricket is a different beast – I thought I went OK. I felt comfortable in the environment, felt comfortable with what I got put up against. I just probably didn’t quite cash in and get the scores I would have liked. “Like most of the guys that are coming in, you’ve got to try and cement a place in the side. Obviously, without scoring the runs I haven’t done that yet. That’s probably my next challenge from a personal perspective. “Test cricket is a different animal at times. When you’ve got a start you’ve really got to push on and make it count. I don’t think the Sri Lanka series really lent itself to the batsmen or the West Indies one actually. I felt comfortable, just couldn’t quite get the runs.” Burns has had a tough English summer, too, having failed to post a half-century in his past 12 innings. “I don’t think I’ve been in my best touch all year,” he admits. “I feel like I need to find my rhythm a bit but it’s two hours at the crease and it starts clicking again.” With a familiar face willing him on at the other end, Burns will hope he can do just that at Lord’s this week.