It is hardly a science but for a rough indication of how promoted clubs can best make a fist of staying up, perhaps it is best to examine some of the more disastrous recent attempts. Derby’s record-low points tally in 2008 sticks in the memory, as does Queens Park Rangers’ feeble effort, largely under Harry Redknapp, four years ago, in which they finished bottom of the pile. But it was the manner in which Fulham spectacularly failed to avoid the drop last season – bulldozing all the hard work that helped them to the Premier League in the first place – that struck a chord with Stuart Webber, the sporting director at Norwich City, who won the Championship in May. “I don’t know the ins and outs at Fulham this past year but it is a great reminder for clubs like ourselves that you can spend £100m and look what happens,” Webber, who claims Norwich will operate with the lowest budget in the top flight this season, told the Eastern Daily Press. “We’re custodians of this place and we have to make sure that we leave it in a better place than we found it. We’ve got to do it our way and we’ve got to trust in that, not get caught up now in the euphoria of having money and all the rest of it, because it would be very easy to and it is tempting to, I’ve got to say, blow a load of money on a centre-forward.” One of the most salient cautionary tales has been right under Webber’s nose since arriving from Huddersfield two years ago, given how Norwich haemorrhaged money and overcommitted to extortionate wages during their last Premier League sojourn, which came to an abrupt end three years ago. They gambled by dishing out lengthy contracts and panic buys backfired, in the same way they came unstuck in 2013; Ricky van Wolfswinkel, Steven Naismith, Johan Elmander and Dieumerci Mbokani (the last two on loan) are forgettable forward acquisitions who hamstrung the club. Aston Villa, too, are familiar with the crippling implications of such spending. This time around Norwich, whose players shared a £10m promotion bonus, are wiser, determined to retain and improve their squad rather than reinvent it. They have tied down 15 players and the manager, Daniel Farke, to new contracts, with key players such as Emi Buendía and Teemu Pukki signing new deals, while they have also rewarded the youngsters Max Aarons, Jamal Lewis and Ben Godfrey, who have been attracting interest from higher up the food chain. Webber acknowledges there is a fine balance between reward and hunger but is loth “to kill the dressing room”. Patrick Roberts has arrived from Manchester City on a season-long loan but Norwich will not be reckless, because of what Webber describes as “a Premier League tax”. “The players are still worth the same for me as when we were a Championship club,” he said. “That is when you have to be strong and robust and willing to move on to the next one. That is why I have huge respect for Spurs and how they have worked. For all of the noise the last couple of years – ‘need to sign, need to sign, need to sign’ – they have just built a stadium, their training ground is ridiculous and they have just been in a Champions League final. That is a real fingers-up to the people that are just saying you have to spend, spend, spend. It is so lazy to just talk about money. What about backing the players you’ve got?” That formula did not work out too badly for Bournemouth, with Eddie Howe standing by almost every player who helped the club to promotion in 2015. Artur Boruc, Adam Smith, Simon Francis, Steve Cook, Tommy Elphick, Charlie Daniels, Andrew Surman, Matt Ritchie, Callum Wilson and Marc Pugh, who relinquished his title as the club’s longest-serving player this summer, featured on the final day of the 2014-15 season at the Valley, where they were crowned Championship champions, and helped secure a 16th-place finish in the Premier League 12 months later. Boruc, Francis, Cook, Surman, Smith, Daniels and Wilson remain key cogs in the Bournemouth machine as they gear up for a fifth consecutive season in the top flight. “I think as long as you see people giving their all every day and you think they have a benefit to the team and the squad, then why not show loyalty?” Howe said last year. The good news for Norwich is that since Leicester in 2014 no team promoted as champions from the second tier have been relegated the following season. The way in which Leicester built around a core Championship-winning group – Kasper Schmeichel, Wes Morgan and Jamie Vardy – paid dividends a year later, when they won the Premier League against all odds. Again, all three players remain integral under Brendan Rodgers, four seasons on. Wolves, too, backed by the wealthy Chinese conglomerate Fosun, did not see sense in ripping it up and starting again last year. Matt Doherty, Conor Coady and Ryan Bennett remain key pillars in a team, fine-tuned by Nuno Espírito Santo, that finished seventh last season. At Sheffield United Chris Wilder has made it plain he plans to stick with a tried and trusted recipe too, having repeatedly emphasised he will not take a “wrecking ball” to his squad. Wilder, who started his coaching career at Alfreton Town, takes great pride in the roundabout journeys he and some of his players have shared. “Mark Duffy walking out at Anfield next year, what is all that about?” Wilder said. “He’s Prescot Cables, he should be on the Kop paying £50 to watch Jürgen. He shouldn’t be playing there next year. Dave McGoldrick shouldn’t be anywhere near it, but he’ll be playing at Tottenham next year, at Arsenal, at Old Trafford. Jack O’Connell. What a fabulous experience for everybody involved in our football club.”