Australia are the top predators of the World Cup, having claimed 11 of 14 titles since 1963, but in Liverpool the hunters will find themselves in unfamiliar territory. The queens of the jungle can hear rustling in the reeds and it is the rest of the netball world planning an attack. After England last year beat the world champions in the dying moments of the Commonwealth Games final, the Australian Diamonds suddenly look beatable. There are other threats, too. South Africa are on an irresistible trajectory and the perennial bridesmaids Jamaica have arguably the world’s best bookends, with the goal shooter Jhaniele Fowler and the goalkeeper Shamera Sterling. Malawi beat the once mighty New Zealand at the Commonwealth Games but the Ferns have rebuilt under Noeline Taurua after missing a medal for the first time. All that sets up the 16-nation World Cup, which begins on Friday, as the most competitive in its 56-year history and one where, for the first time, an antipodean team are not the favourites. That mantle sits with the Tracey Neville-coached England, who not only won gold last April but also beat Australia in London in late January. England bring a mostly unchanged side into the tournament, featuring the leading lights Serena Guthrie, Geva Mentor, Helen Housby and Jo Harten. The Roses want to play down their favouritism, with the defender Eboni Usoro-Brown even trying the mental gymnastics-requiring “underdog favourites” line but England know they are expected to win and, more importantly, Australia know too. We are world No 1 and there’s confidence which comes from that' English netball has been building towards 2019 for years and it is widely suspected they “accidentally” won Commonwealth gold on the road to Liverpool, heaping yet more expectation on them. That is just fine with the Australia coach, Lisa Alexander. “They can say they’re underdogs but they [the English public] are going to be putting them right up there on that gold-medal podium,” Alexander says. “We are world No 1 and there’s confidence which comes from that. We also won the recent Quad Series, although we lost that last game to England.” It is fair to say Alexander and her charges will not have forgotten the way England celebrated that three-goal win at the Copper Box, despite England being pushed all the way by what ended up being a second-string Australia. Given a swath of recent retirements, Alexander has a relatively inexperienced squad in Liverpool, with only 338 total caps: 489 fewer than England and 443 than New Zealand. While experience is not everything, in big tournaments it is often the cool-headed veterans who deliver victory, as was the case with the Australia defender Laura Geitz’s blinding performance in the 2015 World Cup final in Sydney. Only three players remain from that triumphant team: the shooters Caitlin Bassett and Caitlin Thwaites and the midcourter Paige Hadley. The rest of the Australia squad have never played in a World Cup. The nucleus of the team – the goalers Bassett, Thwaites and Steph Wood, the midcourter Liz Watson and the defenders Courtney Bruce, Jo Weston and April Brandley – were part of the losing Commonwealth team. The gamechanging shooter Gretel Tippett, the midcourters Jamie-Lee Price and Kelsey Browne and the young defender Sarah Klau have never played at a World Cup or Commonwealth Games. Alexander, though, is not fazed. “There’s been a few comments [about experience] and the strength of this team and that’s part of what we have to cop. We have to just show what we can do.” The fact her squad play in the best league in the world, Super Netball, gives them an edge, Alexander says. The Diamonds are happy as underdogs. “This group, because it is so different, they are hungry for the chase.” The former England international and UK Superleague coach Tamsin Greenway, who has applied to replace Neville as the England coach after the tournament, says it is the Roses’ time for World Cup gold. “When you win your first gold, the pressure lifts, so winning at the Commonwealths has put a relaxed feel into the England squad. They’ve done it. They’re quite calm,” Greenway says. For perhaps the first time Australia have nothing to lose – and that could be scary, she says. “They’re going to take it up to teams. I’m expecting a really good performance from the Aussie team. And remember, it’s not like they got smashed in that final, they lost by one goal … in the last second.” Housby, who shot that winning goal, and fellow shooter Harten, who play Super Netball, will be central to the Roses’ chances of success – and they have backup in the form of 36-year-old Rachel Dunn, who starred against Australia in January. The defenders Mentor and Layla Guscoth will strike fear into any attack line and through the midcourt, the captain, Serena Guthrie, and Chelsea Pittman will deliver pure grunt. Looking to other nations, New Zealand should not be discounted. With more than 100 caps each, Maria Folau, Casey Kopua, Laura Langman and Katrina Rore know how to win and, fuelled by the embarrassment at missing out on a medal at the Commonwealth Games, they will be no pushover. “Noeline [Taurua] has put together a group that’s conditioned for the tournament. I wouldn’t be writing off New Zealand,” Alexander says. Many believe South Africa, coached by the Australian Norma Plummer, have a chance to win a medal for the first time in 25 years, on the back of many of their stars – including Karla Pretorius, Phumza Maweni, Lenize Potgieter and Bongi Msomi – playing in the best international leagues. “They are a genuine chance,” Greenway says. But it depends how the draw pans out. The Proteas are in the same group as world No 2 Jamaica. With more players than ever with top-flight experience, Jamaica could push for a podium finish in Liverpool. With Fowler at one end and Sterling at the other, it is the connection through the middle that will be the problem for the Sunny Girls. New Zealand have to get past Malawi, who are without the injured shooter Mwai Kumwenda, while Australia and England should not be troubled in the early rounds. Regardless of how the preliminary rounds play out, Australia and England should be in there when it matters. Will netball’s natural order be restored or will England roar from atop the podium, as the prey turn the tables and become the predators?