Alexander and Christoffer Reedtz are targeting a swift return to the Football League after their Danish consortium completed its takeover of Notts County. The Magpies were relegated from League Two for the first time in their history last season and were scheduled to be back in the high court in London on 31 July to face a winding-up order. However, now the Reedtz brothers have assumed control from Alan Hardy they are keen to start rebuilding the club, starting with a quick promotion. “The preparations for the new season, of course, haven’t been ideal, with many players leaving and the club unable to sign replacements until now due to the financial circumstances,” they said in a statement. “Having said all that, our ambition is to bring Notts County back to the Football League as soon as possible. “We will work intensively with Neal Ardley, the manager, and the rest of the team to bring in the right players in order to have a squad that has the necessary quality and depth to hopefully challenge for promotion this season.” The brothers own a football analysis company called Football Radar, which was founded 10 years ago and has headquarters in London and offices in Liverpool and Bulgaria. They plan to use the resources of the company to help rejuvenate the club. “Ever since we founded the company 10 years ago it has been our goal to own a professional football club and we are thrilled that the day has come where we have fulfilled this ambition,” they added. “To now have the opportunity to own a club with such heritage as Notts County is a dream come true for both of us. “A key element in our future strategy will be the work we do at Football Radar. “We believe that the unique data and knowledge we have access to through Football Radar, when used alongside the extensive expertise that already exists within the club, can help Notts County become very successful. “We feel very proud and humbled to be in charge of this fantastic football club. We know how important Notts County are to the fans and to the city of Nottingham, and we can guarantee that we will do our utmost to bring success to the club.”