Video games tend to lean heavily on metaphor when they tackle themes of mental health. In 2018’s Celeste, the journey to the top of a mountain symbolises a path to inner peace; in 2017’s Hellblade, the demons out for your character’s blood can be seen as stand-ins for an internalised trauma. Sea of Solitude sails the same route: protagonist Kay wakes inside a boat in an unnamed city, ravaged by storms and almost entirely submerged in water. Feathered and with glowing red eyes, Kay judges herself monstrous. Using a flare, which functions as a source of light and a waypoint marker, Kay begins her search for a way out of her trappings as an ominous sea-creature follows her every move, ready to strike. Sea of Solitude could easily have fallen into the trap of clumsily equating depression with a darkness that you fight with a source of light from within. The first monsters you meet call Kay worthless and ignorant, and you fight back by clearing dark distortions around light-filled beings. As someone living with clinical depression, I resent the image of it as something inherently dark that needs expunging. But designer Cornelia Geppert has a more personal story to tell here, and this slightly jarring first act is the beginning of Kay’s exploration into her feelings of self-loathing, unhappiness and depression. This is a non-violent experience. Monsters may physically harm Kay, but as a player you never use violence yourself, instead either luring your adversaries into the light or evading them altogether. The first act is all about exploring the sunken city, leaping across rooftops or plunging into the swirling waters while avoiding the sea-creature beneath the surface. Kay can clear away dark influences by sucking them out of the landscape and into her bright orange backpack, transforming the Berlin-inspired city from a dark and stormy place into a sunnier, pastel-coloured urban oasis rendered beautifully in Geppert’s vibrant style and accompanied by a soothing soundtrack. Kay soon realises this world harbours her family, who are in a similar state to her own; settings such as her father’s dilapidated office symbolise not only her loved ones’ states of mind but also a potential source of their problems. The strong narrative kept me engaged, but finding new uses for the flare in differing settings was satisfying too. Sea of Solitude is similar to Shadow of the Colossus in how it acknowledges giant monsters aren’t something to be beaten, and that simply fighting doesn’t mean you’ll succeed. That message is undercut somewhat, however, by the game’s visual language, which is very much about clearing away a dark taint and releasing distorted thoughts. It feels like a concession to conventional video-game progress, where players need an obvious way to track achievements and reach some sort of end state. It also feels at odds with Geppert’s careful writing, which deftly tackles issues such as divorce and bullying and makes it clear that accepting errors in your thinking or letting go of unsalvageable relationships is a lengthy process. This has clearly been a work of catharsis for its designer, blending the two to say something personal and important. By opening up about the lived experience of depression and focusing on the causes rather than the solutions, Cornelia Geppert and the team at Jo-Mei have created something that truly resonates. Sea of Solitude is out now