I love feeding a crowd, but even as a former chef and full-time food person, I still find larger numbers of people daunting. I make big plans: I’ve had pizza parties where I spent the entire evening working the pizza oven, and finally got the last one out as the final guest left. I’ve made a complicated recipe for the first time (classic rookie mistake) which didn’t go to plan and sent me into a panic. But most of the time, I just over-cater by quite a margin. That’s not always a bad thing, as it means lots of leftovers, but it also means that I fork out a lot of cash and spend a really long time cooking. My new mantra when I’m cooking for a crowd is threefold: I make one delicious thing that can be eaten in the hand, that won’t spoil and that can, in the most part, be made in advance – with perhaps one warm element to go with it that I can cook when people arrive; and finally, a really good drink that won’t require, say, squeezing 500 limes. This summer, it’s going to be these sticky celeriac buns: barbecued celeriac steaks topped with a jalapeño-spiked slaw and lots of chilli sauce – bright and happy party flavours. And all washed down with a simple rosé spritz that’s cooling and easy enough on the booze that you could have a few. Try to buy smaller celeriac so they will fit in your buns. If you can only find a bigger one, cut the slices in half before blanching. Prep 20 minCook 30 minMakes 6 2 medium celeriac (about 350g each) For the barbecue sauce2 tbsp red-wine vinegar30g light brown sugar1 tbsp molasses 100ml tomato ketchupJuice of 1 lemonJuice of ½ orange1 garlic clove, bashed½ tsp flaked sea saltA few sprigs fresh oregano or thyme, leaves picked1 sprig rosemary½ red chilli, deseeded For the slaw1 spring cabbage, finely shredded2 large carrots, peeled50g pickled jalapeños, finely chopped, plus 2 tbsp of the pickle liquidJuice of 1 lime1 drizzle honey4 tbsp extra-virgin olive oilSalt and black pepper1 tbsp toasted sunflower seeds50g bunch coriander, leaves only To serve6 burger bunsMayonnaiseChilli sauce or sriracha First make the barbecue sauce. Mix all the ingredients in a saucepan, then simmer briskly over a medium-high heat for eight to 10 minutes, until slightly darker and a little thicker. Set aside to cool. Thickly peel the celeriac and cut into six 3cm “steaks” – they should weigh about 100g each. Bring a pan of salted water to a boil. Simmer the celeriac steaks for 10 minutes, until tender. Drain, put in a large bowl or roasting tray, pour over the barbecue sauce, then leave to marinate. Meanwhile, light the barbecue or heat a griddle pan, then prepare the slaw. Shred the cabbage and carrots, then toss with the chopped jalapeños. Make the slaw dressing in a jar: shake the pickled jalapeño liquid, lime juice, honey and olive oil, and season well. Just before serving, toss the cabbage with the dressing, sunflower seeds and coriander. Once the coals on the barbecue are white, grill the celeriac for five minutes on each side, brushing the steaks with the excess marinade. Layer the buns with a little mayo, a celeriac steak, some slaw and a drizzle of chilli sauce. I spent one long summer sipping this on grassy verges in Barcelona. In Spain, this super-relaxed street-side drinking is called botellón – everyone brings a bottle, glasses and some ice, and it’s as simple as that. This is often made with red wine, which works just as well, and decent shop-bought lemonade. Prep 5 minMakes 1.5 litres 1 bottle good-quality rosé, chilled750ml sparkling water150ml agave or sugar syrup1 unwaxed lemon, sliced1 unwaxed lime, sliced Put everything in a jug with lots of ice and give it a good stir. Pour into glasses, and drink outside in the sunshine or on a warm summer evening.