Your front-page article (Operations cancelled in standoff with consultants, 8 July) provides timely exposure on the disastrous impact on NHS care of the labyrinthine pensions tax system. Our members, hospital consultants and specialists are caught in this web that has even seasoned tax professionals scratching their heads due to how it interacts with the NHS pension scheme. However, your report is wrong in two respects. First, this is not a standoff between medical staff and the NHS. It has become clear through our lobbying of ministers and civil servants that this is a standoff between the entire NHS – staff, trusts, and the NHS nationally – and the Treasury, which refuses to act despite its culpability. When this system was introduced by then chancellor George Osborne, no consideration was given to the impact on the NHS, which relies on hospital doctors working overtime to fill rampant vacancies. Second, it is not a “work to rule”. Hospital doctors have for many years worked beyond their contracted hours, but they now face a form of Russian roulette where they never know which extra shift may be the one to leave them facing tax bills that could run into the tens of thousands. Even before this phenomenon, many of our most experienced doctors were on the brink after seeing real-terms pay fall by a fifth in a decade and the ever-intensifying pressure created by underfunding and understaffing. The latter is a vital subtext of this story: the vacancies crisis among our medical staff has been masked by consultants working routine overtime in order to keep patient services going. Now the mask is slipping. The current pensions chaos will only worsen this problem. For many doctors this is the last straw, with one in five set to leave the NHS over the issue, according to HCSA research. It is therefore astonishing that the Treasury has failed to own up to its responsibility for this disaster in NHS care. It must now act to scrap the taper and reform this system before we lose a generation of doctors for good.Dr Claudia PaoloniPresident, HCSA – the hospital doctors’ union • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition