As someone who has always believed that selling education is wrong, I found myself nodding in agreement with Sonia Sodha’s piece (“Don’t blame parents for wanting the best for their kids. Change the private school system instead”, Comment). I was cheered by her praise of Finland’s abolition of fee-paying and her characterisation of Labour’s position as “a damp education squib”. But then she came up with what seemed to me an over-complicated scheme of tackling the misnamed “public” schools through universities. Why not emulate Finland? The governing bodies of the schools could be given a reasonable period of time to put forward their own propositions for integration into the state system. Many have excellent sporting facilities and some have specialities in music and other areas. They could transform themselves into specialist schools for children who demonstrated gifts in such areas and recruit on merit rather than on the basis of parental incomes.Ian BullockBrighton In an otherwise excellent article, Sonia Sodha suggests that banning private schools from charging fees may be “deemed impossible”. However, determined political action based upon a coherent long-term vision is not only possible but is the key to developing an education system that is both equitable and high-performing. The inherent inequity and social divisiveness of the current system will not be seriously reduced by such measures as widening access to elite universities because the power of the most prestigious schools is not primarily educational but socio-economic: when it comes to having easy access to elite positions in society, going to Eton is vastly more important than going to Oxford. Nor will financial measures such as removing tax advantages have much impact: parents who can afford more than £40,000 on basic fees will hardly notice the increase in costs. Unfortunately, one of the biggest obstacles to radical reform is the Labour party, whose record since 1945 in confronting the powerful interests vested in the system can only be described as one of abject cowardice. For all Corbyn’s ranting about social justice, there is no sign of this changing.Michael PykeShenstone, Lichfield, Staffs Andrew Rawnsley describes the Liberal Democrat leadership hustings he attended as “a cosy evening that never leaves the party’s comfort zones” (“It’s as exciting as a bowl of tofu, but the Lib Dem leadership contest matters a lot”, Comment). His description of the event almost exactly matches the one I attended in Leeds recently. I, too, felt that “the searching questions that the Lib Dems ought to be posing to themselves” are being avoided in the contest. Specifically, I heard little from either candidate about how they would tackle the widespread damage to society and public services caused by austerity, for which, of course, the party was partly responsible during its time in the coalition. There is no doubt that the party’s involvement in the coalition has severely harmed it. There is still a significant risk that the current influx of new members could be reversed if the party and its new leader are unable to offer some clear assurances. I submitted a question to the candidates along these lines, but the chairman did not select it. No other similar question was asked at the hustings. This issue seems to be the elephant in the Lib Dem room. I have rarely heard anyone wanting to discuss it at the meetings I have attended. Can either of the candidates now give us a clear idea of how the party has moved on from its support for the politics of austerity?Richard HassallKnaresborough, North Yorkshire Russia may well decide to “open its taps” in order to avoid losing more market share to the US’s rising production of shale oil but there are darker clouds than mere world trade adjustments on Opec’s horizon (“Opec weighs up the risks if Russia goes it alone on prices”, Business). Wood Mackenzie, the global energy consultancy, reports that, since 2000, oil demand has peaked across much of the developed world. Meanwhile, sales of electric vehicles doubled between 2017 and 2018 and are expected to reach 3m this year. Even as Opec+ tweaks its production to protect its revenues, we see a new surge in solar investment, especially across Europe, increased funds for wind power and further advances in utility-scale batteries. As electric vehicles, powered by ever cheaper renewable energy, threaten oil’s hegemony and signal the advent of a post-oil global economy, Putin may soon opt to turn his taps full on in order to beat his fellow cartel members in the scramble to harvest and quit.Eurof ThomasCardiff Richard Zimler tells of an old friend who prefers to remain anonymous (“I have never met antisemitism in Britain… until now”, Comment). The friend requires Zimler to refrain from identifying two “cultural organisations”, not themselves antisemitic in the friend’s view, but said nonetheless to have discriminated against Zimler as a Jew by refusing to help publicise his new novel. Such an inverted pyramid of anonymity and multiple hearsay leaves the reader in darkness. However, it lets Zimler link the Labour party and the boycott, divestment and sanctions movement with denial of jobs or contracts in Britain to “[Jewish] artists, writers, dancers and singers… scientists, engineers and professors”. These are not actual acts of racial discrimination against real Jews, though they may be reflections of Zimler’s fears. For those who didn’t read as far as Zimler’s own essay, you helpfully put his words into oratio obliqua in the same issue (“Novelist blames UK’s ‘climate of antisemitism’ for cancelled talks”, News). The informant seems to have told your reporter that the organisations “feared [Zimler’s] Jewishness would alienate Palestinian sympathisers among their clientele”. Behind a screen of anonymity, your paper smears “Palestinian sympathisers” as potential racists. Perhaps that is really the point.John SpencerLondon SW18 The need for water companies to act on the climate emergency highlighted the culture of greed and lack of investment that can only be corrected with nationalisation (“Water companies fail to face the challenge of global heating”, Editorial). You say that we need to build more reservoirs, but we already have potential personal reservoirs that are not being exploited. I am talking about rainwater harvesting. New houses should have collection tanks buried underground, while the rest of us should be given a financial incentive to retrofit overground tanks to be able to at least flush toilets, rather than use precious drinking water. Finally, all properties should have a water meter.Tom FarrellSnainton, Scarborough, N Yorks Great interview with David Lynch and a fine photo to accompany it (New Review). But an important question was missing: where does he get his hair done?Paul BishopHarpenden, Herts