Uniquely dysfunctional, incompetent, unpredictable, faction-riven, diplomatically clumsy, inept. That is Donald Trump’s Washington according to Britain’s ambassador, Sir Kim Darroch. Or is it perhaps Theresa May’s London according to the US’s ambassador to London, Woody Johnson? The difference is that we know the first, but not the second. Leak inquiries, like that now ordered into the Darroch memorandum, are Whitehall’s most fatuous blood sport. They seldom find culprits and serve merely to magnify the original embarrassment. Usually the damage has been done. Diplomacy is about appearances and not much else. It is hard to see how Darroch can continue to lobby effectively on Britain’s behalf in Trump’s Washington – not least for highly implausible trade concessions post-Brexit. Yes, as Darroch’s apologists claim, diplomats are expected to speak the truth. Yes, he said little that anyone could not read in a newspaper, which makes it baffling why he bothered to express such simplistic opinions at all. But his profession is publicly to dissemble, to pretend, to practise courtesy and politesse. He may have thought his opinions would be kept secret. If so, he was a fool. With the coming of the internet at the turn of the century, Foreign Office officials were wisely told to commit nothing to electronic communication they did not want to see on the front page of the Daily Mail. Darroch, despite being a security expert, clearly forgot this. He may be the victim of a Brexiter mole in Whitehall or an adept hacker in the Brexit lobby. That was the risk he was taking and he should have known it. British government is currently chaotic. The prime minister is making decisions for her memoirs, not her government. The Treasury has lost control of its budgets. Ministerial loyalties are in shreds. It is small wonder senior officials are “briefing” left, right and centre, against the Labour opposition and Brexit alike. They are going to have to clear up this mess, and very soon – but that is a reason for them to keep their cool. As for the Foreign Office, it should surely scream at all and sundry, “Don’t press send!” With daily cases of online banking fraud, online identity theft, online gambling addiction, online teenage bullying and online sex abuse, it is surely time to see a “worldwide web open to all” as a dangerous toxin, not a boon to humankind. Universal hackability is inevitable. Ruthless regulation and restriction must come. Until then, diplomats and everyone else should realise that if they want to share a secret, close their screens. If Darroch was so keen to convey his pearls of wisdom to his colleagues, he should have given them lunch in his club. • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist