Ursula von der Leyen, the nominee to lead the European commission, will seek to build bridges with members of the European parliament in Strasbourg after a mixed reaction to her historic appointment. Germany’s defence minister was a surprise choice to lead the commission, as EU leaders struggled to reach a compromise during three days of summit talks dedicated to finding people to lead the EU’s most important institutions. Von der Leyen needs to win support from a majority of members of the European parliament in order to take over the reins from Jean-Claude Juncker on 1 November. She is due to meet MEPs in Strasbourg on Wednesday. The 60-year-old former gynaecologist, who speaks fluent English and French and studied at the London School of Economics, would be the first woman to lead the EU executive in its 62-year history. While she has won plaudits for her wide-ranging experience, her appointment has been heavily criticised by Socialist and Green MEPs. The election of the Socialists’ candidate, the Italian MEP David-Maria Sassoli, as European parliament president for a two-and-a-half-year term, came as a consolation. He won a narrow majority, prevailing over a Czech Eurosceptic, the Greens and the radical left, after two rounds of voting. In his victory speech, Sassoli paid tribute to British MEPs and described Brexit as “painful”. He said: “With all due respect for the choices made by British citizens, this is a political transition that has to be pursued in a reasonable way in a spirit of dialogue.” Despite this gain for the left, Socialist members of the European parliament were still smarting that EU leaders had rejected their candidate, Frans Timmermans, the first vice-president of the European commission. His appointment had been fiercely opposed by Poland and Hungary, two governments that are embroiled in a dispute with the EU over violations of the rule of law. Timmermans has been leading talks with Warsaw and Budapest on behalf of the EU, a difficult job that has made him the target of hostile coverage in the state-dominated media in those countries. Hungarian government spokesman Zoltán Kovács said the “Visegrád Four”, which also includes Slovakia and the Czech Republic, had demonstrated their growing strength and influence over the direction of the EU, in part, because they had “toppled Timmermans”. Kovács also boasted of the defeat of Manfred Weber, the centre-right candidate to become European commission president, who was the first choice of the German chancellor, Angela Merkel. Socialist MEPs meeting in Strasbourg on Tuesday reacted with fury when reports emerged of the Von der Leyen compromise, largely because of the defeat for their candidate who has been the EU flag-bearer for the rule of law. “It is unacceptable that populist governments represented in the council rule out the best candidate only because he has stood up for the rule of law and for our shared European values,” said the Socialist MEP leader, Iratxe García. Socialists and Greens were also unhappy that EU leaders had ignored the Spitzenkandidaten process favoured by the parliament, where candidates declared themselves before the European elections. The Von der Leyen appointment “has generated a lot of unhappiness”, one source said, citing “fury” over failure to give Timmermans a big job, but also the German minister’s “chequered” history. “The other fury is that Ursula von der Leyen is already a compromised defence minister in Germany because of her defence contracts,” the source said. In 2018, the German Bundestag launched an investigation into suspected nepotism and errors by Von der Leyen in the awarding of contracts. The minister admitted last year her department had made mistakes in allocating contracts worth millions of euros to external consultants. The defence ministry has long been known as the “ejector seat” in German politics and Von der Leyen has generated negative reviews from army chiefs. Her appointment was part of a package that included proposing Christine Lagarde for the European Central Bank. The Belgian prime minister, Charles Michel, will take over from Donald Tusk as president of the European council. The Spanish foreign minister, Josep Borrell, will be the EU’s foreign policy chief, the third person to hold the role. The Dutch Green MEP Bas Eickhout tweeted that the “very disappointing deal” was old Europe at its worst. “A backdoor deal with candidates emerging to please the national leaders from Germany, France and Spain. This is not the change that was promised to European voters,” he said. 