I love playing in England. As a swing bowler, you would expect nothing less. Being back in the country over the last couple of weeks building up to the Women’s Ashes has given me a chance to reflect on where we were as a team the last time visited for the 2017 World Cup. That didn’t end well at all, when we were knocked out of the tournament by India in the semi-finals. A major theme of the aftermath of that was that the team was not in the healthiest place, both on and off the field. We had to learn to be more honest with ourselves. At the time, we knew we were skilful cricketers but that wasn’t enough to make us as good as we could be as a team. For us to take that next step, it required being far more open with each other without worrying about the consequences of that vulnerability. These days, if somebody isn’t feeling right and isn’t up to it, then they say so. It makes a massive difference. Especially when we are on the road, which was a big part of it for me as an affectionate and needy sort of person that craves being open about everything. I like being comfortable enough with those around me to ask for a hug if I need one, or to give one in return. We are at that level now. Everyone came to the party on this and we have all seen different sides to each other that we wouldn’t have a couple of years ago when it was a stuffier environment. That meant leading into the first proper game of this series, I was pretty open about the nerves I was experiencing. Having not bowled a lot outside on turf with it being winter at home in Adelaide, it led to me bowling poorly in the warm-up games. Being a day-nighter made it worse, because you have all morning to think about it, but then it all fell into place. It was a bit unusual going back to playing in front of so few people, which wasn’t what we experienced the last time we were in England for the World Cup or the 2015 Ashes when the atmosphere was brilliant. But we also know that with so much cricket going on over here at the moment, that was likely to be part of the deal. It didn’t matter once we got out there. Especially fielding first – always my preference as an opening bowler – running out with the team for the first time since March. We had a lot of energy early and set up the win. I wasn’t surprised that England clung on and got themselves back into it. I don’t buy too much into the idea that we are the raging hot favourites here or anything like that. Remember, they made it to the World T20 final last year missing two of their best players. They are scrappers, which is what makes these amazing games. It’s why I love this series more than any other: there’s no hiding. Winning against them is so satisfying because you have to earn it. It is different playing against the old enemy, partly because off the field we aren’t that way. We play so much cricket with and against each other in the Big Bash and Super League over here and at international level, there are a lot of friendships. That can be good and bad when the Ashes comes along. With me, they know me so well that they know all of my slower balls, for instance, and probably the sequence that I bowl them in. I really love that challenge. In saying that, our coach Matthew Mott was pretty honest with us after we made such a mess of the chase. We know that we missed a real chance to stamp our authority on the series by winning by seven or eight wickets rather than by two. The batters know what they did wrong and that’s under control. I was shitting myself on the sidelines ready to go in No 11! But there would have been no benefit in Motty giving us a spray, we all know where we have to improve. One debate to come out of the game, which I found pretty interesting, was the fact that we don’t have access to the Decision Review System in this massive series. It’s very frustrating that we can see the ball tracking up on the big screen yet there is no way for it to be used by either team. I know that Fran Wilson from England got a bad decision and we had a couple too that we could have sent upstairs. I don’t understand why we don’t have access to it. But we aren’t going to spend any energy worrying about it now. That’s also reflective of where we are as a dressing room now compared to a couple of years ago: we focus on what we can control. It’s a much better place and we are such a better team for it. Megan Schutt is an Australian international cricketer and will be writing a weekly column for the Guardian during this year’s Women’s Ashes series