The UK was cautioned “not to waste this time”, and instead all its leaders have managed to achieve is anoint the biggest political punchline of the last three hundred years as PM. If the Conservative Party can survive this ongoing debacle, it can surely survive anything. CMN The good news is after Johnson there will not be an Etonian, or Tory party in power for a long, long time. He is going to make those institutions toxic for a while. This would be funny if it wasn’t real life, all our lives. The bad news is we are probably going to go through the closure of parliament and hard Brexit before we get to the good news. You know with Trump in the White House and Johnson in Downing Street we might as well dispense with the concepts of good news, bad news, fake news or whatever. By the time this is over no one is actually going to believe it happened, it will be taken as a joke, a cautionary tale, an apocryphal story. gavernism Bit of a ramble of a victory speech with some attempts at humour that fell flat. He sounds more like a self help guru than a Prime Minister. paburke He probably wrote that speech this morning in the car. That’s the kind of work ethic that will turn things around I’m sure. Cicadoidea Johnson said in his victory speech that “Over time the Conservatives have had the best instincts, and the best way of balancing instincts, like the instinct to own your own home and keep your own money, and the instinct to share.” I must have missed out on the sharing bit of the Tory party’s instincts. I’ve not seen any evidence of it. I have seen greed and selfishness when it comes to avoiding paying taxes but owning several homes. Well it is all we can expect from the self-servative membership. The have voted to give us drivel mixed with badly constructed Latin and Greek waffle to impress the gullible. bytzer Even though we don’t directly elect our prime minister, an internal governing party leadership change should always be followed by a general election, unless the new leader intends to stick to the manifesto policies which his predecessor was elected on. “No-deal” was definitely not in the last Conservative manifesto as a policy commitment. Johnson has no mandate to govern us. Marmaduke Johnson might be the greatest thing to happen to the UK in a long time. The man has no principles. He just wants to be prime minister. I seriously doubt he has any interest whatsoever in running the country – or leaving the EU. My money says, there will be a few weeks on hand wringing and obfuscation interspersed with a liberal sprinkling of Latin. Then he will have a referendum... and it will be presented as the only option as well as the right thing to do, with a “fighting on the beaches” speech, and what he had said all along. The phrase “on mature reflection” will be used. That will keep him in government for until 2022 – job done. mcnerneyd I’m devastated to hear that Johnson has been voted by Conservatives to become PM. It’s unimaginable that such a chameleon and seemingly buffoonish person could be voted in ... I have to think politicians in the party have taken complete and utter leave of their senses to put him in charge. Someone must have pressed a self-destruct button in Parliament. I pity the country and the poor sods who have to endure the collapse of civility and the economy. Judy Matheson I live in the Netherlands and the next PM is not huge news, mainly because it will make no difference to the EU’s stance on Brexit. Any coverage is about Johnson himself and his maverick status, a sort of Willy Wonka as PM. The UK has been seen as a basket case for quite a while and Johnson as PM just underlines this. ChasHurley Theresa May was an appalling prime minister and it was right for her to resign in disgrace. The Tories have truly sunk to scraping the bottom of the barrel with their coronation of Johnson today. A man who lies with such flagrant compulsion and literally cannot differentiate between his own lies and reality. America has Trump, now we have Johnson. God help us all. gbrading For all those that wanted Theresa May out: good luck with good old Boris Johnson. Be careful what you wish for. Jeffmnld Decent effort by Mr Hunt. Good Lord, if that clown was only able to persuade two thirds of an electorate compose exclusively of his natural backers, the omens are good for this embarrassment to be short lived. Down with this appalling, entitled insult to our democracy. CharliesApples Please don’t call him just “Boris” or any other shortened form of his name, like Bozo or BoJo tempting though it is: it plays directly into his hands. His full name is Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson, known to his friends as Al. “Boris” is Johnson’s preferred public name for himself because it makes him sound warm and cuddly buffoon, and fits in nicely with his carefully cultivated image as a tousled-haired overgrown and irrepressible schoolboy engaging in jolly japes and fun wheezes. I’m convinced it’s why he’s apparently so attractive to the blue-rinse brigade in the Tory party. Tony