When I lived in Brighton, I was lucky enough to live around the corner from a fantastic bakery. It was the sort of place I would pop into for a quick sandwich and end up leaving with my arms full of pastries and crackling loaves of bread. It was also where I had my first taste of bostock, a French pastry originally devised as a thrifty way to use up stale brioche. With its layers of buttery frangipane and toasty, syrup-soaked bread, it’s the sort of weekend breakfast I spend the whole week looking forward to. Bostock traditionally calls for brioche, although this is not something I usually have going spare. The Jewish bread challah makes an excellent substitute, or use any good-quality, thick-sliced white bread. Prep 20 minCook 15 minServes 4 4 large slices brioche, challah, or good-quality, thick-cut white bread1 large handful blackcurrants100g flaked almondsIcing sugar, to serveCreme fraiche, to serve (optional) For the syrup1 large orange, juiced, and zest pared 70g caster or granulated sugar For the frangipane125g unsalted butter, at room temperature160g caster sugar2 medium eggs200g ground almonds1 tsp salt¾ tsp almond extract (optional) Heat the oven to 210C (190C fan)/ 400F/gas 6½. To make the syrup, use a vegetable peeler to pare strips of zest from the juiced orange. Add to a small saucepan along with the juice and sugar. Bring to a boil, simmer for a few minutes, until it is a syrupy consistency, then leave to cool. To make the frangipane, cream the butter and sugar, then stir in the eggs, almonds, salt and almond extract (if using), until combined. To assemble the bostock, arrange the brioche slices on a baking sheet and drizzle with the orange syrup. Divide the frangipane between the four slices and spread evenly. Scatter over the blackcurrants, gently nudging them into the frangipane, followed by the flaked almonds. Bake for 15 minutes, by which time the frangipane will have toasted to a chestnut brown. Dust with a little icing sugar and serve with a spoonful of creme fraiche, if you like.