Ashleigh Barty has been dealt another Wimbledon snub with the world No 1’s second-round match on Thursday being shunted to Court Two. Instead of taking on Belgium’s Alison Van Uytvanck on the showpiece Centre or No 1 Court in the afternoon, the French Open champion will continue her campaign in the morning round of matches. The surprising move from the All England Club comes on the back of the Seven Network’s controversial decision to focus on the all-Australian battle between Nick Kyrgios and Jordan Thompson instead of the top seed’s first-round match against China’s Zheng Saisai on Tuesday. Wimbledon officials have opted instead to showcase British men’s No 2 Cameron Norrie’s match against Japanese eighth seed Kei Nishkori for the Centre Court curtain-raiser. That match is followed by another British player, Johanna Konta, the world No 18, who takes on unheralded Czech Katerina Siniakova before Kyrgios closes out the day against Rafael Nadal in a genuine Centre Court blockbuster. Court One’s first match will see two-time champion Petra Kvitova meet France’s Kristina Mladenovic – the last player to beat Barty before she embarked on her 13-match unbeaten run. Another Briton, Jay Clarke, then plays eight-times men’s champion Roger Federer before seven-times women’s winner Serena Williams takes on Kaja Juvan. Last month the decision not to reshuffle the rain-affected French Open schedule to accomodate Barty’s semi-final on centre court at Roland Garros was branded “unfair and inappropriate” by the WTA’s chief executive, Steve Simon, and a former women’s No 1, Amelie Mauresmo, said it was “a disgrace”. Barty said pre-Wimbledon she was not bothered where she played. “There isn’t a bad court at Wimbledon so wherever I’m scheduled to play on, we’ll go out there and do our best,” she said. “The size of the court, they’re all the same. The lines are the same.” Barty also shrugged off Seven’s move not to show Australia’s best female player since Evonne Goolagong Cawley in her first match as world No 1. “If people can watch my matches, great,” Barty said after her first-round win. “If they can’t, they can’t. That’s up to the broadcasters, not me.” Kyrgios believes Australia have the right to watch Barty ahead of him and said the 23-year-old deserved to have the whole nation behind her. “What she’s doing is incredible. I knew as soon as she got her head right and wanted it enough, the sky’s the limit for her,” Kyrgios said. “I knew deep down she was always capable. When she took that year off, came back, she seemed to be refreshed. Now she’s winning grand slams. It doesn’t surprise me at all. I’m happy that she’s got all the support. She deserves it.” An All England Club spokesperson said in a statement to AAP: “As always, the scheduling of the order of play each day at The Championships is a complex operation. We take great care when scheduling matches and allocating courts. All decisions are made with fairness and the best interests of the tournament, players, spectators and our worldwide broadcast audience at heart.”