The Egyptian writer Ahdaf Soueif has resigned as a trustee of the British Museum because of its position on subjects including BP sponsorship and the repatriation of looted artefacts. Soueif, a trustee since 2012, said her resignation was not because of a single issue. Rather “it was a cumulative response to the museum’s immovability on issues of critical concern to the people who should be its core constituency: the young and the less privileged”. The issues include sponsorship, worker relations and her belief that the museum “hardly speaks” in the debate over repatriation. In a blogpost for the London Review of Books, Soueif accused the museum of collaborating “with those who are unmaking the world before our eyes”. The museum’s chair of trustees, Richard Lambert, said the resignation “of a valued and very supportive trustee for seven years” was a “sad moment” and “unexpected”. He defended the museum’s acceptance of BP sponsorship – a deal which runs until 2023 – and said it had been discussed and endorsed at the board’s most recent meeting, about two weeks ago. “BP has made it possible for us to put on exhibitions which 4 million people have seen … We couldn’t have done without that support.” Lambert, speaking personally, said BP was a major British employer which paid taxes and was committed to the Paris climate agreement. It had “provided us with strong support and we are grateful for that.” The museum, along with the Royal Shakespeare Company and the National Portrait Gallery, are the regular targets of protests against oil company sponsorship of the arts. The actor Mark Rylance last month said he was resigning as an associate artist at the RSC because of it. The other big and hotly debated issue for the museum is about the repatriation of looted cultural objects. Lambert said the museum was “playing a very important part in the debate” and pointed to visits by its director, Hartwig Fischer, to Benin City, Ghana and Sudan as well as regular engagement with museum directors in Berlin and Paris. A high priority, he said, was helping other countries build knowledge and physical infrastructure where objects could go. Soueif, whose books include the Man Booker shortlisted The Map of Love, also criticised the museum for not rehiring cleaners employed by Carillion after the company went into liquidation in 2018. A new trustee to replace Soueif will be chosen from open application by a three person panel, including Lambert. The choice must then be endorsed by the prime minister. Lambert denied he wanted board members who sang from the same hymn sheet. “Let me tell you, as the luckless chairman, trustees like to express their views forcefully.”