For all Johnson’s talk of uniting the country, his cabinet selection speaks of the opposite. It is a declaration of war against anyone who does not believe in Brexit. If we are, as many suppose, headed for a general election, there is only one way I see a happy ending in all of this. An electoral pact with the Liberal Democrats is possible, but not while Labour is led by Jeremy Corbyn. He is not an electable PM, a gift to the Tories, and as divisive a figure as Johnson. Keir Starmer or Tom Watson could stem the flow of votes that Labour are currently haemorrhaging to the Lib Dems. Now is the time for pragmatism to face off the no-deal threat, for sensible politicians from all parties to come together to fight the hard right. Now is the time for the political fight of a generation. So, to the Labour members and MPs supporting Corbyn as leader, I ask: which is the lesser evil? No-deal Brexit, or someone else leading your party? It’s up to you. David HepburnLondon • I have been canvassing recently for the Plaid Cymru candidate in the Monmouth constituency, where comments on the doorstep are both interesting and alarming. There continues to be a reluctance to back the Conservatives or Labour, but support for the Brexit party continues, which may well result in them achieving a major breakthrough. We could be faced with a Conservative/Brexit party coalition taking power. This could only be answered by some form of alliance between Labour, the SNP, Lib Dems and Plaid Cymru. The present attitude of leading Labour members is unhelpful for setting up any such alliance. In light of Savid Javid’s recent comments, I suspect this is already in the minds of the Tories.Janet DaviesAbergavenny, Gwent • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition