I’ve been with my partner for more than four years and we have a daughter together. We also raise her son together. Her ex-husband kicked her and their son out of their house after she was diagnosed with a serious lifelong illness, stating that he couldn’t stay with a sick person. Despite all the pain that the ex has caused, he is still treated like family by most of the in-laws, particularly by my mother-in-law. She thinks of him as wonderful and a “brilliant dad”, and keeps secrets from my partner about him going over for tea and going to family events. She even went to Rome with him after he had abandoned her daughter. My partner and I are treated like spare parts. The ex has moved on and is moving overseas with his fiancee. My mother-in-law has been invited to meet her – she has jumped at the chance and tried to keep it from her daughter. In short, she is completely obsessed with my partner’s ex and has lost the respect of her friends and many family members over her loyalty to him. Am I being melodramatic or are my partner and I, along with our children, being cast out because of this excuse of a man? • When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed. • Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site. • If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns. • All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms