John Crace says Boris Johnson and Jeremy Hunt have been “outdoing one another to prove who is insane enough to be their leader” (The politics sketch, 4 July). I suppose that makes sense given that even the most ambitious politician would have to be insane to want to be prime minister at this time. It’s like a perverse version of Catch-22, with Yossarian Johnson and Major Major Hunt trying to convince Tory members who is the craziest, and therefore best qualified for the top job. That’s some catch, that Catch-22.Beverley MasonCardiff • My two favourite headlines are “Heidi high” for an article about drug use in Switzerland, and the classic News of the World headline: “Nudist welfare man’s model wife fell for the Chinese hypnotist from the Co-op bacon factory” (Letters, passim).David SutherlandOxted, Surrey • You highlight the decline in the use of recycled toilet paper (Report, 6 July). We are in a climate emergency. Who seriously thinks the softness of the loo roll with which they wipe their behinds is worth cutting down virgin forest at any time, least of all now? Recycled loo roll should be bog standard and the rest illegal. And whilst waiting for this to pass surely no one who professes to care about the climate should have it in their house.Dave HunterBristol • Why on earth are people taking all their tech stuff on holiday (Report, 6 July)? Can I suggest people go on a real holiday, leaving all that stuff behind and start enjoying wherever they have decided to go? Your list came to more than £200, enough for at least a couple of drinks every day.David ReedLondon • Sean Ingle refers to Andy Murray as Britain’s greatest ever tennis player (Report, 5 July). Has he never heard of Fred Perry or Ann Jones?Alan WhitfieldStockport, Greater Manchester • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition