David Olusoga is spot on (“The cult of optimism got us into this mess. It’s time to embrace pessimism”, Comment). What we need is certainly not the mindless “we won the war, we can win again” line peddled by Brexit supporters, but also not the kind of pessimism that paralyses action. There are numerous signs that the awakening that Olusoga calls for is brewing. One of the most encouraging developments is that, whereas before 2016 the EU was the subject of almost total national ignorance, now we see a flourishing pro-EU enthusiasm, especially among the young, and a much wider understanding of it, including both its strengths and its weaknesses. Another is the growth of climate activism, again including the young, who are taking to politics in unprecedented numbers. Underlying all this is the growing swing against neoliberal economics. It seems that the “Overton window” is at last moving to the left.Jeremy CushingTaddyforde, Exeter With regard to your letter on antisemitism in the Labour party (“The poison in Labour’s soul”): I was born in Greenock; my grandmother’s neighbour was married to Keir Hardie Drummond; his mother, Flora Drummond, known as the General, was the “right-hand man” of Keir Hardie, the founder of the Labour party. If you cut me down the middle, like Blackpool rock, I would have Labour written through and through. When I was young, my mother, at a lunch party, heard a guest refer to a friend as the “Jew boy”. Ma took a long drag of her cigarette – through a holder obviously – turned to him and said: “Jew man, don’t you mean?”, then she took me by the hand and walked away, saying under her breath: “Silly little man”, the most contemptuous expletive I heard her utter. I had no idea what had just gone on. Until now. I am heartily ashamed of my party, specifically its leader. How dare they? Well, not in my name. As a very dear (Tory) friend of mine said recently: “Babe, they don’t deserve you.” Jennifer TowlandFaringdon, Oxon I was interested to read your piece about the funding gap in education and the work of parent-teacher associations (“Revealed: how wealthy parents widen cash gap between state schools”, Investigation). As the country’s largest membership organisation for PTAs, we are told by parents that they are increasingly concerned about the cost of sending their child to school. In our 2018 survey, 43% of parents said they had been asked to make a contribution to the school fund, while 49% of parents believed the funding crisis was having a negative impact on their child’s education. It’s important to recognise the value of parents as stakeholders in education and that their contribution to schools goes way beyond the money they are able or unable to offer. So, at a time when schools are increasingly pressed for funding, parents shouldn’t be asked to “plug the gap” but instead strong partnerships between home and school should be forming so that every child can continue to thrive and reach their potential.We know that parent groups all across the UK are doing an incredible job of supporting their children’s schools. As the leading membership organisation for Parent Teacher Associations (PTAs), we are fortunate to get to see first-hand how dedicated parents are to championing education – a role they all do brilliantly. The majority of our PTAs are small groups of volunteers who give their time to come together to raise funds (on average our members raised £8,030 in 2018) and build school communities. The time they offer and support they give is truly inspirational. These well-run armies of volunteers are valued by schools across the country, and we are proud to celebrate and champion them. Our parent volunteers come from many backgrounds but are all united in their desire to enhance the learning experience for children and do this by developing communities in schools that everyone can be a part of. John Jolly, CEO, ParentkindTonbridge, Kent Megan Stack describes the moral dilemma that middle-class people face when employing domestic workers to clean their home and look after their children while they themselves do highly paid work elsewhere (Self and Wellbeing, Magazine). There is an easy solution: pay the person what you earn per hour rather than whatever minimum wage you can get away with. What can you earn in one hour while someone else is doing your ironing? This then is what you should pay them – the true value of their labour – while they free you up to do something else. But perhaps you are not willing to do this? The hourly rate would be too great since you would be paying out only what you got back for your own labour? Very well then: clean your own lavatories!Dr Kenneth SmithBuckinghamshire New UniversityHigh Wycombe As a former school governor, I was intrigued by Kenan Malik’s article (“Working class versus minorities? That’s looking at it the wrong way”, Comment). He quoted the Office for National Statistics study of the “ethnic pay gap”, which showed those of Chinese and Indian origin had higher median hourly pay than white British people, Bangladeshi, Pakistani and black people. Surprisingly, this finding reflected the performance of “ethnic” children across the county in their SATs. All the children had the potential to do well at school, which may indicate that there is a link to the value that different cultures place on the education of their children at an early age. An area of further research perhaps.Charles TyrieEdwalton, Nottingham Your Special Report (“Invasion of the e-scooter”, News) made no reference to the increasing problems of e-scooters in parks and local nature reserves (LNRs). These often have “no cycling” bylaws that e-scooters ignore. Many paths in LNRs are steep and winding with sharp blind bends and older people or young children do not expect a powered vehicle to be coming towards them. In our borough, this problem has increasingly been raised at our parks forum meetings.Lucy Roots (Friends of Queen’s Wood LNR), London N10 Vanessa Thorpe’s interesting article seems to imply that the ell is named for the letter of the alphabet (“May I have a word?”, Comment). While this is a useful coincidence, the word goes back to an Indo-European root, el- or ul-, probably meaning “elbow(-joint)”. Irish uilleann pipes are played with the elbow (moving against the bag) and the ulnar nerve passes the elbow. A medieval English ell was about 45in, a handy way to measure out cloth; thus it was the whole arm’s length. A cubit was/is a forearm length. In the Old Testament, the Hebrew ammah – cubit – was the forearm’s length. The ancient Greeks used the word pēchys for the same measure.Terry WalshCartagena, Murcia, Spain Andrew Rawnsley sounds understandably plaintive when he asks: “Where are the politicians with principles they would stand down for?” (Comment). His column seems even more apposite now both Tory leadership candidates have jettisoned the Northern Irish backstop, so making a Brexit deal impossible as they insist on leaving the world’s largest single market. Guto Bebb aside, surviving Remain Tories will probably hesitate. They reason that because Boris Johnson is so wildly unpredictable – to himself, one suspects, as much as to others – there is at least a chance he may betray Jacob Rees-Mogg as he betrayed David Cameron. But if Johnson does go full throttle for no deal, several Tory MPs will surely resign the Tory whip. Labour MPs appear closer to jumping, after Jeremy Corbyn unleashed Momentum’s wild dogs on all who dared question his response to Panorama’s investigation into alleged Labour anti-semitism. This, twinned with Corbyn’s insistence that a Labour government would still pursue Brexit, has led several MPs to conclude they can’t stand under Labour’s tattered flag in an early election. Three have spoken to me in the past week alone and are considering options, including joining the Liberal Democrats.Ed Davey MPHouse of Commons, London SW1 Andrew Rawnsley says that “Boris Johnson is the quintessential contemporary example of a man with strong convictions, all weakly held”. Or even weekly…Helene Grygar Bampton, Oxon