Prep 10 minCook 20 minServes 4-6 as a side 4 eggs (leave out if you’re vegan)1 cos lettuce, or any large, leafy lettuce (250g net weight)2 medium-sized green chillies, very finely minced2 heaped tbsp fresh coriander leaves, chopped, plus a little extra to garnish3-4 garlic cloves, peeled and very finely minced4 slices thin white bread, crusts removed, bread cut into small dice200g mayonnaise (use an egg-free one if you’re vegan)Salt, to taste Juice of ½-1 lime, to taste Boil the eggs for seven or eight minutes, plunge into iced water to stop them cooking any longer and to keep the yolks buttery, then peel once cool enough to handle. Break the lettuce leaves into inch-sized pieces or smaller, wash and drain. Put the chilli, coriander and garlic in a serving bowl. Coarsely chop the eggs into 5mm dice. Fry the bread in oil until crisp and golden (I use a deep-fat fryer, but shallow frying also works). Put the mayonnaise in the serving bowl and toss to combine with the garlic, chilli and coriander, then season with salt and lime juice to taste. Just before you’re ready to serve, add the diced eggs, lettuce and half the croutons to the bowl, and toss – do not overmix, or the lettuce with go limp very rapidly. Serve straight from the bowl, or transfer to a platter, and sprinkle the reserved croutons over the top, with a little more fresh chopped coriander, if you like. This salad is particularly good with fried, breaded chicken or fish. Prep 10 minCook 15 minServes 4-6 as a side For the chimichurri1 tbsp flat-leaf parsley leaves, finely chopped4 tbsp coriander leaves, chopped3 garlic cloves, peeled and minced2 tbsp mint leaves, finely shredded ½ tsp fresh (or dried) oregano, chopped½ tsp red chilli flakes2 tbsp vinegar – cane, malt, red-wine or cider, according to taste2 tbsp fresh lime juice½ tsp crushed black pepper½ tsp salt, plus extra to taste150ml extra-virgin rapeseed or olive oil, or more if needed For the quinoa 1 knob butter300-400g pre-cooked quinoa (or 150-200g dried quinoa, soaked, boiled in salted water for 15-20 minutes, and drained)1 x 400g tin chickpeas, drained (or 200g dried chickpeas, soaked, drained and cooked in boiling water and a pinch of bicarb until soft)200g mixed green leaves – mizuna, baby curly kale, baby spinach, cress First make the chimichurri – you can do this a couple of days ahead. Put everything bar the oil in the small bowl of a food processor, blend smooth, then whisk in the oil until combined. Pour into a clean jar, seal and keep in the fridge until needed. Melt a knob of butter in a frying pan, add the cooked quinoa and fry, stirring to coat, until toasty (or skip this stage, if you prefer). On a platter, mix the quinoa and chickpeas, then add the leaves and toss gently. Just before serving, drizzle on a few tablespoons of the chimichurri, mix again and taste – adjust the seasoning as need be, adding dressing if you think it needs it. This salad goes especially well with fried fish, sprinkled with toasted ground cumin and lime juice. Use up any excess chimichurri by blending into mayonnaise and serving with whatever takes your fancy – it’s great in sandwiches. Prep 15 minCook 30 minServes 4-6 as a side or starter 1 medium carrot, peeled4-5 cabbage leaves, central core removed½ small celeriac, peeled (150-200g)2 small red onions, peeled, halved and cut into very thin half-moons1 small white radish, or mooli (75-100g)4-5 red radishes 1 medium beetroot2 garlic cloves, peeled and minced1 green finger chilli, finely chopped1 tbsp English mustard ½ tsp horseradish sauce (I like my slaw hot, so add more to taste; do not use horseradish cream, though)3-4 tbsp mayonnaise (homemade or ready-made)1 heaped tbsp coriander leaves, finely chopped Shred the carrot, cabbage and celeriac, and put in a bowl of chilled water with the onions to keep crisp. Shred the radishes and put in a second bowl of chilled water, so they don’t taint the flavour of everything else. Shred the beetroot and put it in a third bowl of iced water, so it doesn’t dye everything else. Put the chopped garlic and chillies in a bowl, add the mustard and horseradish, and stir to combine. Add three tablespoons of mayonnaise, stir again, then add the coriander, toss and season to taste – you may want to add a little more mayo, too (if using homemade mayo, you might want to add a good squeeze of fresh lime juice; ready-made mayo is already highly acidulated, so you won’t need any if using that). Drain all the vegetables one by one, and add to the bowl, giving them a good yet gentle mix, to make sure they are completely coated in sauce and evenly distributed. Serve the coleslaw with spicy meat or poultry, especially off the barbecue, or with crisp fried fish or poultry, or in a burger; boiled lobster and prawns go very well with it, too, as do boiled eggs and potatoes. Prep 15 minCook 30 minServes 4-6 as a side or starter 2 large jacket potatoes100g cashew nuts¼ tsp vegetable oil1 x 400g can chickpeas, drained (or 100g dried chickpeas, soaked and boiled until cooked)1 beef tomato, peeled, deseeded and cut into small dice – you need roughly 3 heaped tbsp1 small-medium red onion, peeled and finely chopped (optional)1 heaped tbsp coriander leaves, chopped1-2 green chillies, finely chopped1 tsp chaat masala powder (these vary from brand to brand, so adjust the amount to suit your tastes)Juice of ¼ limeRock salt, to taste Heat the oven to 150C (130C fan)/300F/gas 2. Boil the potatoes in their skins until cooked, then peel, cut the flesh into 5mm dice and put in a large bowl. Put the cashew nuts on an oven tray, add the vegetable oil, then toss to coat – don’t be tempted to up the amount of oil; this is more than enough. Roast until lightly coloured – eight to 10 minutes – then break or cut into pieces, and add to the bowl. Add the chickpeas, tomato, onion, coriander, chillies, chaat masala and a squeeze of lime to the bowl, and toss. Taste and adjust the seasoning, then serve alongside a main course, or as a starter with hot puris. • Cyrus Todiwala is chef/patron of Café Spice Namasté in London E1 and Mr Todiwala’s Kitchen at Heathrow Terminal 5 and Lincoln Plaza London, where on 27 July, he’ll be serving all these salads as part of a summer barbecue; go to lincolnplazalondon.co.uk for full details.