John Arlott introduced me to Neville Cardus. In the early autumn of 1973 Arlott interviewed Cardus – who was Sir Neville by then – for three 25-minute programmes on the BBC. Each was a journey around his life and career. Cardus was in his mid-80s, but looked much older. He looked so old, in fact, that I wondered whether the Queen would shortly be sending him a centenary telegram to complement his knighthood. He sank convivially into a high-backed leather chair, the sort you would find in the library of some distinguished London club. Cardus’s voice, which seemed a generation younger than his body, performed that wonderful trick of conjuring the past. He had witnessed the march of cricket’s history from a front-row seat. He’d once glimpsed the semi-retired WG Grace in the bulbous flesh – grey-bearded and so big-bellied and arthritic that he couldn’t bend down to pick up a ball. He’d sat in a state of constantly recurring astonishment as Victor Trumper played extravagant strokes, each attacking shot going off the bat with a bang. He’d followed Donald Bradman during his four tours of England, a pageant of scoring that made respectable his lust for hundreds and double hundreds. Some of the names that swam out of Cardus’s memory, such as AC “Archie” MacLaren, Johnny Tyldesley and Harry Makepeace, were then complete strangers to me, as remote as figures from medieval England. But Cardus brought sharply back something of them he’d known long ago and so made the dead live again. This occurred especially when describing the man he called “my idol, my hero”, the imperious RH “Reggie” Spooner. He spoke in bursts of love about Spooner, compelling you to love him too. Arlott had known Cardus longer than any cricket writer then travelling peripatetically from ground to ground. He’d co-authored a coffee-table book with him called The Noblest Game. No one was more qualified to shepherd Cardus through each biographical landmark. His illegitimate birth in near slum conditions and the tangled lineage of his family. The fact both his mother and his aunt were prostitutes. The additional fact that he had never met his father. The way in which he underwent the grandest of reinventions, changing everything about himself. His speech. His appearance. His clothes. His class. His baptismal name. Arlott covered the lot. Cardus’s curious assortment of ragtag jobs before his improbable appointment as assistant cricket coach at Shrewsbury school. His compulsion to write for the Manchester Guardian and the peculiarly favourable turns and twists that took him there. His breakdown, physical and mental, that changed the shape and purpose of his life. His fondness for telling a great story ... and for slightly stretching it into an even better one. And, finally, the way in which he showed that writing with elan about cricket didn’t prevent you from writing with erudition on classical music. As Cardus saw it, there was no difference between filing one thousand words on a Hallé concert and another one thousand words on an Ashes Test. The skill was simply to have something new and knowledgeable to say about each of them. That seems perfectly logical to us now only because Cardus established it as such then, few thinking the feat possible until he did it. Arlott knew that. He also knew that Cardus had profoundly changed British sports writing and the sniffy, lowbrow attitudes towards it. He made it a job for artists as well as artisans. Not bad for someone born as a bastard in a backstreet. Before Cardus, there were cricket writers who still called the ball “the crimson rambler”, referred to the wicketkeeper as the “custodian of the gauntlets” and saw the ball speed “across the greensward”, as though the vocabulary of Merrie Olde England had never gone away. What in cold ritual the copy-boy carried to the telegraph office could be starkly factual – paragraphs of piled-up statistics as dry as kindling. Most match reports were written chronologically, beginning with the toss, and read for information rather than pleasure. The reader hardly ever got to find out the way the ground looked, the hue of either the pitch or the sky, or whether the clouds were wispy cirrus or moody nimbostratus. There was little sense either of how a batsman, bowler or fielder went about his work. Or how his physical appearance and mannerisms, quirky or otherwise, influenced it. Cardus painted all this on the page impressionistically and in primary colours. He was the first to share not only what he saw but also what he felt. With him, you got every blade of freshly mown grass and the way in which the light fell across it. He became the first newspaperman to look at a cricket match as a reviewer, wonderfully expressive, rather than a reporter, sent to mechanically tell you how the scoreboard ticked over. The game’s aesthetics, rather than its statistics, motivated him. After him – and strictly because of his influence – came RC Robertson-Glasgow, JM Kilburn, Dudley Carew and, much later, Alan Ross, who said that “thanks to Neville Cardus” there was an expectation that newspapers would print “fine writing about cricket”. In Australia, Ray Robinson and Jack Fingleton fell under Cardus’s influence too. He created a new journalism for sport and established cricket as the poet’s game. The Manchester Guardian basked in the cachet his byline brought them and relished even more the extra copies it sold. He was the patron saint of the newspaper’s circulation department. Arlott spoke of hundreds of Manchester Guardians being bought as soon as sellers untied the string on bundles thrown from the back of delivery vans and then stood beside advertising boards that declared in black capitals: NEVILLE CARDUS REPORTS ON THIS MATCH. I was dumb-ignorant about this as Arlott, the friendly interrogator, gently nudged Cardus through his reminiscences. In fact, I barely knew of Cardus then. I’d switched on the TV specifically to see Arlott. I had to read Cardus. There were none of his cricket titles in the village library. He’d published his last collection of articles over a decade earlier, and it had drifted out of print. I had to go into the dark and musty stacks of the county library, where hardbacks were stored along a mile of metal shelves. The stacks were then just a meaty hit away from Trent Bridge. I found Cardus on Cricket sitting on a neglected row. I blew the dust off the book and took it home. At the foot of page 48, I found the sentence of Cardus’s that is quoted more often than most. Trent Bridge, a “Lotus-land” for batsmen, a place where it was always afternoon and 360 for two wickets. Every summer someone drops it into their own copy. Not only because it saves them from the burden of original thought, but also because it’s convenient shorthand, conveying something that requires no further explanation. The line, already half a century old when I came across it, appeared new and shiny to me, as if the ink was still wet. I like to think I saw in the very moment I read it the exact image Cardus intended to fix in the mind’s eye: a ball as it’s just about to be bowled; the biscuit colour of the pitch; the field well spread and the batsman’s clean white bat raised a little. Just 18 words; but what Cardus manages to evoke in them is all that we imagine – and hope – a cricket match will look like in the dry heat of high summer. We see what we long for – a perfect pellucid day, the sky as an unblemished curve of polished glass, iridescently blue, and the sun so strong and big that every shadow it casts is pit-black. Trent Bridge was my home ground. So I saw also, as if staring at a broad canvas, the sweep of the stately pavilion, the low roofless stands, the rise of George Parr’s elm, the crowd clustered around the loop of boundary rope and a huge spread of parched outfield. I didn’t know then that Cardus had been too timid to step into Trent Bridge before writing it. He’d been sent to Nottingham to cover a Test match for the first time. The day before, he’d got as far as the high gates, beyond them spying “one or two men with cameras” who looked so “alarmingly efficient and possessive” that his courage failed him. He bought a copy of the Nottingham Evening Post and read the groundsman’s boast about the beauty of his pitch. It made Cardus think of Reggie Spooner, and of watching him cut and drive 247 runs there almost two decades before. He composed his most famous sentence while standing at a counter in the city’s main post office. I chased down everything I could and of Cardus’s. When I could eventually afford them, I bought the books in their original bindings. An infatuation had begun. This is an edited extract from The Great Romantic: Cricket and the golden age of Neville Cardus by Duncan Hamilton, published by Hodder & Stoughton. Available now, priced £20.