Oona Doherty is finding out about the law of unintended media consequences. Hard to Be Soft: A Belfast Prayer, the work that has defined her young choreographic career, grew out of a solo she made in 2016. Since then, however, the conversation around Northern Ireland has changed, and Doherty isn’t exactly disposed to be a spokeswoman. “Now it tours all the time and everyone keeps asking: ‘tell me about your life history in Belfast; what do you think about Brexit?’” she says. “I’m really afraid of people buying the show and going like: oh, poor Belfast! Let’s go see this wee play about Belfast before they float off into the …” I absurdly feel the need to apologise. “No, you’re OK,” she adds laconically. If this sentence counts as high praise from anyone, it’s Doherty. The 33-year-old choreographer doesn’t do pretence, either in performance or off stage. When I ask her frequent collaborator the Belfast-born composer David Holmes about her, he uses the word “raw” three times. That visceral honesty has set her apart in a sea of highly curated contemporary dance brands. Doherty has a rare ability to connect a gesture with the web of emotions that sustain it. In Hard to Be Soft, her hair tucked away in a small bun, she re-creates the muscle memory and social performance of masculinity with complete empathy – and choreographs it for others, too, including a moving father-son duo. The production is heading to the Edinburgh festival and London’s Dance Umbrella this year . “I’m so blessed, but I don’t have a clue what’s going on,” Doherty says when we meet in Paris. It’s the middle of the afternoon, and we settle into the tiny, near-empty bar of the Théâtre de la Bastille. She is here to perform Hard to Be Soft. It’s the first time one of her creations is on in central Paris rather than in smaller suburban theatres. French venues have been strong supporters of her work from the start, but she admits the local pecking order had escaped her. “It’s only this time I’ve realised that all my other gigs [have been] at the end of the Métro lines!” She is a rarity among artists, a ball of no-nonsense candour and intuition, who seems physically allergic to affectation. A few days earlier, I had watched a visibly tired Doherty, still reeling from the premiere of her latest work, Lady Magma, deliver one-sentence answers on a panel at the European festival Aerowaves. When asked about her influences, she replied: “I don’t really watch dance.” (Not entirely true, for the record.) She is rested and more expansive when we sit down, but immediately points out that her gender-bending exploration of masculine tropes in Hard to Be Soft as well as 2016’s Hope Hunt came about by accident. The parts she dances in both were created for male friends: she only took over when they got other jobs. “I had never read or looked at anything to do with gender before people started asking me: how did you come to make a gender piece?” Hard to Be Soft also involves a group of powerful teenage girls, the Sugar Army, who are recruited locally in every city and defy “feminine” expectations (without forgoing lipstick, at least in Paris). Doherty has a dream for her international Sugar Armies: to bring them together for a dance protest in front of Stormont. Holmes calls her “a sponge”. “Oona is constantly making it up as she’s going along, listening, absorbing, almost creating on the spot. What she does is really sophisticated, but it’s also completely from the street, so it’s got this real guttural realism to it.” Growing up in Belfast, Doherty was a self-avowed tomboy. Her Northern Irish mother moved the family there from London when she was 10; she and her brother got in trouble for their accents. She started dancing at an after-school club, taking part in her Catholic school’s musicals: “We weren’t allowed to do Cats. I think it was too sexy for the nuns.” Still, religion seeped into her imagination. She once described Hard to Be Soft as a “neon bright prayer”, its design has a church-like feel to it, with light filtering from above. In primary school, Doherty thought she might become a nun herself. When her mother stopped going to mass because it was “too depressing”, she went alone to apologise to God for her family’s absence. She over-corrected in some ways as a young adult, getting kicked out of the London Contemporary Dance School after being beset by feelings of inadequacy. “I started acting up, going out with this crazy Sardinian DJ, partying, spending my student loan. That was to do with my ego,” she says. “But it was the best thing that ever happened to me, because then I worked as a waitress, and for the first time in my life, I really missed dancing.” After completing degrees at Ulster University and Laban, Doherty spent four years with T.r.a.s.h, a now defunct Dutch company known for extreme, punk-style experimentation. In 2014, she gravitated back to Northern Ireland. “I was drinking and drugging up too much, I had to go home,” she says frankly. She has no regrets. “When I’m working, it helps me to remember what it felt like to be really deep in a ketamine hole, to be like: oh, too much coke. All of that can come back into use in the nervous system to make physical states.” Bangor, the Belfast suburb where her family lives and where Doherty can go on long runs by the sea, has the opposite, grounding effect. She is fiercely protective of her roots. “I’m really serious about myself, and a pain in the ass sometimes. That’s why I like Belfast: it keeps you normal. The artists are amazing, but they don’t let you be an idiot.” At the Atelier de Paris in April, she also unveiled a new work, Lady Magma. This 70s-flavoured, slightly chaotic “ritual”, another collaboration with Holmes, was born out of an exercise of breathing and release, and reads like a no-holds-barred exploration of female pleasure. “When you practise really opening a muscle, and really releasing it, that’s the most simple version of how you can actually let go of shit,” Doherty says, adding that it has led to soul-searching about her own body. “When you’re having sex, sometimes it’s hard to truly release into your own pleasure, because you hold a bit of tension. You’re aware, even if you’re trying to not be aware, of what you look like.” For the first time, Doherty isn’t on stage in Lady Magma, although she climbed on a bench in the hall of the theatre before the premiere to lead the audience in breathing exercises. “What are you looking for today?” she asked one woman near her. “Emotion,” came the reply, and some of Doherty’s own stress seemed to ebb away as she nodded. She still has her doubts about her ability as a choreographer. “I haven’t had a show yet that has played and done well without me being in it,” she says. “Maybe I’m just really good at dancing.” The paucity of arts funding in Northern Ireland means there is no guarantee where support will come from for her next projects. Not that Doherty is about to wallow in self-pity. “I’ve had quite an easy life, you know, compared to a lot of people. Geez! I’m a white girl doing contemporary dance! It can’t get much easier.” Hard to Be Soft: A Belfast Prayer is at Edinburgh international festival, 21-24 August, and at the Southbank Centre, London, on 11 October. Hope Hunt and the Ascension Into Lazarus is at The Yard, London, 14–16 October as part of Dance Umbrella 2019.