Don’t leave at the interval. The first of this double bill of queer one-act plays by Tennessee Williams is sluggish and shy, leaving you wondering why the King’s Head bothered to revive it. But the second, never performed in Williams’s lifetime because of its overtly gay characters, is a bullet of a show with a shattering lead performance. Something Unspoken, the first play of the night, is a tentative dip into the relationship between wealthy Cornelia (Annabel Leventon) and Grace (Fiona Marr), her meek secretary of 15 years. On Sarah Mercad’s pastel-pink set, the pyjama-clad pair gingerly skirt the topic of romance, all the while interrupted by a repeatedly ringing phone. Williams cautiously toys with reputation and loyalty, and drops delicate imagery into their language – Grace compares the way they’ve aged, her hair grey cobwebs to Cornelia’s silver – but the lyrical allusiveness quickly becomes monotonous. With little tension and low stakes, there’s not much here to make us care. Director Jamie Armitage has clearly given more time to refining the second piece, And Tell Sad Stories of the Deaths of Queens. Luke Mullins glowsas Candy, a cross-dressing queen who picks up Karl, an emotionally bruised sailor (George Fletcher). Innocent flirtation quickly dissipates and the potential for physical violence pulsates as Karl becomes ravenously cruel. Yet the humour never fades, as Candy uses one-liners as armour. The pacing is delicious, veering between taut and tender. Mullins is astounding, with Candy desperately trying to control what she can’t by throwing tenderness at Karl’s aggression. The physicality of pain is agonising; when Candy tells Karl she’s sick, she touches the same place under her ribs as she does to describe the depth of her loneliness, curling over as if she has been punctured. Joining them are Ben Chinapen and Michael Burrows, whose delicate music accompanies the evening. When Candy is broken, alone and blue as can be, they rush on stage to comfort her. After all she’s been through, it’s hard not to want to do the same. • At King’s Head, London, until 24 August.