Lewis Hamilton celebrated his victory at the British Grand Prix by revelling in the support he received at Silverstone across the weekend. The British driver expressed how much it had meant to him and how he had been inspired to deliver another outstanding performance for the fans at a race he said he will remember for ever. Hamilton won for Mercedes in front of his teammate, Valtteri Bottas, and after question marks over his Britishness earlier in the weekend he made sure he collected a union flag to wave from his car as soon as he could on his in-lap. Acknowledging the fans with the national flag had been important to him, he said. “It is the greatest single moment of any athlete in the world to wave their flag as the number one or with gold or whatever it may be in their home country,” he said. “It’s been the single most incredible feeling and most special moments an athlete can have. I come here and I look at all this incredible support. They always ask you how much does it lift you up and it’s a huge amount of energy but a lot of weight comes with that, a lot of responsibility. “People buy merchandise and flags and you just want to deliver for them so much. “I really just wanted to deliver and, when you achieve something like today and you see all those British flags, one day I will look back and have a picture of me in the car with that flag and I will always be able to look at that and smile until my dying day.” Hamilton became the most successful driver at the British Grand Prix, with his sixth win, surpassing Jim Clark and Alain Prost. He does not generally pursue records but admitted he would now take pleasure in a remarkable achievement. “Unless I stop and think of how many wins I have, I didn’t really know if I had four, five or whatever it was here,” he said. “To then hear that I have six and to be up there with the greats, I remember growing up watching this sport and watching a lot of the greats and meeting a lot of the greats, even working with one of the greats and now to be up there with them is one of the coolest things.”