When Eddy Merckx took to the stage in the Grand Place in Brussels on Thursday, in front of a vast crowd chanting his name at the team presentation of the 2019 Tour de France, the echoes were obvious: 49 years and 11 months earlier the Cannibal and his wife, Claudine, had appeared on the balcony of the ornate town hall to greet another vast, cheering crowd after the first of his five overall wins in the Tour. This weekend’s Grand Départ in Brussels celebrated two events: one is the passing of 100 years since the invention of the Yellow Jersey, arguably the masterstroke that has contributed most to the Tour’s inexorable rise to become the world’s largest annual sports event. The other is that first victory by Merckx in the Tour in 1969. It seems astonishing to devote an entire weekend to celebrating a single win but that victory defined a decade in the Tour and sealed Merckx’s dominance of world cycling. Hyperbolic it might seem but parallels were drawn with the moon landing the weekend that Tour finished in Paris. After his victory Merckx was rushed to a television studio where he was interviewed alongside live footage of the Apollo 11 flight. Both of this weekend’s two stages in and around the Belgian capital pass through Woluwe‑Saint‑Pierre, the suburb where cycling’s nonpareil grew up among the hills and woods that now form the parks that are Brussels’ eastern “green lung”. A single visit by the Tour would be the norm for most of the race megastars such as Bernard Hinault or Miguel Induráin; Merckx gets two. The five-day Merckx-fest – the weekend, plus the buildup – overlooks the fact that the Cannibal’s legacy is not as straightforward as it looks. Merckx was permitted to start that 1969 Tour only after the International Professional Cycling Federation (FICP) overturned a positive test that had seen him unceremoniously ejected from the Giro d’Italia. The Tour route will take in Woluwe‑Saint‑Pierre, where a plaque sits by the site of the Merckx family grocery, but there is no visit to the village of his birth, Meensel-Kiezegem, lost in the countryside of Flanders-Brabant to the east of Brussels. In its Flemish‑speaking fields the Merckx family roots run deep – the local cemetery is packed with gravestones bearing the name – but there are other associations. Members of the extended family were linked to an SS roundup and deportations late in the second world war that followed a partisan murder of one Gaston Merckx, a member of the pro-Nazi Vlaamse Wacht paramilitary. Eddy Merckx’s parents moved across the linguistic frontier to the French-speaking Brussels hinterland a year after the war ended, when the village was still in turmoil. On two wheels Merckx’s shadow is as long as when he retired in early 1978. It is 43 years since a Belgian won the Tour – Lucien Van Impe in 1976. As has often been the case since Van Impe’s best years ended in the early 1980s, no Belgian name figures in the shortlist of putative Tour favourites. It is seven years since a Belgian made it into the top 10 overall – who now remembers Jurgen Van den Broeck’s fourth place in 2012? The paradox, as Van Impe explained, is that in Belgium young cyclists do not dream of the Tour: they want to win the great one-day race, the Ronde van Vlaanderen. In his obsession with the Tour (as in his entire approach to cycling) Merckx was the exception. What of the next three weeks? There are three teams from Belgium but only one Belgian in the field with star quality: the Olympic champion Greg Van Avermaet, the country’s most recent yellow jersey wearer. He leads the Polish squad CCC. The Lotto and Deceuninck squads, the flagship teams for cycling in Flanders, are built respectively round an Australian, the sprinter Caleb Ewan, and a Frenchman, Julian Alaphilippe, the world No 1. The Walloon squad, Wanty‑Groupe Gobert, are valiant triers a world away from Planet Merckx. Ironically one rider with a Merckxian side to him has been left at home: there was no place in Deceuninck’s eight for the multiple Classic winner Philippe Gilbert. The search for a “new Merckx” began before “Big Ted” Van Impe’s reign had ended and it goes on. The pages of Belgian cycling history are spattered with riders ephemerally handed the crown, which seems to bring a curse with it. Currently one man carries that heavy mantle: the teenage prodigy, Remco Evenepoel. Evenepoel is only 19, so it is hardly surprising he is not at the Tour. In his first year as a professional the former footballer has already managed to win the Tour of Belgium and take second place in the country’s time trial championship. The worst that can be said of him is that he has matured precociously. Meantime, along with Van Avermaet, the other Belgian who will be closely watched in the next few weeks is Wout van Aert, who rides for the Dutch team Jumbo‑Visma. Van Aert emerged last season from cyclo-cross as one of the hottest talents in road racing and landed a major win in June in the time trial at the Critérium du Dauphiné, a result overshadowed by Chris Froome’s accident. No one is quite sure how far the 24-year-old can progress but he could be put into the spotlight as early as Sunday, when Jumbo will be one of the favourites in the team time trial, and any of the hilly stages during the first two weeks could suit his – and Van Avermaet’s – all‑round ability. After which the Tour will hit the mountains and it will be backmarker business as usual for post-Merckx Belgium.