‘The last thing I did in any kind of creative-writing capacity would have been my English GCSE,” Sheila Atim laughs. The 28-year-old actor, who won an Olivier award for the Bob Dylan musical Girl from the North Country and has landed a role in the hotly anticipated Game of Thrones prequel, has now turned writer. Her debut play, Anguis, is at the Edinburgh fringe this summer. “A producer approached me, initially in a music capacity,” she tells me over the phone during a rare break in her hectic schedule. Atim is a multi-instrumentalist and composed Time Is Love, Che Walker’s production at the Finborough earlier this year. “I thought, ‘Right, let me think if there is anyone in history that I’m interested in.’ Cleopatra came up, and I did a bit of reading about her.” The music project soon turned into a play instead; when the producer asked if she would like to write it, Atim thought: “‘Yeah, why not?!’ And then it’s like ‘Oh. Wait …’ But it’s Edinburgh and that’s the whole point, it’s all about experimentation, emerging artists.” Can an Olivier award-winner call themselves an emerging artist? “Absolutely!” Set in the modern day, Anguis is, according to Atim, “basically a long conversation” between Cleopatra and an immunologist called Kate Williams. The two women are recording a podcast. “Cleopatra’s got some things in her story that we are not sure whether they are true, so we’re discussing a lot of the Cleopatra we’ve come to know versus who she might have actually been. Secondly, Kate is going through an event in her life with large political and social ramifications, so she’s having to navigate that.” Recently, Atim has explored how the online age means we are responding faster to the world around us, a theme that runs through Anguis. “There’s less time and space to exist in the kind of ‘I don’t know’ ambiguous place where we do all our decision-making.” Instead, she thinks, “within five minutes of hearing about something, you must have made a decision on how you feel about it, how are you going to deal with it, what you’re going to tweet”. Her rising profile means she does a lot of interviews. “I get asked questions on things and I’m very clear in those interviews that I don’t know, if I don’t know or haven’t worked it out yet.” It feels meta to ask if she worries about being interviewed, but I do anyway. “No, I don’t. I’m aware of certain pitfalls or whatever, but I’ve got nothing to hide, and I’m not ashamed of anything that I think or feel. I do like talking about things.” Her Essex accent has some humour in it. “Yeah, don’t worry. I’m not freaking out. I’m not going to hang up!” Born in Uganda, Atim grew up in Essex with her mother, and caught the acting bug in school. Almost 6ft tall, she did some modelling as a teen, toyed with being a doctor and studied biomedical science at King’s in London. Her early roles included Che Walker’s The Lightning Child at the Globe and a lot of Shakespeare. She was in Phyllida Lloyd’s Donmar Trilogy and played a riveting Emilia in Othello opposite Mark Rylance and Andre Holland. But she’s perhaps better known for her roles as the haunting, silent Woman in Les Blancs at the National theatre in 2016, and in Girl from the North Country a year later. These days, she’s recognised “a lot more often than I thought I would be”, and the Thrones TV prequel – which she “can’t talk about yet” – hasn’t even been released. Fans don’t know when the pilot will air, but after a casting announcement in January, we know Atim will have a major role. Since she is doing more work on TV, does she have hopes to write for screen, too? She laughs. “I’m going to see how this is received first. Honestly, I’m the sort of person who’ll take the L, right? If everyone says it’s rubbish, I’ll be like, ‘Do you know what, fair enough mate.’ I can’t do everything.” Saying that, she has enjoyed the writing process. “I’ve had moments where I’ve gone, ‘Oh my God, what am I doing? Delete, delete, delete.’ But the team have been really reassuring, and I’ve got a lot of friends who are writers and they’ve all said that’s completely normal.” She seems proud of Anguis and calls it “genuinely thought-provoking in a time where I think we do need to pause and think – this play gives us time that we don’t necessarily give ourselves to think about things”. She’s currently doing rewrites, and despite her busy acting schedule, aims to get to Edinburgh to see it. “I am really excited. I’m just also terrified, but that’s all part of it, and those two feelings are almost the same thing sometimes.” Anguis is at the Gilded Balloon Teviot, Edinburgh, 31 July-26 August.