Canadian police are zeroing in on the community of York Landing, Manitoba, in pursuit of fugitives Kam McLeod, 19, and Bryer Schmegelsky, 18, after the pair were spotted by members of an indigenous patrol group. The fugitives were seen by members of the Bear Clan Patrol, who are based in the provincial capital of Winnipeg. The group has been assisting community members in the Fox Lake Cree Nation, which is next door to the remote community of Gillam, where the search has been focused. On Sunday night, “multiple [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] resources” were being sent to York Landing to investigate a tip that the pair are “in, or near, the community”, according to a tweet from Manitoba RCMP. “A heavy police presence can be expected in the area,” it said. Multiple RCMP resources are being sent to York Landing, MB, to investigate a tip that the two suspects are possibly in, or near, the community. A heavy police presence can be expected in the area. We will continue to update you as information becomes available. It is believed crisis negotiators, tracker dogs and high-tech equipment including drones and infrared equipment, are now moving towards York Landing. RCMP have asked community members to not post photos or otherwise distribute the location of officers on social media. They have not released any information about how the suspects may be armed, but both McLeod and Deese were shot. A Facebook post by Leroy Constant, the elected chief of York Factory First Nation, called on residents in York Landing to “remain indoors with your doors locked. All vehicles should be parked”, it said. McLeod and Schmegelsky are suspected of killing Australian Lucas Fowler, 23, and US citizen Chynna Deese, 24, and have been charged with the death of Canadian, Leonard Dyck, 64. The community of York Landing is approximately 11 sq km and has a population of 443 people, according to the 2016 census, and about 116 dwellings. It sits on the eastern bank of the Nelson River, which flows into Hudson’s Bay. Its first responders are local patrol groups from clans who make up the First Nation. For the past five days, RCMP focus has been on the town of Gillam, which has a population of approximately 1,300, spread out over a large area. York Landing is about 80km west of Gillam as the crow flies, but limited roads mean a trip by car takes several hours. The last confirmed sighting of the pair was in Gillam, which is why police have focussed their resources on the community, but in recent days RCMP have said McLeod and Schmegelsky might have left the community in disguise with the aid of an unknowing resident. Police have been searching cottages, cabins and waterways. They have received over 200 tips in the past five days. A police statement reminded people not to approach the teens if they are spotted.