Why is it so hard to make chapatis at home? I follow recipes to the letter, and buy the proper flour from a local Indian store, yet they always turn out like MDF. Am I missing a trick?Lizzie, Leeds “The key to chapati is the consistency of the dough,” says West-Country-based chef and food writer Romy Gill. “And if you are using true chapati flour, it’s vital the water ratio is correct, because it’s incredibly fine flour that goes very sticky very easily.” Once you’ve kneaded the dough, pop it in a bowl in the fridge for half an hour before you even think about starting to shape and cook chapatis, says Gill, whose debut book, Zaika: Vegan Recipes from India, is out in September. “The cold makes it go harder, which makes it easier to roll; if you leave it at room temperature, it just gets wetter and stickier.” In other words, as with all bread-making, this is not the time for guesswork, even if you have years of knowhow. Sanjay Gour, co-owner with Nand Kishor of the much-acclaimed Dastaan in Epsom, Surrey (the pair previously ran the kitchens at the even more vaunted Gymkhana in London), goes a step further to stave off dry bread: “Put the dough in a lightly greased bowl, apply a very thin layer of oil to the top and cover with clingfilm – that will stop it from drying out and forming a skin.” Like Gill, Gour gives his dough at least a 30-minute chill, but adds that it’s advisable to leave the dough out to relax a little afterwards, so it’s more pliable and easier to divide into balls. Gour says another possible cause of Lizzie’s dry chapatis may be that she’s dusting them with too much flour when shaping. “Obviously, you need some flour, because this dough sticks to just about anything, but if you use even a bit more than you need, it will dry out and you’ll end up with dehydrated bread that’s not at all nice to eat.” If you’re in any doubt as to how much is too much, give the chapatis a good shake or two when rolling, just to be on the safe side. Gill adds that if you can’t get hold of chapati flour locally, you can make a pretty decent fist of it using plain or wholemeal instead. “I did a recipe for the Observer a few years ago that’s pretty foolproof.” But, she adds, a different flour requires a different treatment: “Rather than refrigerating it, keep the dough at room temperature, because it does the opposite of chapati flour dough.” Gill and Gour agree on another non-negotiable: brush one side of each cooked chapati with melted butter, then fold the bread over and cover with a tea towel. As Gill says, “This keeps them moist and soft, otherwise they’ll be like cardboard before the whole batch is cooked.” In India, many households make chapatis on a tava, or tawa – basically, a very flat, thin frying pan, often made of cheap steel or aluminium, designed for cooking all kinds of flatbreads, from chapatis to parathas and dosas (you can pick one up online for as little as a fiver) – but Gill says “a basic pancake pan works just fine”. Gour, however, prefers a flat griddle because, without the extreme heat of a professional hob, he reckons it’s better for getting the requisite char and blistering. “If Lizzie’s ever in Surrey,” he says, “tell her to pop over to Dastaan and we’ll give her a quick lesson.” I’m no Derren Brown, but somehow I foresee a fair few “Lizzies from Leeds” dialling Gour’s restaurant round about … now. Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.com