The same player is on the front cover of the Spanish sport newspapers Marca, AS and Mundo Deportivo, and also on the back pages of most British nationals, and it’s Gareth Bale – or “Gareth Sale” as AS have it. According to Mundo Deportivo, Real have offered the Welshman and £90m to Paris Saint-Germain for Neymar; Marca say he is heading to China, where he has offers from two teams; AS insists he has been offered to PSG, Manchester United, Bayern Munich, Internazionale and Tottenham and none of them was interested, but that negotiations with an unnamed Chinese team “are at an extremely advanced stage”. Back in England, various papers name the side as Beijing Guoan – the Sun says they are offering £1m a week, tax free – but confusingly while the Mail reports that “the likeliest destination for Bale is China”, the Mirror insists “it is more likely he will stay in Europe”. Over the weekend Zinedine Zidane said that he wanted Bale to leave Real Madrid – “Let’s hope it happens soon. If it happens tomorrow, so much the better” – leading to an apparently terminal rift between club and player. Perhaps something similar will happen between Ivan Perisic and Inter, after Antonio Conte raged that the Croatia international “is not suited to the role I am asking for”, that despite intensive training “the responses so far are not positive” and that, all things considered, “I don’t think he can give the team what it needs”. According to Corriere della Sera the 30-year-old is now almost certain to depart – and “he wants to move to the Premier League”. When Manchester United tried to sign him a year ago they were quoted a price of €50m; now Gazzetta dello Sport says Inter would happily wave him on his way to Salford for as little as €30m. Then there’s Paulo Dybala, who according to reports in Tuttosport and Corriere dello Sport this morning could end up in one of three places: Turin, Paris or Manchester. He has yet to start pre-season training, having been granted extended leave following the Copa América, and it is not entirely clear where he will fit in the Juventus team when he does turn up. Meanwhile he might help PSG come to terms with losing Neymar and bring a little spritely ingenuity to a Manchester United frontline soon to be shorn of Romelu Lukaku. Harry Maguire’s move to United, who appear to be involved in every rumour currently circulating, is now “imminent”, according to the Independent, while the Mancunians are also hoping to sign Sporting’s Bruno Fernandes. They had better hurry, with the 24-year-old Portuguese midfielder on Real Madrid’s shortlist of potential alternatives to Paul Pogba. So too is Sergej Milinkovic-Savic (and Christian Eriksen), the Serb apparently certain to leave Lazio, whose president, Claudio Lotito, said over the weekend: “It would not be fair to stand in the way of his reasonable ambition to play for one of the world’s very best teams.” Inter seem to be believe they deserve a place on that list, while PSG are also keen and United would like him too – though only if somebody buys Pogba first, which leaves them hanging around on the sidelines while their rivals are free to pounce. Finally another player set to follow Bale out of Real is Dani Ceballos, who – according to the Mirror – has “had lengthy talks” with Arsenal, leaving the Gunners optimistic of beating Tottenham to the 22-year-old’s signature. The Gunners are also “now in a position to meet Celtic’s £25m asking price” for Kieran Tierney, according to the Sun.