Arsenal are not giving up on signing Wilfried Zaha from Crystal Palace. As well as that derisory/prudent £40m initial bid for the winger, they are prepared to offer three players they value as worth another £40m into the deal. Calum Chambers, Mohamed Elneny and Carl Jenkinson may be running out at the Selhurst Colosseum if a deal now worth £80m in book value goes through. Palace, meanwhile, would prefer £70m straight out if they are to lose their Ivorian jewel. Diego Costa back in the Premier League just as VAR comes in? Marco Silva wants the striker, who is surplus to requirements at Atlético Madrid, to be part of his Everton revolution, though director of football Marcel Brands is resistant to the arrival of a player as old as 30. Juventus’ Moise Kean, 19, and Lille’s Nicolas Pépé, 24, are more comfortably in that Brands bracket. Barcelona winger Malcom is meanwhile in the middle of a tug of love between Arsenal and Everton for his services. Tottenham are stepping up their bid for Dani Ceballos, the Real Madrid youngster who won the European Under-21 championship with Spain earlier this month. A loan is the player’s preference, as he still believes he can make it at Real one day. Further La Liga targets for Mauricio Pochettino are Real Betis midfielder Giovani Lo Celso and another Spanish Under-21 star in Dinamo Zagreb’s Dani Olmo. The heavy outlay any of those three would cost can be offset by Daniel Levy through selling Toby Alderweireld to Roma for £25m. Aston Villa want Burnley keeper Tom Heaton, and have offered £7m for the man who turned the Clarets’ fortune around last season after replacing Joe Hart. Heaton is the target after Stoke refused to accept less than £25m for Jack Butland. They have also bid a release-clause-busting £12m for Brentford’s Ezri Konsa and want Egypt winger Trezeguet. Mario Lemina really really wants to join Manchester United from Southampton. “There’s no turning back,” he says he has told his current club’s hierarchy. Should he get his dream move then he might well be playing with Harry Maguire, who United are increasingly confident of winning the race for at a price of £75m. Aston Villa, Brighton, Bournemouth and Wolves are all in the market for Harry Wilson, the Liverpool winger who starred on loan at Derby last season, and another loan move looks most likely for the 21-year-old. And, West Ham saw something in Gonzalo Higuaín’s Chelsea performances and want to sign him on loan from Juventus for the coming season.