If you were a British Asian in the 90s you will viscerally recall the moment when you first saw Goodness Gracious Me. I was a moody teenager watching telly in bed with the lights off, presumably waiting for something presented by Dani Behr to come on, and it was the sketch about the Asian University. “We send you out into the world having learned the real value of education,” Meera Syal was saying in a bright RP accent, hair manically GHD-ed in the futile 90s fashion. “Pharmacy is better than law … accountancy is better than engineering … and medicine is better than anything else you can think of.” My God, it was hilarious. I was so tickled I got out of bed and ventured into the sitting room where, lo, my first-generation Indian parents were also gawping at this foreign visitor to our home: a BBC comedy sketch show made by and for brown people. I joined them on the sofa. We laughed our heads off at people who looked at us, made jokes about us and made jokes about the white people who made jokes (and worse) about us. It was a revelation, the stuff of which white BBC execs’ dreams of diverse programming are made. Twenty years on, the racism is the same (or is it worse?), the latest fashion is moaning about diversity quotas and there still aren’t enough black and Asian comedians on the telly. So Muzlamic (BBC Three) comes at a time like every other: when we need it more than ever. This pilot, at a zippy 15 minutes long, is written and performed by the goofy, occasionally too Ali G-ish comedians Ali Shahalom and Aatif Nawaz. Billed as “a sketch show exploring life from the perspective of two Muslim comedians, or rather, two comedians who happen to be Muslim”, it opens with an almost funny sketch about a pair of Muslim holidaymakers, caps on backwards and beards neatly manicured, being questioned by airport security. When asked if they have ever had any trouble with the police, they offer PDFs and printed copies of their answers to the standard questions, such as: “Do you know Isis?” When they leave, they courteously offer to send in “the next brown boys, yeah?” “I didn’t say brown. He said it,” the security officer says nervously to the CCTV cameras. Much funnier is the office-based sketch in which the arrival of new guy Samir (“I prefer Sam – that’s what my wife Elizabeth calls me”) puts an Asian colleague’s nose out of joint. “I don’t know what possessed you to get a job in Stevenage,” hisses Mo, “but those people out there are my white people.” An increasingly absurd face-off in which they try to out-white each other follows. “I’m so white I have a loyalty card at Greggs,” boasts Samir. “I’m so white I call my mum and dad by their first names,” Mo bats back. And on it goes until Mo wins with a line about being so white he wipes rather than washes his bum. White fragility, racial stereotyping and unconscious biases are all serious subjects ripe for laughs. In Muzlamic, the material is spot on, but the comedy tends to fall short. In Chat to Me, a female presenter – and there aren’t enough women here, by which I mean there is one – interviews the Muslim author of a children’s book. First question? “How do you feel about 9/11?” She interprets the relationship between a squirrel and older elephant in his book as a comment on grooming gangs then, once the cameras have stopped rolling, asks him to sign a book for her daughter. “What’s her name?” the author asks, defeated but still, as ever, trying to be the good immigrant. “Kashmir,” she replies airily. The longest-running and silliest sketch is about Mabz, the gangsta owner of Halal Cuts in Bethnal Green. He is robbed in, the voiceover deadpans, “the notoriously cut-throat world of east London barbers” and becomes embroiled in a turf war. “Call all my cousins,” he says to a mate on the phone. “Yeah, even my dad’s side. Even Asif … No, not Shahmin, but everyone else.” It’s not exactly razor-sharp (sorry), but then that’s half the point. It doesn’t always have to be cutting edge.