This match could have changed at 12.38pm today, the moment Heather Knight chose to make a game of it: the first time England had been in control since Knight lost the toss on the first morning. By opting to declare just four balls after England had passed the follow-on target, Knight attempted to breathe life into what was looking like inevitable stalemate. “We got a couple of wickets after lunch and we’ve got an outside chance,” the England coach Mark Robinson said of England’s tactics after close of play. “We were trying to bowl them out for 120 and have a crazy chase on the last evening.” That the Test did ultimately finish in a draw – the captains shaking hands an hour before the scheduled close with the visitors 375 runs to the good – can therefore be placed squarely in the hands of Australia’s conservatism. While on the back of this result Meg Lanning’s side have now retained the Ashes, they had said all along that they want to win this match: “It’s not in the Australian way to play for a draw,” was the verdict of Rachael Haynes at stumps on the first day. Faced with the opportunity in the evening session to put their money where their mouth is, they firmly declined, refusing to declare and dangle a carrot even when the target was almost certainly out of England’s reach. “When it got to a point where we felt we couldn’t win the game, we weren’t going to throw it open to England to give them a chance,” Lanning, Australia’s captain, said at stumps. “The pitch wasn’t really deteriorating as we thought it would so we just didn’t think there was enough time to be able to bowl them out. We came into the Test match 6-0 up and were in a position to make that decision.” By contrast England, criticised for seemingly shutting up shop after scoring just 19 runs in the last hour of play on the third evening, had earlier done an about-turn in a display of intent that finally enabled them to wrest back the initiative. Laura Marsh will for ever be remembered for her stultifying effort to save the 2013 Wormsley Test, when she scored 55 off 304 balls; here, after Anya Shrubsole was stumped charging down the pitch to Sophie Molineux in the fifth over of the day, she marshalled the volte-face, joining Nat Sciver in taking on the Australian spinners as the pair added 42 for the eighth wicket. When Sciver eventually departed 12 runs short of three figures, chopping a ball of Jess Jonassen’s on to her own stumps, Sophie Ecclestone also got in on the act, getting a measure of revenge against Jonassen by dispatching her over the top in a 19-ball nine-run cameo. Marsh’s dismissal – trapped lbw by Jonassen – eventually brought on the declaration, but the 32-year-old offie (who might well have sat out this match in favour of Kate Cross had the pitch not been expected to turn) was then handed the ball by Knight immediately after lunch. Her second ball was a ripper that bowled Alyssa Healy through the gate; four balls later, Rachael Haynes was also walking off, trapped leg before. Australia were 15 for two, 130 runs ahead. Suddenly, England experienced something they had not felt in three days: hope. They were all smiles, up in Australia’s faces, four fielders gathered around the bat under helmets, as Ecclestone went hoarse from appealing. She finally struck half an hour before tea, Beth Mooney departing courtesy of a stonking catch by Tammy Beaumont at short leg, having added 25 runs from 33 balls. Along the way the debutante Kirstie Gordon had added Lanning to her list of scalps after she hit a full toss straight to Georgia Elwiss at cover. Walking off, the usually unflappable Lanning looked like she wanted to punch a wall. She had the last laugh in the end. “Our challenge has been we haven’t been able to settle quick enough,” was Robinson’s verdict on the series so far. “That’s been our undoing. What’s cost us is not being able to settle quick enough and get enough composure. “The key is keeping things in perspective. We’re playing a very good team who have got momentum – you’ve got to give them a lot of credit that once they’ve got their noses in front, they’ve kept them there.” Sadly, the final-day spectacle looks likely to add fuel to the fire of those who argue that women’s Test cricket, now played only biennially between England and Australia, is dying on its feet. Both teams have been vocal in their support for the format over the past four days. Both Robinson and Lanning reiterated that support at close of play. The real problem on day four was that only one team played like they meant it.