A year ago, the climate activist movement Extinction Rebellion did not even exist. Now, just nine months after its first public action, the Victoria and Albert Museum in London has acquired a number of artefacts associated with the group, saying the visual impact of its campaigns can be compared to that of the suffragettes. A green, blue and pink flag printed with the movement’s distinctive extinction symbol, two printing blocks used by activists early in the campaign to make their own protest banners and an already rare pamphlet from the first print run produced by the group will join the V&A’s permanent collections as part of its “rapid response” programme to put contemporary and newsworthy objects on display. The museum, which specialises in art and design, has also acquired digital artefacts including the website from which the symbol is freely available for anyone to use, and a downloadable file for 3D printers, allowing activists to create and immediately use their own printing block to create yet more banners, T-shirts and placards. Corinna Gardner, the senior curator of design and digital at the V&A, said the collection recognised how effectively Extinction Rebellion (XR) had created a highly distinctive visual identity and harnessed open-source technology to enable DIY campaigning to spread rapidly across the globe. “Extinction Rebellion’s first public act was only in October last year, but it has become clear is that their acts of rebellion have a visual character and identity that is singular,” she said. “My interest is how, through a really considered set of design choices, Extinction Rebellion have brought a joyous but also focused sense of purpose to their actions.” From its adoption (with permission) of the highly recognisable extinction symbol first designed in 2011 by the London street artist ESP to its limited but “punchy” colour palette and carefully worded slogans, she said the group had used design to galvanise concern for the climate emergency. As such, she said, its design approach stood in relation to the suffragettes, who similarly relied on a limited colour palette of green, white and purple to visually communicate their cause. “They have created a visual identity that those of us who are experiencing it will remember. It will remain in our consciousness, just as other protest movements of the past have done.” The museum has also acquired a child’s hi-vis jacket, worn during an XR protest, which will go on display at the V&A’s Museum of Childhood as part of a display about how the movement has engaged with families, accompanied by a programme of workshops. Clive Russell, a member of XR’s arts group, said the organisation was pleased the work could be seen for free alongside work by William Morris and other “design activists” of the past. “The climate and ecological emergency is the issue of our time, and art and design is crucial to our non-violent actions and communication,” he said in a statement. “We call on all artists and designers to think beyond the bullying constraints of commercial drudgery and join us in rebellion.”