A West End theatre is to be renamed in honour of Stephen Sondheim, one of the most influential figures in musical theatre. The producer and theatre owner Sir Cameron Mackintosh said on Friday he planned to rename the Queen’s theatre, the home of Les Misérables, as the Sondheim theatre. It means Sondheim, 89, will be the only living artist to have a theatre named in his honour both in London’s West End and on Broadway in New York, where the former Henry Miller’s theatre was named after him in 2010. Sondheim said he had loved British theatre since he saw his first play in London in 1958 and Mackintosh’s gesture meant a great deal. “I am chuffed, as you say in British English, to a degree I wouldn’t have imagined. Or as we say in American English: it’s awesome.” Mackintosh said he had been a friend and colleague of Sondheim’s since he produced the musical revue Side by Side by Sondheim in 1976. “As an innovative voice in musical theatre, his influence has no equal. Sondheim’s work will undoubtedly be performed as long as audiences want to see live theatre, so I feel honoured that he has agreed to have his name on one of my Shaftesbury Avenue theatres to salute his upcoming 90th birthday,” he said. Mackintosh previously hoped to create a studio space in London named after Sondheim but the plans fell through. He said the new plan provided “a perfect companion” to his theatre next door, the Gielgud, named after the actor John Gielgud, and his Coward and Novello theatres, named after Noël Coward and Ivor Novello. The Queen’s theatre, designed by the architect WGR Sprague, opened in 1907 with a production of The Sugar Bowl, a comedy by Madeleine Lucette Ryley. It closed for 20 years after a bomb hit it during the blitz, reopening in 1959 with Gielgud’s Shakespearean recital The Ages of Man. The renaming will take place in December when the theatre reopens after four months of renovation and rebuilding work. Part of the project will involve the restoration of Sprague’s original boxes, which were destroyed by the bomb along with the entire front of house. Les Misérables, the world’s longest-running musical in its 35th year, will be at the Gielgud theatre while its regular home is closed.