Campaigners have welcomed the government’s stated intention to add the Paralympic Games to the list of sporting events that must be screened live on free-to-air television in the UK, with ministers also considering whether to ensure major women’s sporting events remain accessible to all. The protected list of so-called “crown jewels” events that have to be shown on terrestrial TV has not changed substantially since it was introduced more than 20 years ago. The list is dominated by male and able-bodied sports, such as football’s World Cup and European Championship, the FA Cup final and the Rugby Union World Cup final. Some sporting events can be shown live on pay-TV, as long as highlights are made available to free-to-air channels. The culture secretary, Jeremy Wright, has now announced his intention to add the Paralympics to the list of protected events, while also consulting later this year on whether to protect the Women’s (football) World Cup and other women’s sports. The women’s football tournament, which concluded earlier this month – and in which England reached the semi-finals – achieved record rating figures on the BBC. Tanni Grey-Thompson, the 11-time Paralympic champion, said the move would be fantastic for disabled people and girls and women. “It’s important that people are able to see those sports on TV, know about them and share them.” Lady Grey-Thompson added the Paralympic Games had always been shown on terrestrial TV, but adding the contest to the list showed “that the government wants to protect it. It shows the government takes these events really seriously.” Wendy Hawk, interim CEO of the charity Women in Sport,said she supported the announcement, but urged the government to include more women’s sporting events. “Visibility is crucial in helping to raise the profile of women’s sport but also to normalise it, breaking down gender stereotypes through inspirational and positive role models – all of which is vital for grassroots sport participation and engaging the next generation of girls,” she added. The culture secretary has the power to add to or remove from the list at any time, although it is largely unchanged from 1998. Under the terms of the law, broadcast rights to these events must be offered to the main free-to-air terrestrial broadcasters on “fair and reasonable terms”. The government made clear it has no desire for a wholesale reappraisal of the list, meaning there is no prospect of the government forcing cricket to return to free-to-air services despite the success of Sky’s decision to allow the Cricket World Cup final to be shown on Channel 4. Instead the focus will be on ensuring equality between men’s and women’s sports, while bringing disability sport in line with its able-bodied equivalents. The success of the BBC’s Women’s World Cup coverage and Channel 4’s Paralympics coverage have raised the prospect of commercial pay-TV providers being interested in buying broadcast rights in future. Mike Sharrock, chief executive of the British Paralympic Association, said: “ We have been advocating for some time that the Paralympic Games should be treated in the same way as the Olympic Games and always be available on free-to-air TV. This is a significant moment for a nation that is proud to be the home of Paralympic sport.” Earlier this month Ofcom changed the rules stipulating which channels count as free-to-air, meaning providers can meet their requirements by showing events on BBC One, BBC Two, BBC Four, CBBC, CBeebies, BBC News, BBC Parliament, ITV, ITV2, ITV3, ITV4, Channel 4, More 4 and Film 4. Group A – live coverage must be offered to free-to-air broadcasters The Olympic Games. The Fifa World Cup. The FA Cup Final. The Scottish FA Cup Final. The Grand National. The Derby. The Wimbledon Tennis Finals. The European Football Championship. The Rugby League Challenge Cup Final. The Rugby Union World Cup Final. Group B – live coverage can be provided by pay-TV broadcasters as long as highlights packages are offered to free-to-air broadcasters Cricket Test Matches played in England. Non-finals play at Wimbledon. All other matches in the Rugby Union World Cup. Six Nations Rugby tournament matches involving home countries. The Commonwealth Games. The World Athletics Championship. The Cricket World Cup – the final, semi-finals and matches involving home nations. The Ryder Cup. The Open Golf Championship.