Something special may be about to happen at the Tour de France. A swaggering sports franchise, groaning with big money talent, scientific knowhow and clinical efficiency, could be taken down by a once neurotic and humble kid from the French heartlands, who prefers fishing trips to heart rate monitors, dog walking to wind tunnel testing. At least that’s the cliched and romantic version of the Pinot versus Team Ineos debate that is vexing all those working on the 2019 Tour de France. The combination of Julian Alaphilippe’s derring-do and Thibaut Pinot’s brooding rage have seduced those wearied by the years of steamrollering strangulation by Team Sky. With such small time gaps between the leading six contenders, there is no doubt that this Tour will be won, not by efficiency or by perfect planning, but by carpe diem bike racing, of the kind that all of the Tour’s great climbers have specialised in. In that sense, Pinot’s personality is most reminiscent perhaps of Charly Gaul, one of the Tour’s most extraordinary climbers, another intense and private man who preferred forests and mountains to the brasseries of the Champs-Élysées. When he retired from racing, Gaul became a hermit for a while, living in a woodman’s hut in the Ardennes forest, hunting most days and living without running water or electricity. “I spent my days planting vegetables,” the Luxembourger recalled after he came out of the forest and rejoined the world. “Roe deer would come and graze at the bottom of my garden. There was nothing but trees and water.” If he wins the Tour de France on Sunday, Pinot, according to those who know him well, will like Gaul shun fame and celebrity. Whatever the denouement of this intriguing race, he yearns to return home, to tend to his animals, to go fishing in his lake and to ride his bike in solitude through the Vosges. Embraced by the French president Emmanuel Macron after his stage win on the Col du Tourmalet, Pinot grimaced uneasily, while Alaphilippe made the most of the moment, mugging for the cameras. Pinot was more comfortable waving to diehard French fans, watching high on the mountainside, and beaming at the chants of “Peeenoooot, Peeenooot!” Described as a “tiger on the bike” by Cyrille Guimard, who directed Bernard Hinault and Laurent Fignon to serial Tour victories, Pinot is a throwback, which is why his style of racing is fast becoming so popular. Like Gaul, he personifies the romance of the mercurial lone climber pitting himself against the fearsome mountains, riding on passion and feel, instead of science. During the post-war Tours, Gaul would destroy his rivals in the mountains. His rival, Raphaël Géminiani, once described Gaul as “a murderous climber, a little machine with a slightly higher gear than the rest, turning his legs at a speed that would break your heart.” Gaul was so prodigious that he would win 250km stages through the mountains for fun, taking a quarter of an hour from his rivals. Those days are long gone and the 2019 Tour will almost certainly be won by seconds not minutes. But such was the ferocity of his accelerations in the Pyrenees that when Pinot attacked, his rivals panicked. If Pinot arrives in the Alps with the same fire in his belly, only Egan Bernal is likely to be able to go toe to toe with him in the ski station finishes on Friday and Saturday, at Tignes and Val Thorens. The weather is expected to worsen in the Alps towards the weekend and Pinot, who struggles in a heatwave, will relish the cooler conditions. Bernal, born at high altitude in Colombia, is, as Geraint Thomas said “a natural born climber”. The Welshman rolls his eyes in disdain at the suggestions that he and his teammates are boring and robotic, but it is true that, for all their success, they have never fired passions in the way that Pinot will if he wins on Sunday. It is precocious climbing talent Bernal, not Thomas, who could be Ineos’s most effective response to Pinot-fever. Already a winner of Paris-Nice and the Tour of Switzerland, he has much of the spontaneity and aggression that characterises Colombian cycling culture, and is perfectly equipped to compete at altitude. To date, however, he has been a discreet presence throughout this Tour. Bernal’s overall wins in the Tours of California and Colombia in 2018 were both founded on lone attacks on the toughest mountain stages. Had he ridden better and lost less than 1min 22sec to team leader Thomas in the stage 13 time trial in Pau, the Colombian might already have leapfrogged the defending champion, who he trails by 27 seconds. But the force, and France, is with Pinot. The frail health and brooding nature that have dogged his career in the past have been forgotten as the sense of expectation grows. Assuming Alaphilippe will soon wilt under the weight of the maillot jaune, Pinot has to first distance Thomas and then steel himself to do battle with Bernal, the only rider so far able to reel him in. His Groupama FDJ team’s budget of €18m places it above several other teams in the World Tour, but makes it a minnow compared to the £40m that Dave Brailsford has to play with at Team Ineos. It would be simplistic to frame Pinot as David taking on Jim Ratcliffe’s Goliath, but for many in France that holds true. Pinot winning the Tour would be like Leicester City winning the Premier League. “All three stages are beautiful,” Pinot said of the forthcoming Alpine triptych that includes four beyond category and three first category climbs, “but the hardest is the stage over the Galibier. If my legs are good I will attack there”. If he does, then Bernal will have to follow and the Tour’s final scenes will be played out over a dramatic 48 hours at Tignes and Val Thorens.