On a sweltering hot day in an east London primary, a play is taking place. George and the Dragon is being performed by a group of older actors, part of local community theatre group Immediate Theatre and the Arcola’s over-50s group. The familiar story of the princess, the knight and the man-eating dragon is told in a traditional manner, but contemporary concerns such as the destruction of nature and the environment have been taken into account, adding a crucial new twist. The dragon’s natural habitat has been destroyed, deforestation has ruined its home, and it has nothing to eat other than the townsfolk. The children in the audience are asked to vote whether the dragon should live or die. Today’s performance is the final of six that the group have performed to local primary schools across east London; although the vote is for life, it’s the closest it has come to death. One of the boys who voted for death said it’s “because the dragon took thousands of lives!” Another declares: “I don’t trust dragons!” “We prepared two endings,” says writer Penny Cliff. The less bloody one, which we saw today, has the characters coming together to plant seeds symbolising a fresh start. Over the last few years, the levels of air pollution around primary schools in cities across the UK has made headlines. There have been calls for more to be done to improve air quality for children, especially after the death of Ella Kissi-Debrah, a girl from Lewisham with severe asthma, whose death may have been related to pollution levels on the route she took to school. Cliff says she did not want to make the play too specific to one issue such as air pollution near schools and instead wanted to focus more on “the impact of poisoning the environment”. She explains: “It is important to write a piece of theatre that is not specific about one thing, but one that communities can take away from it what they need to take, based on how it resonates with them.” And indeed this week, children from the six schools are joining the older performers to create an intergenerational sequel that they will then perform. The children come from a wide range of backgrounds; many live on local estates. Jo Carter, the show’s director and the founder of the company, says: “We hope that by working creatively together, all our participants will get to know each other and understand the opportunities and challenges faced by residents at opposite ends of the age spectrum.” Working with both older and younger people is what makes Immediate Theatre and its partnership programmes so rare. What are the communities? The cast, a mixture of professional and amateur actors, also come from east London. Steve Latner, who plays the judge, also grew up on a rough estate and joined a community theatre group that helped change the direction of his life. “It’s important to see a different pathway,” he says. “Something like Immediate Theatre does this.”David Howells, a retired computer science lecturer, plays an oak tree and one of the town’s citizens. “This is the first stage show I’ve done since I dried up when I was 15 in a school show!” he says. He used to work in a sheltered housing community in east London and saw firsthand how community theatre overcomes social barriers when Immediate Theatre did a project with the people there based on their experiences during the second world war. So what’s on the cards for the sequel? Responses from the children range from wanting to see George turn evil and kill everyone, to George and the dragon becoming best friends and planting seeds to help restore the natural environment so the dragon no longer has to eat people. Regardless of what happy or bloody direction the sequel takes, Carter hopes the children will gain from the experience of working with the older actors. “It’s not like this is a lovely five minutes and then goodbye,” she says. “In terms of developing cultural capital, it’s about ongoing experiences. If you want to [access theatre] you should be able to, even if you don’t have a lot of money or if you live in the wrong place. Art is an essential part of education.” Immediate Theatre’s work sees them engage in a range of community-based theatre projects. For last autumn’s Our Space project, the company collaborated with children from the Nightingale estate to create a graffiti mural as a response to such issues as knife crime, drug dealing and antisocial behaviour. Councillor Sem Moema, from the Hackney Downs ward where the Nightingale is located, highlights the “massive role” Immediate Theatre has played in bringing arts to residents and local people. “In Nightingale in particular, we’ve had a lot of serious issues around gun and knife crime, as well as other issues relating to a lack of opportunities for young people being drawn into drugs, drug dealing and low-level gang activity,” she says.The Christmas panto, Cindy Rella, was also an intergenerational collaboration between Immediate and the Arcola over-50s group and involved young people from the Nightingale estate who all created a show inspired by Cinderella. Moema points out that bringing the two age groups together for a theatre show is a creative way to deal with antisocial behaviour. “We’ve taken a public health approach to dealing with the perpetrators of the violence and antisocial behaviour, and one of the issues that came up was the mistrust and misunderstanding between generations, as well as the lack of positive activities that people of all ages and abilities could take part in. People like Jo and community-based arts organisations – who really should be at the core of funding – have helped local people begin to reclaim their neighbourhood and bring their community back together.” • The sequel will be performed on 26 July at 4pm at the Wally Foster Centre, Clapton, London.