In the summer of ‘93, everyone at my school became a leg-spinner. We’d never seen leg-spin before Shane Warne arrived. Not that we could remember. No one could do it – ball after ball just looping onto the top of the low hanging cricket net – batsmen waddling half way down the green matting, jumping and trying to hit the ball back to the bowler, hopefully with enough power to do it in one go. We were hopeless, but we were inspired by what we saw on TV. Sky’s conditional offer to put the Cricket World Cup final on free-to-air television could just be a one-off, but what if it was the start of something more? It wouldn’t be hard to put the game on regardless of the result of England’s semi-final but perhaps the ECB have worked out that not enough of us are watching it. Living in a Sky Sports bubble (and being in it for years) makes it difficult to conceive of a world without live sport at my fingertips. Pretty much every office I sit in pumps out every possible sport on every possible TV. Sky Sports Football, Sky Sports Cricket, Sky Sports News, Sky Sports Kabaddi, BT Lorry Racing. It’s all on, all the time. I genuinely forget that others don’t have that luxury, and haven’t had the chance to watch cricket for the last 14 years – during which time the coverage has been consistently excellent. All those summer days watching Bumble and the others teasing Nasser Hussain about the size of his nose, seeing which pundit has been given the third man analysis role against their will. The evenings spent watching Charles Colville and Bob Willis getting increasingly annoyed – perhaps because they’ve been left to do the highlights. And that’s before the winter – getting up at weird hours to watch overseas tours wondering if Tim Abraham has enough sun cream, or getting ready to start your day, flicking on the Big Bash and then realising it’s midday and you’re not dressed. The number of people who’ll understand those references is actually pretty low. As Sean Ingle pointed out in 2015, almost as many people watched a 1974 feature length episode of Columbo on ITV3 as watched Joe Root take the winning catch at long off at Cardiff in the first Ashes Test of that year. And while Ingle clearly fails to recognise Peter Falk’s televisual brilliance, it’s a worry. Eight and a half million people watched the culmination of the fourth Test in 2005. I don’t walk down the street with English cricketers enough to know whether they get stopped every five seconds or whether they’re anonymous when they’re out shopping. Do 20-year-olds have equivalents of Peter Such and Alan Mullally rattling around their brains taking up much needed space? Will the modern day cricketers break into our public consciousness? Will Mark Wood win Strictly? Will Keaton Jennings present Top Gear in 2035? Participation is down. Andy Bull recently noted that 40 sides had disbanded in the last five years in the Hampshire league, with many others losing their second, third and fourth XIs – added to this is the slow acknowledgement that the sport is becoming the preserve of the privileged to an increasing degree. And what a shame. Because there is something so weirdly, but fantastically, different about playing cricket compared to any other team sport. A whole day of playing sport, where you might win it single-handedly, and on another day you might do literally nothing. Not a thing. It’s sad to think fewer and fewer people will create their own cricketing memories – those batting gloves at school with the green rubber spikes which gave you no protection whatsoever, and pads with buckles that pointedly refused to stay in place when you ran a quick single as your box fell out of your pants and wedged itself behind your knee. At university, second XI cricket was not of a high standard. Dan was the only player who could bowl straight. He’d always begin with an orange, aiming for off stump and we’d wait for the glorious sound of citrus on willow. After we’d clear up the vitamin C explosion, we’d apologise and get on with the game. Then came the twist – the ‘keeper would take a Red Delicious out of his pocket – we’d throw it around the field, from slip to point to cover to mid-off, shining it on its way round – and Dan would bowl that. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Apple on willow, shattering all over the square. On one occasion, their opener played the first ball/apple perfectly – a cultured leave outside the off stump. The keeper took it with soft hands and we threw it around the field again, desperately trying to keep a straight face, before the apple hit the middle of the bat on the second delivery. I’m not sure I’ve even been so happy. It was stupid, and we were idiots, but we were idiots playing sport. Probably the most exhilarating single moment of my life (admittedly the bar is low) was playing village cricket. What a thing that is. Teammates decades apart in age and feet apart in waistlines, with one large man lodged at first slip in every side. The tactical toilet break so that you don’t have to umpire the first 10 overs – and if you end up in the middle the complete refusal to give any lbws. There was one game a year when the fair came to town and took up half the village green – I’d be crouching at gully while Chic’s Le Freak blared across the field. In the 2003 Cambridgeshire Junior cup semi-final, requiring five off two for Ashwell, I hoyed one over cow corner for six – it even got a headline in the Royston Crow. That very rare feeling of striking a ball so sweetly that it didn’t feel like I hit it. We won the final – I did not bowl, did not bat. Did not do anything. I still have the trophy in my toilet. Here’s hoping Sky’s free to air offerings don’t stop after this tournament. What about a day of an Ashes Test this summer? A Premier League game this season? If we want more people to watch, play and be inspired, it has to be the right thing.