Ever the gentleman, Roger Federer resisted the chance to put on an exhibition at the expense of his flustered young opponent. The second seed was required to do nothing more than get the job done and keep the crowd sweet. There were few flourishes, few spells of breathtaking genius, just levels of ruthlessness and efficiency that proved far too high a standard for Jay Clarke, who was hopelessly exposed in only his third match at Wimbledon. If it felt like Federer was below his best as he reached the third round with a routine 6-1, 7-6 (3), 6-2 win, perhaps it was because he had no incentive to humiliate the British wildcard, who came into the biggest match of his short career distracted by the soap opera surrounding his decision to inform Harriet Dart via text that he was ditching her to play with Cori Gauff in the mixed doubles. Cue the Love Island gags, though Clarke is clearly hopeful of making up with Dart. He revealed he had congratulated the Londoner on reaching the third round of the women’s singles. “I spoke to her twice,” he said “Obviously initially she was very upset. She had every right to be; I’d be too. But I spoke to her before the tournament came out and said if I win a match in the singles, or two matches, then we wouldn’t probably play anyway. We’d pull out. I’m glad she’s doing well.” The good news for Clarke was his new partnership with Gauff did not dent his popularity with the home crowd on Court 1. Yet the vibe was hopeful rather than expectant and there were knowing sighs when nerves betrayed the 20-year-old in his opening service game, three double-faults gifting Federer a break. “It was strange,” Clarke said. “In the buildup I didn’t feel nervous and then obviously when you take the first couple of steps on the court that’s when it hits you.” Federer, who plays Lucas Pouille after the Frenchman beat Grégoire Barrère in straight sets, has been around long enough to spot easy prey. The Swiss was carrying bad memories from his previous outing on this court, that maddening defeat from two sets up in his quarter-final against Kevin Anderson last year. But he has never lost a grand slam match to a player ranked as low as Clarke, the world No 169, and was never in any serious danger. They played in Federer’s kingdom and played by his rules,although intrigue briefly flared when Clarke dug in during the second set, forced a tie-break and earned the first mini-break to lead 2-1. The response was crushing. Federer won five of the next six points and strolled into a two-set lead thanks to the seventh of 10 aces overall. There would be no repeat of the collapse Federer suffered against Anderson and he could afford to offer Clarke a few words of encouragement. “I liked what I saw,” he said. “Playing on grass, I don’t know if it’s his favourite surface. Whose favourite surface is grass anyhow? We don’t have really time to practise on this surface.” That was strange to hear. Nobody is more regal on these lawns than Federer, champion here eight times. Maybe he was just being nice. No matter, they will be pleased to see him back on Centre Court, where the opening match on day four predictably failed to entertain as Kei Nishikori outclassed Cameron Norrie, the British No 2. The eighth seed won 6-4, 6-4, 6-0 and next plays Steve Johnson after the American saw off Australia’s Alex de Minaur, the No 25 seed, in five sets.