It is 31 years since Seve Ballesteros became the last Spaniard to lift the Claret Jug. Since then José María Olazábal and Sergio García have come close, only to slide away at the crunch. But on the eve of the 148th Open Championship Jon Rahm appears to have the punch and panache to walk in the footsteps of his hero. The tempestuous 24-year-old has finished third or better in his last three starts, including victory at the Irish Open in Lahinch a fortnight ago and a podium finish at the US Open, and he relishes playing in the grimy Irish weather. No wonder he is third favourite behind Rory McIlroy and Brooks Koepka with the bookies. “I just like it here,” he said. “Ever since the first time I played in Portstewart two years ago, the Irish crowd has treated me very, very specially. “It’s the closest I’ll ever feel to playing at home, without being at home, really. That’s what I think makes it so special.” Rahm does not mind the wind and the rain, pointing out that, as a Basque, he is used to it. “When the weather is rough, it’s difficult,” he said. “I don’t think anybody truly enjoys playing in cold, rain and wind. But on days like that you’ve got to throw technique, systems and strategies out the window and survive.” 6.35am: Darren Clarke, James Sugrue (a), Charley Hoffman6.46am: Emiliano Grillo, Sung Kang, Thomas Thurloway (a)6.57am: Andy Sullivan, Christiaan Bezuidenhout, Alexander Levy 7.08am: Chan Kim, Zander Lombard, Brandon Wu (a)7.19am: Richard Sterne, Romain Langasque, Matthias Schmid (a) 7.30am: Padraig Harrington, Matthew Fitzpatrick, Andrew Putnam 7.41am: Bubba Watson, Eddie Pepperell, Rafa Cabrera-Bello 7.52am: Phil Mickelson, Shane Lowry, Branden Grace8.03am: Alex Noren, Mike Lorenzo-Vera, Sam Locke8.14am: Webb Simpson, Sergio García, C.T. Pan8.25am: Ryan Palmer, Andrea Pavan, Dylan Frittell8.36am: Kyle Stanley, Robert MacIntyre, Andrew Johnston8.47am: Mikko Korhonen, Oliver Wilson, Curtis Knipes (a)9.03am: Ian Poulter, Sungjae Im, Kiradech Aphibarnrat9.14am: Henrik Stenson, Xander Schauffele, Graeme McDowell9.25am: Haotong Li, Russell Knox, Bernd Weisberger9.36 p.m. Jason Kokrak, Connor Syme, Austin Connelly9.47 p.m. Zach Johnson, David Duval, Corey Conners9.58am: Francesco Molinari, Bryson DeChambeau, Adam Scott 10.09am: Rory McIlroy, Gary Woodland, Paul Casey10.20am: Rickie Fowler, Kevin Kisner, Hideki Matsuyama10.31am: Jim Furyk, Si-Woo Kim, Jimmy Walker10.42am: Luke Lista, Alexander Bjork, Paul Waring10.53am: Shugo Imahira, Nate Lashley, Benjamin Herbert11.04am: Mikumu Horikawa, Callum Shinkwin, Garrick Porteous11.15am: Prom Messawat, Matthew Baldwin, Jack Senior11.36am: Tom Lehman, Joaquin Niemann, Miguel Ángel Jiménez11.47am: Byeong Hun An, Jorge Campillo, Chris Wood11.58am: Joel Dahmen, Adri Arnaus, Dimitrios Papadatos 12.09pm: Stewart Cink, Rory Sabbatini, Innchoon Hwang12.20pm: Erik Van Rooyen, Kurt Kitayama, Jake McLeod12.31pm: Ryan Fox, Shaun Norris, Dongkyu Jang12.42pm: Tyrrell Hatton, Keith Mitchell, Thomas Pieters12.53pm: Justin Thomas, Tommy Fleetwood, Thorbjorn Olesen1.04pm: Brooks Koepka, Louis Oosthuizen, Shubhankar Sharma1.15pm: Billy Horschel, Jazz Janewattananond, Aaron Wise1.26pm: Jordan Spieth, Marc Leishman, Danny Willett1.37pm: Cameron Smith, Adam Hadwin, David Lipsky1.48pm: Paul Lawrie, Chez Reavie, Justin Harding 2.04pm: Takumi Kanaya (a), Tom Lewis, Brandon Stone2.15pm: Lucas Glover, Joost Luiten, Nino Bertasio2.26pm: Ernie Els, J.B. Holmes, Abraham Ancer2.37pm: Brandt Snedeker, Lee Westwood, Brian Harman2.48pm: Justin Rose, Tony Finau, Lucas Bjerregaard2.59pm: Dustin Johnson, Jason Day, Keegan Bradley3.10pm: Tiger Woods, Matt Wallace, Patrick Reed3.21pm: Jon Rahm, Patrick Cantlay, Matt Kuchar3.32pm: Kevin Streelman, Doc Redman, Robert Rock3.43pm: Adrian Otaegui, Yuta Ikeda, Isidro Benitez3.54pm: Patton Kizzire, Sang Hyun Park, Yuki Inamori4.05pm: Yoshinori Fujimoto, Doyeob Mun, Andrew Wilson4.16pm: Gunn Charoenkul, Yosuke Asaji, Ashton Turner Top-20 ranked players in bold; (a) denotes amateurs. All times BST And Rahm, whose temper has sometimes let him down, knows he has to win the battle of ice and fire if he is to claim his first major. “When you start getting water on the club face and balls start being a little bit unpredictable, it’s hard to hit all the fairways,” he said. “It’s hard to hit all the greens. “You have to grind out the pars and make the few birdie putts you have. Usually you get breaks. It comes for an hour, leaves for 30 minutes, comes for a little bit. So, if you can just somehow keep the momentum going and battle out those tough times, you can keep a round going. If you completely derail, which can happen really easily, you lose your swing, you lose your touch, it’s hard to get it back.” Rahm has devoured every act of Ballesteros wizardry on YouTube but confesses that without the legendary Spaniard he would never have taken up golf. His parents, Angela and Edorta, became hooked on the sport only after watching it for the first time when friends suggested they go and watch the Ryder Cup at Valderrama in 1997 – which was held in Spain because of Ballesteros. At the time Rahm was a one-year-old. Since then he has gone on to hold the record for being the No 1 ranked amateur in the world for the longest period of time – 60 weeks between 2015 and 2016 – and to become one of the best pros in the world too. And, as always, Ballesteros continues to be a source of inspiration. “I think I’ve seen as much as you can find of Seve in YouTube, really,” he said. “The inspiration, there’s a lot to look up to. I don’t think I have the talent to do what he did or to play the way he did. But I don’t care if it looks pretty, as long as I win the event. “And obviously it’s an event that’s really important as a European and as a Spaniard,” he added. “And it would be really incredible to do something that great players after him haven’t been able to. “Olazábal and García came close quite a few times. So it would be an honour to be the next Spanish player to win an Open. I would very much love to.” Odds of 14-1 suggest he has a fair chance.