It is not hard to find amusement in the concept of Australia’s top cricketers preparing for the Ashes by playing a formal match against one another. An observer with English cricketing sympathies might read this as evidence of Australians thinking they are better at everything. That observer might equally have enjoyed Australia beating up Australia, before Australia wiped out Australia in return. On a green wicket at Southampton with a battery of fast bowlers using it perfectly, one half of the squad rolled the other for 105, before reaching stumps themselves at 96 for seven. This was not a situation like 1994-95, when Australia and Australia A played a tournament as teams with distinct identities. A startlingly forthright banner at the MCG read “Australia plays with itself. Oh what a feeling.” The A team had players like Merv Hughes, Michael Bevan and Damien Martyn, and quickly won public support. National captain Mark Taylor was irritated, and (so the theory goes) sabotaged Australia A by promoting their best bowler Paul Reiffel to run drinks in the senior team when the two played off in the tournament final. In 2019 it is far less formal, dividing 24 Ashes hopefuls down the middle, each half under the tutelage of an assistant coach. It was initially hard to read the Hick Twelve as anything but a dozen-strong banjo choir or a group of suspects in a murder cult, but it was Graeme Hick facing off against Brad Haddin. One side had Australia’s first-choice quicks, the other had the fierce James Pattinson, the off-spin of Nathan Lyon, and the batting of Steve Smith. In fact the move to all-Australian preparation was not driven by arrogance. It was simply the lack of a viable alternative. For years now the Australian and English boards have been involved in a reverse arms race, from water pistols to pop guns to pointing rubber bananas, as the home side arranges ever-weaker opposition for its rival. England will offer county teams that are inspecting the floorboards under the second division, Australia counters with a two-day trip to tackle an invitational XI in Alice Springs. In 2015 Australia played Essex, Northamptonshire and Kent, all of whom rested their bowlers from first choice down to about 15th choice, while preparing the flattest possible tracks and asking Australia to bat first to ensure four days of gate receipts. Essex opened the bowling with the medium seam of batsman Jesse Ryder, while Northants pulled in Richard Gleeson from a minor counties team when his captain had never seen him bowl. Australia’s Shaun Marsh was able to swell his slender tally of first-class hundreds, and was picked for Trent Bridge where he made two runs in the Test. So it made sense this time to arrange a match where Australia could control the quality of the players, and where the jostling for Ashes places guaranteed they would compete. It made sense to request a grassy wicket as chance to get used to the moving ball. The brains trust might be questioning the wisdom of that component though after losing 17 wickets in the day for 201 runs. Great fun for the seamers but the batsmen will not have benefited from their string of brief stays, nor will Lyon or John Holland from four wicketless overs of spin. The scores of note were 41 from Marnus Labuschagne and 29 from Mitchell Marsh. The two of them may well be playing off for one spot, with Labuschagne being talked up as an all-rounder for his part-time spin. Nothing has been solved with the batting, where the main question is who of Joe Burns, Marcus Harris and Cameron Bancroft will partner David Warner. Each has his claim: Burns made 180 in his last Test outing, Harris 1,000 runs in the domestic season, while management will be desperate to get Bancroft back soon so they can treat the sandpaper suspensions as resolved. The main plus from this chaotic day was a strong hit-out from Pattinson, who roared in and bowled with verve and purpose in a way that his return of one wicket does not reflect. There is something particularly interesting about seeing a team’s best bowlers take on their best batsmen. Pattinson to Warner was one, Patrick Cummins besting Smith was another. The first day might have gone to the bowlers, but as this game goes on those individual battles could shift. As long as Pattinson and Cummins stay fit, a fast-bowling five where they sit alongside Mitchell Starc, Josh Hazlewood and Peter Siddle looks inked in. For that alone this summer, Australia will be well worth watching no matter whom they are playing.