When Zoey Goto drops her two-year-old daughter off at nursery in the morning, she has an enviable commute to work. For freelance journalist Goto is at her desk and opening up her laptop in under two minutes. The reason? Goto, 39, works from central London-based Cuckooz Nest, which doubles up as a co-working space and a creche, offering 36 desks for the adults and a nursery capacity of 18. Stocked up with toys and books and featuring a dress-up section and a breastfeeding room, Cuckooz Nest, located in Clerkenwell, opened in 2018 and allows parents to book desk space and qualified childcare on a flexible pay-as-you-go basis starting from £14 an hour, or £12 per hour as part of a monthly membership with a minimum commitment of eight hours a week. Goto visits the workspace three mornings a week through an eight-hour package which costs her £8.64 an hour after applying a 10% Islington resident discount and a further 20% off through the government’s tax-free childcare scheme (see right). For Goto, who also has a seven-year-old daughter, this hybrid model has provided a greater level of flexibility. “In the past I used traditional nurseries with set times, and it worked out fine as I was writing a book and was in charge of my own times. But now the bulk of my work is journalism, and I need to be able to respond to commissions that come in and be more flexible. Now I can accept writing commissions with short deadlines, which had always been a problem in the past. If I get a commission with a deadline in two days’ time, I can accept.” On top of the flexibility - highly desirable for a freelancer - is the money it has saved her. “It’s loads cheaper, as the going rate around here seems to be £12 to £14 an hour for a nursery space alone. Also, they give you a month of holiday, so you can take that off, whereas with nurseries you have to pay for every week.” She is also saving on paying nursery fees to cover the time when she is travelling to and from the nursery. Designed to help tackle the twin problems of escalating childcare costs and sometimes inflexible nurseries, a new breed of co-working spaces where rows of Macs are as ubiquitous as kids’ toys are attracting the interest of the nation’s growing army of freelancers, remote workers and entrepreneurs. Lydia Barron, 38, mother of Mabel, 8, and Elwood, 4, was swayed to join Huckletree West, a co-working space in London’s White City, in 2017 thanks to its Kids Studio, a dedicated area featuring books, bean bags and a TV where parents can either leave their older kids unsupervised or book a babysitting service for any younger children. Prices start from £175 per month for 10 days per month flexible drop-in workspace. “As soon as I saw the kids’ space, I thought it would be super-useful as my business partner and I have kids and, though they’re in school, there’s school holidays, and all our staff are parents,” says the co-founder of changing bag brand Tiba + Marl. “So it allows us to work and continue to run the office side of things, but people can come in with their kids. I used to be freelance and eventually had to put my daughter in a private nursery before school, but then you’re weighing up earnings and spending, and it’s not even worth it for £50 after you’ve paid for everything. A space where you can bring babies and kids would have been a game-changer.” Barron says her children spend at least one day a week at the space during the holidays. “They come in and just sit there and draw and read. It keeps them occupied for a few hours.” However, unlike Cuckooz Nest, Huckletree West isn’t a registered nursery. “It’s up to you to keep an eye on your kids,” she says. “Our office is just along the corridor and we can see in and make sure the kids are behaving themselves.” However, parents can book a babysitter. The emergence of such spaces comes as the cost of childcare in the UK is spiralling. The average cost of a part-time nursery place for a child under two now stands at £127 per week, increasing to £174 for inner London, according to Coram Family and Childcare. The former figure jumps to £242 a week for full-time hours. According to the TUC, the cost of childcare for young children in the UK has increased by more than four times faster than wages since 2008. Megan Jarvie, head of Coram Family and Childcare, says it can be a struggle to find affordable childcare. “Prices are high and only half of local areas have enough childcare for parents working full-time,” she says. “A whole range of different families can struggle with childcare costs, but families with the youngest children face the highest costs and receive the least support. For example, a single parent with a young child can spend up to half of their disposable income on childcare costs, even once they are claiming government support. Families are left with few choices if they can’t find childcare they can afford: some rely on friends and family, but others will find they simply cannot afford to work. These costs are really hitting families.” At the same time, the rise of technology has led to a surge in the number of freelancers, with self-employed workers increasing from 3.3 million in 2001 to 4.8 million in 2017, according to the Office for National Statistics. As a result, co-working has become increasingly popular - the number of global co-working spaces reached 14,411 in 2017 and is expected to jump to 30,000 by 2022, according to the Global Coworking Unconference Conference. Could this hybrid approach to co-working and childcare be the answer for this growing army of freelancers and entrepreneurs? Jonathan Lima-Matthews, senior policy advisor at IPSE, the Association of Independent Professionals and the Self-Employed, certainly thinks so. “Nurseries are often inflexible to the cyclical nature of contracts, leaving freelancers paying for a service they don’t need,” he says. “Just as in-house nurseries are a very popular benefit for employees, freelancers feel the same way about childcare in co-working spaces.” Plus, he adds, “co-working spaces can bring the advantages of an office environment, giving freelancers people to bounce ideas off, networks that advance their business, friends and access to support”. Cuckooz Nest co-founder Charlie Rosier says the space was born out of her experience of juggling childcare and work after her daughter Orla was born in 2017. “After six weeks I needed and wanted to get back to work – I then spent time looking at the childcare options,” she says. “I found it difficult to find a nursery or childminder that would take a small baby – plus very few offered the flexibility I wanted. An au pair was not an option as I didn’t want someone inexperienced/young looking after a six-week-old baby, and finding a nanny that would take part-time/flexible work was challenging. All in all, I couldn’t find a solution that was fit for purpose, and I realised that many others must be in the same situation.” Catering for newborns to two-year-olds, her business’s customer base include lawyers, architects, designers, journalists and PhD students. However, there are drawbacks to working with children on site. Goto admits the noise can filter through from the nursery to the office. “That is something I sometimes slightly struggle with, as we’re literally next door and can hear if a baby is crying, so it can be distracting, especially as a lot of the time you think it’s your own baby and it’s not.” It’s the same at Huckletree West. “It’s not completely soundproof,” says Barron. “If kids are screaming, you can hear it.” While the co-working/nursery model looks attractive, some businesses have struggled to make it work. For example, Caboodle, a company running pop-up co-working with flexible childcare at Windmill Hill City Farm in Bedminster, Bristol, was forced to close following a review of its finances. “Sadly there was no way we could make it sustainable – we were running at a loss,” says Caboodle co-owner Ellie Bowie. “The cost of childcare is prohibitively high, and building in flexibility means needing staff who are also willing to work flexibly and at the last minute. We spent a lot of time looking into finding our own space, but the cost of finding a suitable property, with both space to work, enough space for children and access to outdoor space, was almost impossible.” Similarly, Brighton-based Officreche closed in 2017 after six years of trading, while Entreprenursery, a London-based co-working space with a nearby creche, closed at the end of 2018 after two years of operating when the landlords decided to demolish the building. “I tried to find alternative venues to partner with, but it was too last-minute, and my business was too small to withstand such unexpected events,” says Entreprenursery founder Dahlia Dajani. “It was a very popular solution and I still get calls and emails daily asking about Entreprenursery.” Despite the demise of some similar businesses, after a year of trading Cuckooz Nest now operates a waiting list, and expansion is on the horizon, with a second space set to open later this year which will cater for children up to five years old, and third and fourth sites in the pipeline for next year. Rosier is optimistic: “The childcare sector is ripe for disruption. There is very little flexibility in how most nurseries operate and, as a workforce, we are moving towards greater flexibility.” For Goto, this model is the “future of working… There needs to be more places like this.” Just don’t forget your earphones.