While waiting at Longchamp for Japan to win Sunday’s big race, it crossed my mind to check how female jockeys are faring in France, two years after officials there decided to help their cause with a 2kg weight allowance, later trimmed to 1.5kg. The answer appears to be that the initiative, viewed with widespread suspicion in Britain, is proving a success. I remember reporting, when the idea was just a couple of months old, that uptake by trainers and owners had been limited and there was only one female jockey in the top 50 in France, and she was only in 32nd place. “Clearly there has been no gold rush here,” I wrote, and that still seemed fair when 2017 ended with just three women in the top 50. Last year brought the phenomenon of Mickaelle Michel, who led the jockeys championship for months in the first half of the year and eventually finished 12th. But what is more impressive, on reflection, is that seven female jockeys finished in the top 50 last year. Bear in mind that there had been none just two years before, when France-Galop decided to act. It seems that last year’s outcome was no flash in the pan, either. Once again, there are seven women in the top 50 at the moment and the best of them, Coralie Pacaut, is 12th. This year’s seven don’t even include Michel, who is having a slower year for reasons that have passed me by; she rode out her apprentice claim towards the end of last year, but so too did Pacaut. British racing might have a stronger tradition of female success in the saddle but we can’t match what’s now happening in France. Hollie Doyle and Nicola Currie are the only women in our top 50 and neither of them are in the top 25. Could it be that we need to consider introducing an allowance of our own? France-Galop’s chief executive, Olivier Delloye, told me yesterday: “The allowance means more rides, more wins and you can see one or two or three female jockeys now achieving a certain level of success, a certain status, with some media coverage. A rider like Mickaelle Michelle is pretty well known by punters. We have Coralie Pacaut, who has now won a lot of races and is known as a very good rider. “The question is, will they manage to step up to the next level as well, being given some rides in Group races [for which the allowance does not apply]. We would love them to ride better horses in good company. But it will probably take another few years to see one of them established at the top level.” Arecibo (3.50) is the nap, as he goes to Ripon in an attempt to follow up his success last Monday. That was a first British success for David O’Meara’s charge, who was useful in France. Evidently he is not the most tractable and it is probably no coincidence that a gelding operation was required before he could score here but he impressed last week and the runner-up was then third in a hot handicap at Ascot on Saturday. He’s still below the mark he had when first racing here in April and can take another step forward. He’s 100-30 because of the interest in Roundhay Park, a dual course winner who is running into form. It could be a good day for O’Meara, who has the 15-8 shot Infinite Grace in a nursery earlier. She put up a big effort at Pontefract last week on her handicap debut and may have been unlucky to run into a nicely treated rival. She runs from the same mark today. The O’Meara-fest continues at Ayr, where I’m a bit surprised to be getting 5-1 about Tomily (2.05). This veteran of 43 starts, who left Richard Hannon after bolting up in a seller a fortnight ago, has dropped 10lb in two months. He’s still fast enough to carry plenty of threat in this class. At the end of the card, there’s 5-2 about Arms Of The Angel (5.10), a steadily progressive three-year-old with Mark Johnston who should relish this marathon race against mostly older horses. She didn’t quite have time to get by a Sir Mark Prescott-trained winner at Epsom last week. Plunger (7.00) is the interesting one at Windsor tonight. He’s slipped below the mark from which he won last summer and Kieran Shoemark is an encouraging booking for a horse who ran well here last month. From the in-form Paul Cole yard, he’s 12-1. Ayr 1.35 Alix James 2.05 Tomily 2.40 Cliff Bay 3.10 Be Proud 3.40 Inner Circle 4.10 Club Wexford 4.40 Outside Inside 5.10 Arms Of The Angel Ripon 2.20 Precocity 2.50 Infinite Grace 3.20 Diamonique 3.50 Arecibo (nap) 4.20 Conundrum 4.50 Country 5.20 Myklachi Windsor 5.30 Cafe Sydney 6.00 Fleeting Prince 6.30 Cool Sphere 7.00 Plunger (nb) 7.30 Jumira Bridge 8.00 Sendeed 8.30 Hats Off To Larry Wolverhampton 5.40 Robeam 6.10 Milltown Star 6.40 Mendoza 7.10 Maiden Navigator 7.40 Global Destination 8.10 Allux Boy  8.40 Starkers