The Guardian appears at last to have woken up to the fact that, compared with the other nations of the UK, in terms of devolution and representative democracy, England is very much the poor relation (Editorial, 1 July). Let’s start by a structural reform of English local government and finance by getting rid of the last of the district and county councils and have unitary councils in their place, while retaining and strengthening town, parish and neighbourhood councils. Also, let’s grasp the nettle and replace the council tax. There are plenty of alternatives such as local income tax, land value tax or a simplified property or sales tax. Then let’s devolve real power to the English regions (possibly up to six or seven), turn the Westminster parliament into a federal parliament responsible only for economic and foreign affairs, defence and environmental planning, and then convert the House of Lords into a senate revising chamber with representatives taken from the UK nations and English regions. Finally, let’s make all elections by proportional representation.John MarriottLincoln • If the union is in danger it is at least partially because the dominance of England – 85% of the population, as you state – means the interests, even the existence, of the other nations are usually ignored. As early as 1917, a few enlightened Tories suggested a federal solution to avert the danger, as they saw it, of both an Irish republic and partition. They were ignored. Perhaps the breakup of England into its very different regions may be the only way to preserve a unified “British” state. Whether that is needed, or warranted, is another issue.Declan O’NeillOldham • I strongly disagree with some of your comments about Scotland. The Scottish parliament started well but has deteriorated substantially in recent years. Despite the fact that we have 129 MSPs for a population of just over 5 million, the general standard of the debates is much poorer than in the House of Commons. The quality of work by the Scottish parliamentary committees tends to be far lower than those in the Commons, particularly in relation to the Scottish economy. I have worked for both. It could be argued that an independent Scottish parliament would do much better than the current one; or that the poor quality of the current parliament strengthens the case to remain in the UK. In any case, the parliament has been a big disappointment in recent years.Tony MackayProfessor of economics, Inverness • What would happen to England’s ethnic minorities if the UK broke up? Will they remain British or become English? At present, most regard themselves as British because British identity is a legal rather than a territorial or ethnic concept. Once, you could be British irrespective of whether you lived in Lahore or Leicester. English identity, by contrast, is primordial. Unless English identity embraces those who are not ethnically English, is it not time that Britain, to safeguard the legal status of its minorities, had an English parliament similar to those of those in Scotland and Wales?Randhir Singh BainsGants Hill, Essex • While issues remain with the devolution of political power to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, nothing has been done to deal with the matter of England. That is particularly evident in London. After Margaret Thatcher abolished the GLC, the London assembly was eventually instituted but with more limited powers. While central government often blames the Greater London Authority and the current mayor for what does or does not happen in the capital, neither has the budget or the authority that existed in the GLC years. Perhaps the candidate for the Tory leader and prime minister who was once mayor of London might address the matter.Keith FlettLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition