Business leaders and trade unions greeted Boris Johnson’s election as Tory leader by urging him to avoid a disastrous no-deal Brexit. The Confederation of British Industry (CBI), Britain’s biggest business group, said he had to secure a Brexit deal in his first 100 days as prime minister. Johnson has pledged to leave the EU without a deal if he cannot secure an agreement by the 31 October deadline. Carolyn Fairbairn, the CBI director general, said: “On Brexit, the new prime minister must not underestimate the benefits of a good deal. It will unlock new investment and confidence in factories and boardrooms across the country.” The pound, which has been under pressure as Johnson’s coronation neared, fell by a third of a cent against the US dollar at $1.244 and was flat against the euro at €1.114 after the widely expected victory. Sterling has lost 15% of its value since the 2016 EU referendum, and last week hit a 27-month low against the US dollar at $1.238 as fears intensified about a no-deal Brexit under Johnson. With the confirmation that  Boris Johnson has won the Tory leadership contest, he will formally take on the role of prime minister on Wednesday afternoon. Wednesday 24 JulyNoon: Theresa May will take her final PMQs in the Commons. She is then expected to head to Buckingham Palace to formally resign as prime minister. Shortly afterwards, Johnson will head to the palace to be invited by the Queen to form a government and become prime minister. During the course of the afternoon and evening there will be announcements on who will form the new cabinet, and he may give a speech outside 10 Downing Street. Thursday 25 JulyParliament sits for the last day before it begins the summer recess. Johnson is expected to address the Commons. Tuesday 3 SeptemberAfter a five-week break, parliament returns. Sunday 29 September-Tuesday 2 OctoberThe new prime minister will face their first Conservative party conference, which is being held in Manchester. Paul Dales, the chief UK economist at consultancy Capital Economics, said Johnson could soften his stance when faced with the reality of Brexit. If he does not, the pound may fall further, he said. “The first three months of Boris Johnson’s tenure as prime minister will be turbulent,” Dales said. “How he deals with Brexit will probably determine whether or not he gets a second three months.” Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the Trades Union Congress (TUC), said working people already affected by spending cuts, low pay and falling living standards could not bear the impact of leaving the EU without a deal. “Even to threaten it [no deal] shows a reckless disregard for jobs, rights and livelihoods, and for peace in Northern Ireland. The impacts would be felt for generations to come,” O’Grady said. “No prime minister who truly cared about uniting and rebuilding Britain would take that step.” The CBI and TUC teamed up in March to warn that the country faces a national emergency if Britain leaves the EU without a deal. During the campaign for the Tory leadership. Johnson said Britain would leave on Halloween “do or die”, raising fears of a chaotic departure that would hit the economy. Other business groups and unions joined demands for Johnson to avoid leaving without a deal as Moody’s, one of the big rating agencies, warned on Tuesday that Johnson’s election had increased the chance of a no-deal Brexit. Leaving the EU without a deal would have “significant negative credit effects” for Britain’s debt, Moody’s said. Johnson has said he is prepared to increase government borrowing to pay for tax cuts and higher public spending. Adam Marshall, the director general of the British Chambers of Commerce, said Johnson had to get to grips with the detail of Brexit fast. “Companies need to know, in concrete terms, what your government will do to avoid a messy, disorderly Brexit … which would bring pain to communities across the UK and disruption to our trade around the world.” Financial firms also said Johnson must move swiftly to seek a way through the political logjam. International banks based in London are already moving jobs and business from the UK to EU countries in preparation for Brexit. Miles Celic, the chief executive of TheCityUK, said: “Brexit uncertainty is depressing business activity, but the financial and related professional services industry remains very clear that a no-deal Brexit is still the worst of all outcomes.” Dave Prentis, the general secretary of the Unison trade union, said: “Boris Johnson has spent the past few months talking up a no-deal Brexit that would be catastrophic for public services. After a decade of austerity, those services can’t afford the shock that crashing out of Europe without a deal would cause.” The Institute of Directors (IoD) and Federation of Small Businesses (FSB) said a no-deal Brexit would be bad for their members and distract further from measures needed to help business after years of uncertainty caused by Brexit. Mike Cherry, the FSB’s national chairman, said: “Securing a pro-business EU withdrawal agreement that can command a majority in the House of Commons is task one for this new administration.”