Netball World Cups tend to follow a formula. For top sides, pool games are cobweb-eliminating pseudo training runs, where combinations are trialled and results are fait accompli. Early on, coaches carefully manage players’ workloads, physically and psychologically, and save the intensity for the business end of the tournament. But if the Diamonds’ clinical 88-24 win over Northern Ireland in Liverpool on Friday night is any indication, the Australians – still stinging from losing to England in last year’s Commonwealth Games final and set on revenge – are going to go their own way this World Cup. While there is improvement to come over the next nine days, Lisa Alexander’s charges started with some serious purpose – and passion – and for the most part, maintained it over 60 minutes, despite personnel changes. It didn’t feel like a standard “bank it and move on” preliminary stage win, rather a statement to the tournament that the Diamonds are here for the trophy, even if it is not won on day one. A clumsy challenge from debutant Jamie-Lee Price on Northern Ireland’s captain and best player Caroline O’Hanlon in the third, which appeared to concuss the Irishwoman, was the only lowlight. Despite suggestions it may go by the wayside, the Diamonds’ rotation policy – which was criticised at the Games and left many wondering if even the coach knew the best line-up – seems here to stay, with Alexander leaving just two of the starting seven on the court after half-time and making other changes at three-quarter-time. The starting line-up saw captain Caitlin Bassett at goal shooter. She showed no signs of a recent concussion, scoring 33 from 34, before being replaced by Caitlin Thwaites. Steph Wood began at goal attack and looked slick, knocking down 12 from 13 before a nervy-looking Gretel Tippett took her bib. Kelsey Browne started at wing attack, but left the court at three-quarter time with a game-high 34 feeds, and was replaced by Liz Watson, who played the first two at centre. Watson was unlucky to be replaced by Paige Hadley at half-time, after picking up 17 feeds and 13 goal assists. Price had three quarters at wing defence but drew plenty of whistle – and a look of disgust from Northern Ireland coach, Australian Dan Ryan, for her interaction with O’Hanlon. As anticipated, Jo Weston started at goal defence, before April Brandley came on, but in a surprise move, debutant Sarah Klau got the nod at keeper, ahead of Courtney Bruce. Klau looked at home and picked up four intercepts and five deflections before Bruce came on at half-time. Weston finished the game at wing defence, in a sign Alexander wants more than one option in that key spot. After holding Northern Ireland goalless for almost five minutes after the first whistle, Australia were well in control by half-time, up 45-15. The Diamonds’ second combination picked up where the first left off, piling on 22 goals in the third, thanks mainly to Thwaites, who shot 15 from 16 and finished with 25/26. Tippett was quiet by her own lofty standards, scoring 18 for the half. The game ended as it began, with the Diamonds fighting for every ball and looking like a team that has had 12 July 2019 circled on the calendar since 15 April last year. Australia’s next match is against Cup debutants Zimbabwe on Saturday night in what shapes as a genuine David and Goliath battle, despite an opening 54-42 win over Sri Lanka. While the African nation qualified for its first Cup last year, the team had to resort to crowd-sourcing funds to get to Liverpool after the government failed to financially back it.