An Irish family facing deportation because their Australian-born son was considered a “burden” on the health system have been offered a last-minute reprieve. Anthony and Christine Hyde, and their son Darragh, 3, who has cystic fibrosis, were granted a ministerial intervention on Friday, after their pending deportation caused outrage across the country. The family moved to Australia in 2009 and have been fighting to stay on since 2015, when it emerged that Darragh’s condition prevented him from passing the medical assessment for those applying for permanent residency. Darragh relies on the drug Kalydeco to survive, which costs $300,000 a year but is subsidised under the pharmaceutical benefits scheme. Costs associated with treatment cannot exceed $40,000 a year under Australian migration law. If they were forced to leave, the Hydes were concerned they would have to wait at least a year before Darragh could access the drug in Ireland. “Late yesterday evening we received the good news that we were granted residency,” Christine Hyde said in a blog post. “We are so excited, a huge weight has been lifted and we can continue our lives. We … are completely grateful to everyone!” The family’s bridging visa was due to expire on 18 June, but they were told a few days earlier that the immigration minister, David Coleman, had decided to review their case. On Friday, Coleman finally intervened and allowed the family to stay on. He said he would not comment on an individual case. An Irish family has launched a last ditch appeal to stay in Australia after their little boy was ordered out of the country. Darragh Hyde was born here three years ago, but the federal government says he can't stay because he has cystic fibrosis. https://t.co/PLm0DiADA8 #7NEWS pic.twitter.com/hXFa6RsTHn The government had faced significant pressure to intervene. More than 120,000 people signed a petition to let the Hydes stay, and the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, had called on the federal government to show the family mercy. The Hydes lives in the Victorian town of Seymour, where Christine works as an assistant principal. Anthony is employed by SkyBus and volunteers for the State Emergency Service. “This is a great family,” Andrews said last month. “The young boy was born here, some compassion and some common sense [is needed]. The case is one of many in which a family seeking residency has had to plead for the minister to intervene because their child was considered a “cost” to the taxpayer.