The moment we won the World Cup is one I will never forget and would do anything just to experience again. It was the most euphoric sporting sensation you could possibly imagine. I was sat in the dugout, roughly at third man, as the throw came in from Jason Roy. In that split second I knew Jos Buttler would take the ball cleanly, I knew that Martin Guptill was short of his ground and from there, with the stumps demolished, I knew it would be total carnage. Without thinking I just sprinted on to the field and people were just running off in all directions. Well, everyone apart from Jofra Archer who was flat out on the floor. Adil Rashid came towards me for a hug with Jos but it was just a blur to be honest – impossible to remember fully or recreate. I saw Eoin Morgan mentioned in the press conference how Rash had told him that Allah was with us, and he replied that, for him, it was the rub of the green. You won’t be surprised to hear I was with Rash on this. After the defeat to Australia I told the boys we were destined to win the tournament but there would be struggle along the way. But Morgs was dead right to highlight how the different opinions on such things in this dressing room are actually part of our strength. We are an incredibly diverse team from different backgrounds and cultures but, crucially, we respect this and embrace it. We never shy away from it. It doesn’t matter where you come from or what you believe in, if you can come together with a common purpose – in our case winning the World Cup – and you show courage, unity and respect (our team mantra) you can achieve anything. Respect is having respect for the people you play with and against, and respect for the shirt. Unity is about sticking together but also uniting the country. That was always the bigger cause for us, not just the cricket. And courage is about having the courage to play our way and not shy away from this when things get tough. Once again you will have seen Rash and myself stepping away when the champagne was sprayed on the podium and I find it weird that people still think it is strange that we do it. We respect our teammates and their desire to do this, they respect our beliefs. It’s really that simple. The amazing thing about our team is that guys took time out very early on to talk to us about our religion and our culture. They have made adjustments for us and we have for them. And we live in harmony. I’ll give Jos Buttler as an example. I know that when he looks at me he doesn’t see the beard. I mean, he sees it, obviously, but having asked questions early on and understood who I am – and I him – he just sees me: another human being and a friend. It was the greatest game I have ever seen or been a part of. The overthrows that flew off the bat of Ben Stokes as he dived for the crease probably go down as the best shot he hit all match – or certainly the one he middled the best. After that I thought we couldn’t lose the game. I was convinced it was coming home. The super over was intense but even when Jimmy Neesham hit that six I still knew it would just need one good ball or one moment of inspiration and the trophy would be ours. As teammates, we have faith in each to perform under pressure and that paid off. Jofra has got serious ticker. You can forget how old he is – just 24 – and to bowl that over on the world stage just weeks after his debut says so much about him as a person and as a cricketer. He will go on to do amazing things because of the talent he possesses. Back in the dressing room it was Jos and Mark Wood who got the team song going – our own version of Allez Allez Allez that has lyrics written by the team – and then various renditions of Champione or similar. It was an amazing moment and a unique one for the five of us – myself, Eoin, Joe Root, Chris Woakes and Jos – who were there in 2015 when we produced such a terrible World Cup campaign. The families came in and we spent some time with them out on the outfield too. Adil’s mum was there for what was her first game of cricket, possibly at any level. Incredible, really. This was reward for her and all the parents and siblings, wives, girlfriends and kids who have been part of our journey. Morgs has always wanted extended families to feel part of the team and in those moments you know why. Winning this World Cup will hopefully give us so many new fans and they won’t just be from the traditional backgrounds but from all communities across the UK. People have been saying life will change for us now but me? No chance. I may be a World Cup winner but I will always be the lad who played cricket with his friends and cousins in the park on Stoney Lane in south Birmingham using an old milk crate for stumps.