New Zealand made the Cricket World Cup final after a gripping 18-run victory over India in the rain-hit semi-final at Old Trafford. After initially reducing the world’s No 2-ranked side to five for three, Kane Williamson’s side held their nerve amid late fireworks from Ravindra Jadeja to set up a final against Australia or England at Lord’s on Sunday. Resuming on Wednesday, the match’s reserve day, on 211 for five, New Zealand managed a further 29 runs from the final 23 balls of their 50 overs. Ross Taylor had added just seven runs to his overnight 67 before being superbly run out by a direct hit from Ravindra Jadeja. From the next ball, the first of the penultimate over delivered by Bhuvneshwar Kumar, Tom Latham struck cleanly high towards the leg-side boundary only for Jadeja to intervene again, leaping to catch two-handed above his head. Five balls later Matt Henry skied to Virat Kohli at deep midwicket. Michell Santner and Trent Boult managed seven runs from the final over to take their side’s total to 239. India got off to a catastrophic start in reply, losing their top three batsmen for one run each – a first in international cricket. Rohit Sharma was first to fall in the second over, caught behind by Latham off Henry after pushing awkwardly. Seven balls later their captain Kohli was stunned to be given out lbw against a straightening Bolt inswinger, struck on the top of his pads. On review it was found to be on course to hit the very top of middle stump. At the start of the next over, KL Rahul followed, caught well by a diving Latham after edging to a Henry delivery that rose a little sharper than he had anticipated. In the 10th over, with only 24 on the board, Dinesh Karthik was surprised to depart for six, again off Henry’s bowling, after an innocuous, barely-off-the-ground edge, low to midwicket, was brilliantly caught one-handed by Jimmy Neesham. Rishabh Pant and Hardik Pandya stemmed the flow of wickets, but with their side only breaking the 50 mark in the 17th over, India found themselves trying to slog the run-rate into their favour. In the 23rd over, with left-arm spinner Mitchell Santner keeping things tight, Pant swept confidently only to find Colin de Grandhomme between him and the boundary – the Kiwi all-rounder catching easily. Santner had conceded only five runs in 5.3 overs, and in the 31st Pandya succumbed to temptation and offered a substantial top edge while slog-sweeping, sending it high for Williamson to catch, leaving the score at 92 for six. It would be the 33rd over before they finally broke into three figures, MS Dhoni coming well down the track to strike the first six of India’s innings. However he would go on to forge a 100 partnership off 97 balls with Jadeja to keep Kiwi nerves jangling. All-rounder Jadeja rode his luck, nearly holing out to Taylor off Neesham, but he was the only Indian batsman scoring at more than a run a ball and the pair rallied valiantly to need 52 from the final 30 balls of their innings. However, the early losses ultimately left them too little breathing space, and Jadeja finally departed for 77 from 59 balls in the 48th over after one slog too many, caught by Williamson off Boult. Dhoni followed an over later, narrowly run out by another outstanding direct hit, this time from Martin Guptill, for 50. Lockie Ferguson bowled Bhuvneshar for a duck, and with 23 needed from the final over from the last two Indian batsmen, Yuzvendra Chahal was caught behind off Neesham to take New Zealand to their second successive final. Andy Bull’s report from Old Trafford will follow later