The trick of being John McCririck, or one of them, lay in his ability to make people smile while putting their backs up. He was outrageous, in both speech and appearance, because what he wanted most of all was a reaction and so he enlivened many a broadcast or social occasion that might otherwise have fallen rather flat. “I’m afraid we can be rather a bland lot,” reflected one horse racing insideron Friday, on being informed that “Big Mac” had died at the age of 79. McCririck’s career could be described as a reckless, headlong flight from anything remotely bland, and the standard reaction for any viewer, flicking channels and stumbling across him for the first time, must surely have been: “What on Earth is going on here?” Shaggily side-burned, he seemed to have assembled his entire wardrobe from what he found backstage during a pantomime. His endless array of hats included a fez, a boater, a Sherlock Holmes deerstalker and a pith helmet, which he accessorised with a fly-swatter. Thus attired, he gave betting reports accompanied by arm-waving “tic tac” signals that meant nothing at all to 99% of his audience. It did not matter, it was part of the show, and for 30 years there was hardly a day’s racing of any significance in Britain without Mac showing up alongside the bookmakers to do his bit. He was a magnet for casual racegoers, thrilled to be near perhaps the only person on the racecourse their friends would have heard of. At the first hint of someone mugging at the camera behind him, McCririck would seem outraged. “Behave yourselves!” he would bellow and perhaps walk away, shaking his head as if it was impossible to continue in these circumstances. Such a man was not asking to be taken seriously, and so McCririck got away with saying things that might have been enormously damaging to someone else’s career, notably almost anything he said on the subject of women. “There is no slander in an allowed fool,” as Olivia might have said, had they met. While McCririck thrived on the attention his persona brought him, the buffoon act sold him short. He was a skilled journalist whose investigations uncovered a couple of betting-related scandals in the 70s. The producers of Channel 4 Racing almost invariably turned to McCririck when there was a serious interview to be done. He prepared for hours before any broadcast, drew on notes he had compiled about key races over decades and could be relied upon to have read all the relevant news coverage before going on air, not so common a habit as might be expected. When he wasn’t hamming it up for the telly, McCririck’s manner could be a lot milder, even courteous and kind, though there was nothing contrived about the right-wing politics he expressed and held to in private. He formed what must have seemed to many an unlikely friendship with my father, Robin Cook, when they bumped into each other waiting for a train after the races at Doncaster. They were good company for each other. I think Dad enjoyed hearing tales about racing folk that could never be printed and in return shared similarly unverifiable insights into the world of politics. When Dad died, it seemed natural to ask McCririck to be among the speakers at his funeral. I’m afraid he was more outspoken that day than I could have wished, but on reflection this shows only naivety on my part. No one else was surprised. If I expected any kind of favourable treatment from him, I was soundly disabused some years later when appearing for the first time on ATR’s Sunday Forum, a debate show about horse racing. Waiting nervously for the ‘off’, I mentioned to McCririck some view I was planning to express. “That’s great!” he replied, with every sign of affable collegiality. “You say that, and I’ll destroy you.” It was not hostility and the gratitude was real. What McCririck valued on air was difference, dissent, raised voices and finger-jabbing. It generated more heat than light but he reckoned it made for good viewing and his longevity in television suggests he was on to something. One Thursday evening, Dad was surprised to find McCririck on his patch as a guest on Question Time. How did it go, I asked. “Typical John,” he replied, “spraying benzene and throwing matches.”