Iran has broken the terms of the nuclear deal for the first time since it was signed in 2015 in a move that will put pressure on Europe to do more to help mitigate the effect of crippling US sanctions. The breaching of the limits on uranium stockpiles, warned of in advance by Iran, follows the US withdrawal from the deal last year and frustration in Tehran that EU states have been unable to do more to counterbalance the results of US sanctions. European leaders urged Iran not to breach the deal, including at a meeting on Friday. They will watch to see whether Tehran makes further breaches of the deal on 7 July, as it has threatened. Tehran revealed through the semi-official Fars press agency it was breaching the deal by allowing its stockpile of low-enriched uranium to exceed 300kg (660lbs). Iran once had 10,000kg of higher-enriched uranium. Behrouz Kamalvandi, a spokesman for the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran, announced 10 days ago Tehran intended to exceed the stockpile limit. But at a meeting in Vienna on Friday between Iran and the other signatories to the 2015 deal, known as the joint comprehensive plan of action, the EU made new offers to persuade Tehran not to go ahead with its threat. At the meeting, the EU announced its long-planned trading mechanism with Iran, Instex, had finally been established and the first transactions completed. Iran and the EU are likely to meet again before 7 July in what will probably be a decisive meeting in an episode of diplomatic brinkmanship. Iran has threatened to increase the level at which it enriches uranium above the 3.7% limit in the deal, which is enough to fuel a commercial nuclear power plant. Weapons-grade uranium needs to be enriched to about 90%. However, once a country enriches uranium to about 20%, scientists say the time needed to reach 90% is halved. Iran has previously enriched to 20%. Tehran is convinced that with political will, Europe could do more to increase trade with Iran, which has collapsed over the past year. The wave of US secondary sanctions has deterred almost all large European businesses, including banks, from trading with Iran. On Friday, Tehran said some of the steps announced by the key European powers – France, Germany and the UK – were positive but not sufficient to deter it from breaking the deal. Before the Vienna meeting, seven other European states said they would join Instex. But Tehran has been pressing Europe to also use the trading mechanism to establish credit lines, so Iranian oil exports to Europe could be financed through it. Instex is confined to easing trade in humanitarian goods not subject to US sanctions, such as food and medicine. China has also given an undertaking that it will continue to buy oil from Tehran. Iranian oil exports have fallen to about 400,000 barrels a day, harming public finances. The Iranian foreign minister, Javad Zarif vowed Iran would never give in to US pressure. “If they want to talk to Iran, they should show respect. Never threaten an Iranian … Iran has always resisted pressure, and has responded with respect when respected,” he said in a speech broadcast live on TV. Zarif also said Instex could counter what he regarded as the weaponisation of the dollar in an attempt to impose US foreign policy on Europe. He said Instex did not meet Iran’s demands or Europe’s obligations, but still had a “strategic value” in showing “the closest allies of the United States are distancing themselves from America in their economic relations”. He added: “This will certainly have long-term effects.” Zarif claimed Russia and China had recently decided to stop trading with dollars as part of a global trend away from using the currency.