It is 10am on Friday when I wake up, groggily, to Dad making an instant coffee in our campervan. I feel awful; he looks fresh. I lost him quite early last night, somewhere amid the lights and sounds of Glastonbury’s late-night adult playgrounds. All the vodka probably didn’t help. Dad turned 60 earlier this year and started talking, somewhat morbidly, about making a bucket list. Having not been to any big concert, let alone a festival, since seeing the Rolling Stones back in 1975, attending the world’s best music festival was top of his wishlist. So I invited him along, slightly concerned that it might be overwhelming. In the run-up, he listened religiously to the Glastonbury 2019 Spotify playlist: Loyle Carner, Hot Chip, Kylie and Tame Impala all made his eclectic handwritten list. We are only a few hours in, but so far I’ve been pretty impressed by his rock’n’roll attitude: there is a no-glass rule on site, but he snuck in a bottle of scotch in his wellies anyway: “They’ll never suspect me, I’m old.” He wants to get a temporary tattoo to scare my mum. By 1.40pm, we’re ready for some music, after a morning of him randomly pointing towards various performers we pass to tell me that they, like us, are definitely Jewish. Dad wants to be right at the front of the Acoustic stage for our first gig, Grace Petrie. I’ve spent my fair share of weddings and barmitzvahs with the guy: I know he’s not much of a dancer. Instead, he stands still, smiling as he watches Petrie play what Dad labels a “really very exceptional” set. I told him in advance about the Glastonbury app that lists the stage times, but he has printed out the full programme, in colour, on A4 anyway; he carries it everywhere, bafflingly referring to it as “the menu”. I leave him alone for a moment to grab some pakoras, and he looks like some sort of official, with his stetson and paperwork. Fellow revellers keep asking him for set times, advice and directions. He happily obliges, until I intervene to apologise and explain he really doesn’t know what’s going on. It’s 4pm and Dad has already acquired a taste for the power that comes with amassing wristbands. We strike it lucky and talk our way into a VIP garden with a free bar. By 6pm, we are drunk and it’s scorching, so we head to the healing fields – a hippy oasis – for a rest. Dad dives into a yurt for a massage, taking his top off while explaining what hurts. Then it’s time for a tarot card reading. “It’s time to embrace something new,” a woman named Christina tells him. “Go out and fall in love again with life.” And so he does. We catch the end of Maribou State and then all of Jorja Smith. Dad doesn’t know her music, but by the end his hips are wiggling and his arms are swinging: the man who doesn’t dance is loosening up. A few more gigs (Billy Bragg, Tame Impala), a few more drinks, and suddenly it’s 11pm. We’re back in the Southeast Corner, where everyone heads to dance after sunset. We find ourselves looking at the leather daddies and drag queens of the NYC Downlow, Glastonbury’s celebrated gay club, its hedonistic heart. As far as I know, Dad hasn’t been gay clubbing before – certainly never with me. I ask if he wants to take a peek inside. With the tarot reader’s advice ringing in his ears, he agrees. We step into the darkness and immediately a queen named Cassandra grabs him and leads him backstage through the arsecheeks, harnesses and heels. I follow from a distance as he is taken to the dressing room, boobs, balls and lipsticks flying all around. Then, before I even register what’s happening, Cassandra escorts him on to the main stage. I watch from the crowd, smiling as they dance. Just after midnight, Dad appears again, very sweaty. The humidity steamed up his glasses, he says, so he couldn’t see a thing – which was probably just as well, I think to myself, given there’s a dark room at the back where condoms are handed out at the door. I’m not sure Dad quite knows what just happened, but before I’ve got time to ask him, he’s off to a Rocketman singalong in the cinema tent by himself. As he walks off, I don’t quite have the words to describe what I’m feeling, but I’m all warm and fuzzy inside. And no, I haven’t taken any drugs. The fact that I felt comfortable inviting him into my queer world, and he said yes and embraced it, feels special. When I came out of the closet as a teenager, ashamed and anxious, I could never have imagined this day would come. I wonder if he appreciates that I – we all – welcomed him, too. I down a gin and tonic and head back into the music, but by 2am I’m getting tired and make my way to bed. I feel a vibration in my pocket. “I’m going to be out a bit later than planned,” reads his text. “Have fun, don’t wait up!”