Mason Greenwood and Marcus Rashford put Manchester United on course for a 4-0 pre-season win against Leeds in Australia. A fine move involving the impressive Paul Pogba and the £45m signing Aaron Wan-Bissaka led to 17-year-old Greenwood’s first senior goal and Ole Gunnar Solskjær said the young forward may even force his way into his starting lineup for the first match of the Premier League season, against Chelsea. “He’s got a chance of starting that one, definitely,” Solskjaer said. “He’s more than capable and will always be there, in and around the box, creating chances. And I won’t say that’s not a possibility, no, it’s a good possibility. If he keeps going as he does. It’s difficult to keep players out who perform well. “Of course we’ve been delighted with the goal he scores. It’s important for strikers to get that goal, even though we always know he’s capable of scoring goals and maybe that’s a weight off his shoulders. I think his movement, his cleverness, he’s going to be a very good player, the young boy. “He can play all front four positions, he can play 10, seven, 11, nine, he’s a natural footballer. With his left foot coming in, he can play anywhere along the frontline.” Perth’s mammoth Optus Stadium hosted the first meeting between these sides since September 2011. Leeds showed flashes of quality but were eventually rolled over, with Solskjær completely rotating his side at half-time. Rashford and Daniel James – so nearly a Leeds player in January – hit a post each in the first half and United continued in the ascendancy after the break, with Phil Jones heading home before Anthony Martial converted a penalty in front of 55,274 fans to keep United’s 100% start to pre-season intact. . Steve Bruce was given an early indication of the size of the task facing him at Newcastle as Wolves thrashed his new side 4-0 in China. The former Manchester United defender, who quit Sheffield Wednesday earlier in the week, was finally confirmed as the new manager of the Magpies on Wednesday after days of speculation. With no time to fly out to Nanjing, the 58-year-old will have seen his team outplayed on TV by a Wolves side admittedly at a far more advanced stage of their pre-season preparations. Newcastle conceded three times before half-time at the Olympic Sports Centre, with Diogo Jota striking twice either side of a Morgan Gibbs-White effort and a Tom Allan own goal completed the rout. The appointment of Bruce has not been universally welcomed by supporters, who have long voiced their frustration with owner Mike Ashley. Even 6,000 miles away in China, there was the odd isolated “Ashley out” chant. The record signing Rodri made his Manchester City debut as the Premier League champions began their pre-season preparations with a 4-1 win over West Ham in China. A Mark Noble penalty gave the Hammers an early lead in the Premier League Asia Trophy match in Nanjing but David Silva equalised. Lukas Nmecha, who spent last season on loan at Preston, put City ahead from the penalty spot before a Raheem Sterling double in the second half.