The timing couldn’t have been much worse. Ahead of yesterday’s school break-up and the big holiday getaway, the pound dipped this week to its lowest value against the euro since the start of the year. While it’s great news for tourists coming to the UK, Brits taking their summer holidays abroad in the next few weeks face bar bills that might make even Peter O’Toole think twice. Blame Brexit. On the eve of the referendum result back in 2016, a pound bought you a heady €1.30. Ever since, the pound has pretty much floated between €1.10 and €1.20, depending on how close the market considered the country to be to a no-deal. And with that likelihood seemingly growing by the day, the pound is currently buying around €1.10, or $1.24 if you are heading to America. For many, it will be a blow. Back in March – when many will have booked their holiday – a pound got you $1.33 or €1.17, so they have seen a 6.7% increase – before they have even got to the airport. Whatever you do, don’t just rock up at the airport or ferry with a bundle of notes and head to the nearest bureau de change. If you do, you may as well just write “rip me off” in lipstick on your forehead. This week the walk-up rate at several airport bureaux was less than €1 to the pound – 98 cents, in fact. With a bit of planning you can easily get this up to a more palatable €1.08, or $1.218 – which means you will receive 10% more currency for every pound handed over. A host of currency suppliers will deliver your order to your home or office, or let you pick it up from the local supermarket. MoneySavingExpert’s dedicated website should be the first port of call as it will tell you who’s doing the best rates, in real time. Input your postcode and your preferred method of collection, and it will point you to the best deal in your area. To find it, just Google “MSE travel money”. The very best rates are always to be had from a host of bureaux de change scattered across central London. You invariably need to pre-order on the firm’s website or print a voucher, and then turn up perhaps an hour or two later. This week several London offices of ICE were offering more than €1.098 per pound. If you are outside London, do not despair: the Post Office, Sainsbury’s and Tesco were offering €1.087 this week. To get these rates, you again have to pre-order the currency – using the store’s website. The Post Office says buyers can pick up their euros and dollars two hours after the web order is made. Tesco will let you collect those same currencies in four hours. If you are spending £800, it is worth an extra £80 when compared to the worst walk-up rates at airports, so this is worth doing. Always use your debit card, not your credit card (or hand over cash) to make the payment. If you use a credit card there are usually 2% fees to pay the provider. Other countries’ currencies will take up to five days to be prepared. If you are heading to Heathrow airport tomorrow, and don’t have time for the local supermarket, book the rate tonight with Travelex and pick the cash up at the terminal. The rate is almost as good as the above (€1.08), though there is a £4.99 pick-up fee if you are ordering £100 worth or less. For collections between £100 and £299, you will be charged a £2.49 fee. Change £300 and over and it is free to collect. It all depends on how the markets view the likelihood of a no-deal Brexit. If the new prime minister was to be firmly rebuffed in his first visit to Brussels, and no deal became a real prospect, the pound would start falling even further, meaning fewer euros/dollars. This week Morgan Stanley warned that should the no-deal scenario materialise, the pound could fall into the $1.00-$1.10 range, which was last seen in the mid-1980s. Similarly, a pound would be likely to fall to less than one euro, making trips to the continent eye-wateringly expensive. An £8 coffee or £6 ice cream could soon become the norm in Venice and other top destinations. However, if you think no deal won’t be allowed to happen, or further delays are in the offing, you should hold off. The pound would start rising on such an outlook, meaning more euros or dollars for your cash. Turkey has been the stand-out destination because the Turkish lira is, to put it bluntly, one of the few currencies that has fared worse than the pound. At the start of 2015, a pound would have bought you 3.5 lira. This week you were getting around 7.07 – making it a top choice for bargain-hungry Brits. Bulgaria’s Sunny Beach was named by the Post Office earlier this year as Europe’s cheapest place to holiday. Portugal’s Algarve was the second cheapest destination, it said, when eating out and a basket of holiday goods were compared.