The Father Ted star Brendan Grace has died at the age of 68 after a short illness. The veteran entertainer and standup comedian played Father Fintan Stack in the popular Channel 4 comedy series about three priests. Grace died at 12.26am on Thursday surrounded by his family after being diagnosed with lung cancer 10 days ago, his manager confirmed. The actor, who also starred in the 2013 TV film Brendan Grace’s Bottler, had lived in the US for many years but returned to his native Dublin in early June, where he was first diagnosed with pneumonia before learning he had terminal cancer. He is survived by his wife, Eileen, and their four children. Tom Kelly, Grace’s manager for 27 years, speaking on Virgin Media One’s Ireland: AM programme on Thursday morning, said the entertainer’s death was a great loss to Ireland. “Although he was aware of the outcome himself in the last few days when the cancer was diagnosed, it’s a great shock to everybody,” he said. “He was very weak, he didn’t wish to have chemo or anything like that, and the inevitable happened. He was one of the greats in modern entertaining, it’s a huge loss.” The comedian Brendan O’Carroll, writer and star of Mrs Brown’s Boys, led the tributes, saying: “So sad at the passing of a great comedy legend, husband and father Brendan Grace. He opened doors for so many of us and leaves a legacy of love and laughter that will echo through this land and we will all mourn his passing. Rest peacefully Bottler, you’ve earned it.” Thousands of messages have been posted by fans on social media recalling fond memories of watching Grace with their families, calling him a “legend of Irish comedy”. Dee Forbes, the director-general of Ireland’s state broadcaster, RTE, said: “We are deeply saddened to learn of the passing of Brendan Grace. Brendan was one of Ireland’s original funnymen, and one of Irish comedy’s true pioneers. “While there are now many Irish comedians who are household names, Brendan emerged as a talent during an era when there were very few established Irish comedians. “Through his live shows, his live recordings, The Brendan Grace Show and many memorable guest appearances on RTE’s The Late Late Show, Brendan established himself in the hearts of generations of fans, not just in Ireland but all over the world. “Importantly, he also paved the way for many of the wonderful comedians this country has produced over the last 20 years or so and leaves behind a legacy he and his family can be proud of. The lord mayor of Dublin, Paul McAuliffe, opened a book of condolence for the people of the city to pay their respects.