Early in the spring of 1984, four years before Caroline Crampton was born, her parents embarked on a journey that would shape her life and lead, several decades later, to this book. In a boat they had built themselves over three years of snatched evenings and stolen weekends, they set sail from Cape Town and bobbed up the Atlantic. Using paper maps and taking only short breaks at Ascension Island and the Azores, they headed north until, at 3am on 17 September, they Scherzo arrived in the mudflats of the Thames. They spent that winter basking not in the azure warmth of South Africa but 8,000 miles away at St Katharine Docks, where the waters froze around their boat and ducks trotted on ice past their cabin. Yet they stayed. Growing up, Crampton knew the Thames estuary was “the place I loved best”. Taken aboard the family boat at six weeks old, she went on to spend holidays travelling the North Sea and give directions not by road name, but by compass point (“Walk north-north-east from the station and turn west at the war memorial”). Even as a rebellious teenager doing the teenage thing of spurning all that her parents had given her, the Thames kept calling her back. When a student at Oxford, she “walked hundreds of miles up and down its banks, shivering in icy frosts and sweating in muggy dampness”. Few stretches of water have been as hymned by the poets. In 1802, William Wordsworth composed a sonnet on Westminster Bridge that opens “Earth has not any thing to show more fair” and carries on oohing and aahing for the next 13 lines. This while the Thames was an open sewer in which, as scientist Michael Faraday later wrote, “the feculence rolled up in clouds so dense that they were visible at the surface”. No such soft-focus sentimentalising for Crampton, whose book expresses a more precise love. Where other writers argue the Thames made London, she looks at how men and women have made the river. As she travels through this book from source to sea, covering much of the Thames’s 215 miles by boat, the “ancient, dreaming quality” of its upper reaches barely distracts her from Victorian pumping stations, cranes and containers, shipwrecks. Mercifully little time is spent on pretty Oxfordshire with its prosecco and punting, while William Morris lamenting the river’s “cockney-isation” is waved aside as a nostalgia-monger. More than water flows along the Thames; for centuries, so has cash. In his poem “London”, William Blake wanders “thro’ each charter’d street, / Near where the charter’d Thames does flow” because the chartered companies have divvied up the river. St Katharine Docks, where Crampton’s parents spent their first British winter, was one of several built in the early 19th century to take in goods and people. That productive energy coursed through the Thames’s tributaries too, with manufacturers, agriculturalists and distributors setting up on their banks. London’s past as an industrial hub has been shamefully painted out, yet it shaped large parts of the city, such as the outer London suburb in which I was born and brought up, Edmonton, on the River Lea. The heavier the use of the river, the bigger the problems to be displaced. Surplus people and sewage – over the centuries both were shipped downriver to rot. Victorian parish authorities dumped their waste on the marshlands of Kent; Cockneys migrated to Essex. Crampton remembers how in the early 90s the river ran yellow and brown; today it can be as blue as the Mediterranean. Noticeable these days are not ships carrying coal from Newcastle but apartments offering river views to multinational investors who will never enjoy them. It’s a wonder that the Wordsworth sonnet hasn’t been deployed by estate agents. The money that used to flow along the Thames collects in ever fewer hands, and the main residue of the river’s industrial history is the condescension heaped on those who remind us of it. Tilbury, sniffed the Economist in 2014, is “a polyp of hard-up, mostly white, grumpy people”. Crampton’s sympathies are firmly with the polyp, although they are occasionally ill expressed. She praises Barking’s Labour MP Margaret Hodge for telling legal migrants “you’ve got to earn your rights” before qualifying for social housing, then a few pages later condemns Theresa May for her shocking treatment of Windrush-generation immigrants as lower-status Brits. The connection between the two may strike more than a few readers as glaringly obvious. In a book about how people live around the Thames, Crampton is intriguingly light on her own biography. Early on, she mentions how at 17 she was diagnosed with a blood cancer, and fitted A-level essays in with sessions of chemo. Just a few weeks after starting at Oxford, the illness came back. “When I struggled with the limitations my health placed on me, or felt weighed down by the need to pretend to those around me that everything was fine, the vitality of the river could cure me.” Then she bustles on to a brief history of the sealing of the Magna Carta at Runnymede, a subject to which she devotes more pages. In these days of publishers treating almost any non-fiction subject as an excuse for authorial memoir, such reticence is at first disarming. Yet this is also a personal book, as when Crampton moves on from discussing the smell of the estuary to a memory of how one hospital cancer unit “had such a powerful odour of saline, plastic, strong tea and gentle concern”. The further the author journeys down the river the more she lets her winning idiosyncrasies show, and the greater the reading pleasure. The result is a tender yet argumentative book dressed in a beautiful jacket that someone will panic-buy at Christmas for an in-law who will crack it open expecting fond cliches about The Wind in the Willows only to alight on an ode to mud, in all its varieties “from the silky ochre liquid that holds rills and ripples like frozen water to the gleaming, thick, caramel-brown texture exposed on the shore at low tide”. And what’s not to like about that? • The Way to the Sea is published by Granta (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.