I could not agree more with Rose Rouse (I’m a woman in my 60s: that doesn’t make me a ‘granny’, Journal, 23 July). No one would describe a 52- or 66-year-old man as a “granddad”, whatever activity he was involved in. In 2019, I would expect better, particularly from the Guardian, whose own style guide (if my “granny” memory serves me well!) bans such terms for older women – I was annoyed to see several examples in it recently. Calling a woman a granny defines her by her reproductive ability, which is demeaning, sexist and irrelevant. That’s galling for any woman, but especially so for the close to the one in five (and rising...) of us who, to our regret, will never have children (and thus grandchildren). It makes us feel like we are of lesser value to society. There’s quite enough of that going on already, thank you.Marieke BosmanAmersham, Buckinghamshire • As a woman in my late 60s, I was rather bemused by Rose Rouse’s diatribe against the disingenuous “granny” moniker being attributed to women of a certain age, whether they are or not. In my social media innocence, I have not noticed this to such a degree and would probably ignore it if I did. I feel our demographic has never had it so good, with so many opportunities to explore. I do take her point about ageism in the workplace, which should be completely denounced. But as a retiree, life is what you make it and if you constantly look to be offended by daft media tropes there is every certainty you will be. My advice is brush it aside and look superior when it is displayed because they are just showing up their own crass behaviour and wouldn’t appreciate an intelligent older woman if they fell over one.Judith DanielsGreat Yarmouth, Norfolk • Like Rose Rouse I am not a granny. Being two years older than me, at least she has not been forced to wait an extra six years to receive her state pension. Many of us stand to lose up to £48,000 following a lifetime’s work both outside and inside the home. A far greater concern than the granny stereotype for women born in the 1950s are the hardships they have suffered because of the cruel policies of successive governments to raise the state pension age twice and then speed up the timetable of change. Boris Johnson recently pledged to help the so-called Waspi [Women Against State Pension Inequality] women. et’s see if he delivers on his promise.Dr Diane BebbingtonLondon • Women are never reduced to simply grannies, but are augmented by a new role and responsibility regardless of age, race, education or wealth. It is a privilege beyond words to be a grandparent, of whom over five million in the UK are primary carers of grandchildren (according to Age UK figures for 2017), a noble and respected role far from “simple”. “Granny”, “Grandma” or “Nan” usually suggest warmth and comfort to children. Anyone doubting the life-affirming contribution of a granny, this time in dire poverty, can read Bill Cullen’s heart-warming and unforgettable autobiography, It’s a Long Way from Penny Apples.Liz ByrneLetchworth, Hertfordshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here