Three thousand new Mazda cars are being urgently recalled in Australia, with fears that their wheels could fall off. And other recalls have been issued for Jeep and Dodge cars, with faults that could cause the windshield to detach, and issues with braking. The 2019 Mazda 3 hatchback has an issue with the wheel studs that connect the wheels to the car. According to a statement from Mazda, “rattling noise occurs prior to a wheel detachment from the vehicle”. There are 3,323 cars affected, sold between 8 April and 21 June 2019. Drivers can check their car on the Mazda site, using their vehicle identification number, which can be found on the user manual – not on the license plate. Repairs will come at no extra cost. At the same time, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission also issued recalls for older Jeep and Dodge cars, made between 2007 and 2010. The faults range from the windshield falling off to the brakes failing. This includes the Jeep Cherokee between 2008-2010, Jeep Compass 2007, the Dodge Caliber 2007, Dodge Nitro 2007-2009 and Dodge RAM 2010. Product Safety Australia said that, for the Mazda 3, “during manufacture, wheel studs may not have been fully seated”. “A small gap may exist between the wheel studs and the hub assembly. Continued use of the vehicle may cause: the wheel nuts to loosen [and] a knocking or clunking noise. “The stability of the vehicle may be affected, increasing the risk of loss of vehicle control and potentially resulting in an accident injuring vehicle occupants and other road users.” For the Jeep and Dodge cars, Product Safety Australia said the problems ranged from braking issues to incorrect numbers on the tyre placard. The Jeep Cherokee 2010 model has a fault where the brake pedal linkage clip “may have been manufactured incorrectly”, the recall said. “A defective or missing brake pedal linkage clip could cause the brake booster input rod to detach from the brake pedal. “If the brake booster rod detaches from the brake pedal, the vehicle may lose its service brakes, increasing the risk of an accident that may cause injury to the vehicle occupants and other road users.” The fault affects 55 vehicles. The Jeep Compass and Dodge Caliber 2007 models have an issue where “length of the rear wheel hub mounting bolts may prevent use of the park brake”. The fault affects 20 vehicles. The Jeep Cherokee 2008 model has a fault where “the windshield and/or quarter glass may have been installed using an incorrect urethane adhesive”. This means “the glass can separate from the vehicle while driving”. It affects 12 vehicles.