In a long overdue change to the impossible perfectionism of so much food TV, Nadiya Hussain’s forthcoming BBC show Time to Eat will strike a more realistic note as the Great British Bake Off-winner uses tinned spaghetti hoops and instant noodles to rustle up her no-fuss meals. “We need to stop being pretentious and think about the fact some people struggle for money,” Hussain told Radio Times, while explaining a time she was faced with either paying her gas bill or boiling potatoes, so reached for the tinned variety instead. That Britain needs reminding of that reality is a subject for a longer, more serious piece than this. But Hussain goes further in asserting that, far from being a fallback in hard times: “There’s nothing wrong with using canned food.” Contradicting decades of fresh-is-best messaging, she has a point. No one would make the gastronomic case for watery, mushy tinned vegetables, but the idea they are nutritionally worthless is wrong. What research there is suggests that, while tinned vegetables lose some water-soluble vitamins B and C, fresh vegetables deteriorate during storage and transportation. Consequently, after cooking, the nutritional values of canned and fresh vegetables are often closer than people would imagine. That complex comparative analysis needs more research, but the wider snobbery that attaches itself to tinned food, the idea it is always poor quality, is clearly nonsense. It baffles the Spanish and Portuguese, who have turned the careful preservation and canning of mackerel, sardines, anchovies, smoked oysters and tuna into an art. Top a salad with line-caught ventresca tuna (soft, fatty, richly meaty belly fillets; the Ortiz brand is widely available in the UK) and it is one of the best things you can eat. As the Spaniard Maximiliano Arrocet, the co-organiser of the 2014 London pop-up Tincan put it: “You can get gourmet food in a tin. It’s not frowned upon.” Lower down the gastronomic pecking order, only the most militant foodie would deny that industrial processing has definitively nailed the flavour of certain products. Is there anything more depressing than a chef home-making baked beans when Heinz exist? Similarly, attempts to jazz up hotdogs rather than open a tin or making corned beef from scratch always jar with what we expect to taste. The best of both worlds is where tinned and fresh produce combine to produce something quick, cheap, nutritious and tasty. Fry some garlic and onions, add almost any veg, throw in a tin or two of chickpeas or cannellini (life is too short to soak and cook dried pulses), chopped tinned tomatoes, tomato puree and stock (made from cubes, naturally), let it bubble away for a bit and you have a large vat of soupy joy that, remixed with pesto, chorizo, chillies and rice, will feed you over several days without ever making you feel you are missing out.