After a two-window hiatus in which they failed to sign a single new player, Tottenham are waving their chequebook about with abandon as they go about reinvigorating an understandably jaded squad for the coming season. The signing of Jack Clarke from Leeds United preceded the loudly trumpeted arrival of Tanguy Ndombele from Lyon for a club record £55m on Tuesday and now the Mirror is reporting that Spurs are “highly likely” to bring in Ryan Sessegnon from Fulham. Eager to move to White Hart Lane and with just one year left on his contract, the 19-year-old full-back will almost certainly get his wish once the two clubs agree a fee. Tottenham are willing to offload England full-backs Danny Rose and Kieran Trippier and Napoli have inquired about the duo’s availability. With Trippier, in particular, looking certain to leave the club sooner rather than later, both Everton and Crystal Palace have also been mentioned as possible future destinations. With Toby Alderweireld also likely to be heading for the White Hart Lane exit, Tottenham could offer him to Roma as part of some a swap deal with the young Italian striker Nicolò Zaniolo. Meanwhile in Spain, the club’s attempts to thrash out a deal with Real Betis to make a Premier League player of their Argentinian midfielder, Giovani Lo Celso, have reached an impasse as the two clubs are unable to settle on a price. Fed up with life at Newcastle, Isaac Hayden wants a move to pastures new and could fetch up on the pristine pasture of Molineux. The Northern Echo says the 24-year-old midfielder is available for around £15m and is also wanted by Watford, Brighton and West Ham. According to the Sun, Newcastle have sounded out Belgium’s Roberto Martínez to see if he’d consider filling the big boots of their recently departed manager Rafael Benítez. The word in Portugal is that Miguel Pinho, agent of the Sporting midfielder Bruno Fernandes, is en route to England this morning to discuss the future of his client with representatives of both Tottenham and Liverpool, while reports closer to home suggest he arrived last night for an audience with Manchester United officials. Call the Rumour Mill an old cynic, but it’s almost as if nobody really has a clue what is going on. Resigned to losing Harry Maguire before the transfer window closes, Leicester hope to replace him with the Brighton central defender Lewis Dunk, who could cost them £40m. The Foxes are also close to securing the £40m signing of Youri Tielemans from Monaco after his successful loan spell last season and could complete their summer trolley-dash by paying an eye-watering £30m for Newcastle striker Ayoze Pérez. And finally, Gareth Bale is beginning to resemble the kind of forlorn stray dog the Rescue Centre is unable to rehome for reasons nobody can quite fathom, as Marca reports that Real Madrid have fielded no inquiries whatsoever about the availability of a player who has very publicly been deemed surplus to requirements at the Bernabéu by his manager.