Lina, 23, grew up in east London. She recently switched from 400m to hurdles I don’t come from a sporty family at all. My mum was raised in rural Egypt, where sport wasn’t on the radar, but I’m thankful because I’ve seen parents walk away from their child if they’ve not won a race. Even when I came last in the European juniors mum said: “But 54.7 is a good time!” As my twin sister Laviai lived in an Olympic borough, we volunteered at the 2012 games, and we saw what elite sport was like up close. I carried Jess Ennis’s kit bag on to the track for her 200m final. The scream when she walked out was unbelievable. We’d seen her picture plastered all over billboards, but she was right there. We thought, “If she’s done this, why can’t we?” I carried Jess Ennis’s kit bag for her 200m final in 2012. We thought, 'If she’s done this, why can’t we?' Up until then, we just loved PE. We had a track painted on the astroturf at our school playground and we would set ourselves challenges, like how many laps we could do in a lunchbreak. We’d do the mini-marathon and school competitions, but after the Olympics, we decided to see how far we could go if we trained properly. In 2015 we both made the European junior championships and won gold in the 4x400m relay. It was the last event of the day so the whole GB squad was cheering us on. I remember exactly how loud the screams were – I can hear them in my head now. We got signed by Adidas and we were suddenly considered professional athletes. The year before that I was ranked 100th in the country, I was nowhere to be seen, and overnight I was ranked third in Europe. It was crazy. It hasn’t been easy, though. At the European juniors, we also both reached the 400m final, but I got a cold that day, so although I was ranked third I came eighth. I was heartbroken, but my sister won so I was saying to myself, “Don’t cry don’t cry don’t cry.” Then two years ago we made the European indoors, but I had to pull out with a grade two stress response in my fibula and she got to the finals. In a way it helps me because there’s somebody to support. It also gives me confidence because we’re identical, we’re carbon copies of each other so if she’s achieved it, my time will come. After those championships I looked for inspiration and found that Jessica Ennis had an injury before the 2008 games. I decided it was a rite of passage, and gave me a chance to step back and work on the basics. I decided to run the hurdles, and after one race I was ranked higher than I was in 400m. Suddenly I was enjoying sport again.I train five days a week. I do a long warm-up, then either accelerations, speed running or endurance, then we do strength and conditioning, and of course hurdles sessions, too. There are so many things that you have to maintain; your nutrition has to be on point, your recovery, your mindset. It’s not just about the three or four hours on the track, every decision you make affects your chances. I have to sacrifice a social life. My friends want to go and party until 2am, but I can only make it to 9pm, because I have training in the morning. I also feel like I never really experienced uni. Wednesdays were the partying night, but I trained on Wednesday evenings, I was never part of any societies because I never had any time. I sacrificed part of that teenagehood, but I don’t regret any of it. To stand on top of a podium is a special thing, because it’s so rare. I so want to do it in Tokyo. Kyle, 21, dives individually and alongside team-mate Matty Lee from the 10m board I was a hyperactive kid so, aged three, my parents took me to gymnastics to release some energy. The coaches saw me messing around and asked if I wanted to start on the squad. I did that for 12 years, and was ranked fourth in the country for my age at 12, but then I broke my elbow which put me out for six months, and I fell behind. Then in 2010, British Diving sent fliers around schools because they were talent-testing. Out of 70,000 kids they picked three boys – and I was one of them. I remember my first dive from the 10m board. I stood there for about three minutes, swaying back and forth deciding whether to do it or not, but you do it so much it normalises it.I was soon training six days a week and after three years I got into the junior GB team, then in 2014 I was junior European champion and junior world bronze medalist. I had a really good chance of going to Rio, but I had nerve damage in my shoulder that was so serious it put me out for two years. In training I’d get a searing pain from my shoulder right through to my fingertips, but I ignored it and carried on. After a while so much scar tissue had built up that I went to a competition and tried to swing my arm and it wouldn’t move. I couldn’t even raise my hand to brush my teeth. I rested it for six months, did one dive and the pain was back, so I had to have surgery. In my time out injured I got a taste for normal life, chilling, not chucking myself off a board every day I was out for two and a half years in total, and in that time I had to make a call between going into full-time education or focusing on sport. I’ve ended up doing both – I’m studying geography and economics at LSE. But in my time out I got a taste for normal life; chilling with friends and socialising, not having the stress of chucking myself off a board every day. It would have been so easy to sack it off, but I didn’t want to be the same as everyone else. That was the motivation to get back to training. Physically, six months back into training I was back at the same level, but mentally I’d fallen so far behind – the guys I was competing against were way ahead. Having made up that ground, now when I compete I always think I can’t mess this up – I’ve worked too hard. We train for five hours a day, 25 hours a week, and within that we do weights, strength and conditioning, gymnastics and actual diving. I don’t live the normal life of someone my age, but that’s been the case for years. My diet goes out the window sometimes, and I’ve slept in the library way too many times, but I have fear of missing out, so I have to give both uni and diving everything. The fact that your source of funding is constantly at stake based on performances is another stress. You’d think all we need is a towel and some Speedos, but it costs close to £10,000 a year for the bare minimum; travel to comps, training camps, Airbnbs. GB diving is so strong that nobody is guaranteed a place in Tokyo. We’ve got five guys fighting for two spots, and Tom [Daley] obviously will get one, so four of us are left fighting for the second one. It could be anyone. I’ve invested so much in getting to the games, I have to see it through. Last month, Giarnni, 20, won silver at the European Championships for the floor I was three when I went to my first gymnastics session, then at four a coach saw me pull myself upside down on the rings and they put me straight into a development group. It wasn’t just the sport I loved, it was the way I felt when I was doing it. Being upside down and not knowing where you are was an adrenaline rush even at that age. Before I knew it, I was training six days a week. I was all set to go to Rio; I’d won three golds and two silvers at the Europeans, I was at my peak, then everything changed. I was trying a new skill on the high bar; doing a double backflip with a full turn, but I couldn’t catch the bar. It wasn’t happening so I was getting annoyed. I pumped myself up and went for it and I caught the bar with my left hand, but my right missed so I swung round on one arm, shot off to the side and hit the wall with a straight leg. It snapped and I was in agony. It was so swollen I had to wait three months to have surgery. The injury was so severe, they had to take tendons from my good leg to make a ligament. my leg was in a brace for nine months and I had to learn to walk again. “I couldn’t even lift my own leg so I couldn’t even imagine myself jumping, let alone getting back to being a world-class gymnast. I thought it was game over. I was away from the training environment, on bed rest watching TV so I got lazy, but Team GB took me out to Rio to watch. It was a long flight with my leg in a brace, so it flared up like a balloon, but I didn’t care – I was going to watch the Olympics! That put the fire back in belly. I met a sports psychologist there and asked her for her help. Coming home all I could think was, “Get me back in the gym.” Learning to walk again was a huge battle. My leg shook with each tiny step because I’d been in a brace for nearly nine months, so I had no quads, no calves, nothing. Once I got the confidence back walking – after nine months, I started increasing the speed, from there I did little jumps and I built up from there. To get mentally and physically well took a good two years. My biggest fear is not making the team. I’ve been in the gym since I was three, All I want is to go to the Olympics Injury isn’t my biggest fear, not making the team after working so hard is. I’m in the gym six days a week, missing family holidays and nights at the pub with my mates. There are nights where I’m exhausted, my hands are cut up and blistered and I’ve got to go catch the bar but I can’t afford to lose focus, because that’s when things go wrong. That’s all got to come down to the Olympic Games. The fear is doing all of this, then not making it. My greatest achievement isn’t a medal or a championship – it’s coming back. At the World Cup in Tokyo in April I went up against the Japanese gymnast Kenzo Shirai – he’s been world champion numerous times, and should have won at Rio but he made an error. I looked down at my scars and went for it. When my score came up I’d beaten him. That was all I needed – I’d beaten the best in the world. I could finally say I was a world-class gymnast again. I’ve been in the gym since I was three years old, all I want is to go to the Olympic Games. Kye, 19, from Peckham, south London, is ranked number seven in the world “I grew up in south London, one of six brothers and sisters. My older brother Daniel was the first one to join the GB team, then Tre and now me. I learnt to ride a bike when I was two, started riding a BMX when I was three, then at four I started competing. When I was a little kid I had full-body eczema and really bad asthma, so I had to use these massive asthma pumps, but doctors said BMX would help, so I used to ride round until I couldn’t breathe, take my inhaler then keep going. It was bad for my eczema – dusty and dry – but my mum kept on top of that. From the age of five to 13 I won 10 British championships. I got to the point where I would race up two age classes, so I would be eight racing 10-year-old boys and I was still winning, but when I got to aged 13 I had a massive accident. I knocked myself out for five days, I had a bleed on the brain, a broken jaw and I didn’t ride for a year and a half. I was racing the older boys and someone crashed in front of me. I tried to move out of the way in midair, which is impossible, so I fell and knocked myself out. I don’t really remember the accident, or much for months after it but I didn’t go to school for months because my cheek was completely off – I needed a skin graft and I had to eat through a straw. I couldn’t exercise, I was bedbound but I knew I wanted to get back on the bike, it was just a case of when and how. After 11 months I went back to the doctor and my brain looked fine, so I could ride again. That first session back I was training as hard as I could and constantly being sick, but nothing was going to stop me. It wasn’t until I was 16 going on 17 that I started to get my confidence, my skills and my speed back – and got back on the GB team. Whenever I crash I think, “Why do I do this?” But then I still get on and go again One of my highest points was winning the World Cup in Manchester this year. The first day I was confident I could make the final and hopefully win it. I got to the semi-finals but then someone crashed in front of me and my day was done. I had a drop of confidence and the second day my starts weren’t as good, but the one time I did get a good start was in the final, and it worked out. It was unbelievable to win. Getting to training is a daily challenge. In winter I just want to quit. I can’t stand it. Trying to keep the motivation week in, week out is the worst because it’s 10am until 5pm. We do track work, then bike work on the flat, sprints from a dead stop and gym work. Doing that nonstop with no competitions is draining. It gets you really strong and that gets you the outcome, which is where you get the motivation from, but it’s relentless. This year, because of the Olympics, we started in February and we’ll compete right the way up to October with no breaks. From the World Cup in September last year to next July every race counts for Olympic points – we get points as riders and for our country. If GB gets in the top two, three riders can go, if it’s top five to three we get two riders and after that it’s one rider. The goal is to get three but we only have five riders, while other countries have ten. When I’m racing I have to keep composed, because you make the littlest mistake and the other riders will hunt you and catch you. You can crash at any time, and that crash can put you out for a year. Eight people are going over a massive jump at once, and it’s a contact sport so you can take each other off. Sam Willoughby was one of the best ever, but he flipped off the bike and was paralysed. If he was still racing now, I’d be racing him. Whenever I crash I think, “Why do I do this?” But then I still get on and go again. The highs are better than the lows. That’s why I’m pursuing this. Ellie, 21, is a 57kg featherweight boxer from Catford, southeast London If I had a kid, I wouldn’t let them box, because I know how much you have to sacrifice for it. I’d put them in ballet classes. My kid would be girly as anything. I’m in Sheffield Monday to Thursday, I get up at 6.30am, weigh myself, then I’m on the track at 7am to run – and I hate running. I’d rather get smacked in my face 10 times than run 100m. Then I either do pads or strength work, and then it’s sparring. In London on Fridays I have longer sessions, and Saturday I either spa or run. Sometimes I think a nine to five would be easier – when you’re at home you switch off, but with boxing it’s 24/7. I grew up in Catford in southeast London. My brother boxed and I followed him like his little shadow. I begged him to take me to the gym, but eventually my cousin Jim gave in instead. I was a little fat kid and nobody was taking girls’ boxing seriously then, so it faded out after about a year. My coach Colin kept saying, “Ellie, come back to the gym,” and I would laugh and say, “Yeah yeah, I’ll be back.” Then when I was 16 he passed away and I felt like I owed it to him to go back. I walked in the gym at 75kg and Sam – my coach now – said “Ellie, you’ve got to sort yourself out, look at you!” I decided I was going to prove those idiots wrong, and six weeks later I’d lost 15kg and everything flowed. When you walk into a gym as a girl, people don’t necessarily give you the respect – they think girls’ boxing is a cat fight, but once you start fighting they recognise you’re not a girl boxer, you’re a boxer. I had my first fight a week after my 17th birthday, then I won the youth ABAs with only four fights under my belt. I was offered a place on a GB programme, but I didn’t want a golden ticket, I wanted to know I’d earned my place so I said no and went straight into the senior ABAs without a senior fight, because they kept falling through. I won the senior ABAs at 19 and got on to the GB squad. Not long after that, though, I was out for 18 months because I broke my hand, and I was an idiot and carried on boxing. They had to get bone from my hip and put it in my hand with pins. I was a mess, mentally and physically. I was coming to the club constantly, just punching the bag with my right hand, running, skipping. I put all my frustrations on to everyone else, but that experience taught me to listen, so I’m grateful for it now. I run every morning – and I hate running. I’d rather get smacked in my face 10 times than run 100m I lost to a French girl, Mona Mestiaen, in my last fight before I got injured, then I drew her first in my first tournament back. She’d got a European medal in that time, but I gave her a count in the first round and beat her. Then in the European final I boxed this girl who was about 8ft tall and her arms were down to her ankles, and I only went in at about 60% so to walk out with silver medal was incredible. I’ve got to give it 100% not just in terms of how I’m training, but how I’m living, because everyone is world class. I’ve never drunk alcohol, I obviously don’t smoke and I’ve never even set foot in a nightclub. I spent my 21st birthday in Russia without my family, but it was perfect because I got through to the finals of the Europeans. I miss out on family holidays and birthdays all the time. My friends say, “Ellie, you’ve got to live a bit,” but this is me living. Before a fight I always think, “Why am I doing this?” In that moment, I hate boxing – it tests you so much. Before my first fight in the world championships I had Delhi belly so I knew if I took a body shot, it was going to be the end of me. I said to coach Dave Pocknell, “I hate this bit Dave” and he said, “You should love it because that ring is your home, go get in there.” He’s right – it’s all in the mind.When I think about going to the Olympics it makes my belly turn over, but that ring in Tokyo is where I’m meant to be.