What were you hoping for?I was told he was a cyclist, so nice legs. First impressions?Charmingly boyish. What did you talk about?Berlin, philosophy and acid communism. Any awkward moments?No olives on the menu. Good table manners?He smeared food all over his face; it was appalling. No, of course not: it was pizza – it was fine. Best thing about Mark?His self-awareness. He mentioned the communist manifesto, but not in a sixth-form kind of way. Would you introduce him to your friends?My friends are going to miss me when I move to Berlin, so it might be a little consolation prize for them. Describe Mark in three words.A natural blond. What do you think he made of you?I think he suspected I wasn’t a natural blond. Did you go on somewhere?To a pub round the corner, where I had to dodge a few exes. And... did you kiss?Yeah, duh. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Probably not showing up two pints deep. Marks out of 10?Rating an experience according to its perceived value is such a capitalist construct, but I’d give it a solid 8. Would you meet again?Depends what he says about me in this column. What were you hoping for?I didn’t want to be paired up with one of those stuffy, shy-Tory types. First impressions?Relief. See above. What did you talk about?Wanting to move away from London. I talked a bit about hauntology, which probably came off a bit pretentious. We were both slightly trashed towards the end, but I think there was something about films. Any awkward moments?Summer said she’d waited six months for a Blind Date because there’s a dearth of applications from straight men, and I told her I wouldn’t call myself straight. Good table manners?I’m not really in the business of policing other people’s behaviour. Best thing about Summer?She had a really interesting background. Also up for drinking on a school night. Would you introduce her to your friends?She’s moving away in a fortnight, so I can’t see it. Describe Summer in three words.Colourful, friendly, characterful. What do you think she made of you?She said I was more interesting than she’d expected. Did you go on somewhere?To a pub on Columbia Road. And... did you kiss?Yeah, briefly. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I wish I’d had a few tinnies on the walk to the restaurant. Marks out of 10?7.5. Would you meet again?Sure, why not? • Summer and Mark ate at Spelzini, London E1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com