Diarmaid MacCulloch’s vast and exhaustive Thomas Cromwell: A Life, published in 2018, was described by Hilary Mantel – no slouch when it comes to the book’s subject – as “the biography we have been awaiting for 400 years”. Delving deeply into Cromwell’s private papers, MacCulloch argues for Cromwell’s central position in the supercharged power-politics of Henry VIII’s court. MacCulloch studied under the great Tudor historian Sir Geoffrey Elton. He has written extensively on ecclesiastical history, and was ordained a deacon in the 1980s. He declined ordination to the priesthood because of the church’s attitude to homosexuality, but remains “a candid friend of Christianity”. He is now professor of the history of the church at Oxford University. You spent six years researching and writing the book. Did you ever get bored of Cromwell?I never got bored with him. I got very irritated with his master, Henry VIII. The more you know Henry, the more you dislike him: the intense egotism of the man and the way he distorts the lives of everyone around him. But I never got bored of Thomas Cromwell, partly because of this vast archive of his personal papers that we have, that were taken when he was arrested and still had many secrets to reveal. Geoffrey Elton had by no means cracked everything, partly because he was not terribly interested in Cromwell the man – he was interested in Cromwell the bureaucrat, Cromwell the creator of structures. And that’s an important aspect of the man, but what I didn’t quite expect was how much of the personality came through from the archive. The one word that historians have to use all the time, and novelists don’t, or shouldn’t, is 'probably' Reading your book alongside Hilary Mantel’s Wolf Hall series is fascinating. How do you view the differences and affinities between the two?Hilary and I did an event together last Monday at Launde Abbey, where Thomas Cromwell’s son is buried. We have not got tired, Hilary and I, of talking about the fascinating difference of looking at the same person from two points of view – one the historian, one the novelist. I might have got bored of the comparison if I didn’t think Hilary was brilliant, and not really a historical novelist, but just a brilliant novelist who in this instance has decided to write a novel about the 16th century. The Cromwell who reveals himself over the course of her novels is very close to the Cromwell I met. How historically accurate are the Wolf Hall books?Hilary likes her story and her characters to be as close to what we know of the past as possible. And I know my biography has been very useful to her, because the third of her novels has been influenced by it. She’s been a bit miffed, in a gentle way, at the way in which she accepted things that were essentially wrong about Cromwell because she took them from the conventional narrative. And she has made adjustments in the new novel to reflect this. What she can do is tell the stories which I cannot, because the facts simply aren’t there. And the one word that historians have to use all the time, and novelists don’t, or shouldn’t, is “probably”. When I’m filling in a gap, I may say: “The probability, looking at the evidence, is this.” But it must always be conditional: there must always be a “might have”. And that must always be the limits of my story, while a novelist is liberated from all that. What books are on your bedside table?A lot of Scandi noir. I relax to well-crafted murder. Otherwise, my reading is determinedly frivolous, because otherwise for half the year I’m a Wolfson prize judge, the great history prize, and so we end up reading about 120 books in six months, and that whole treadmill is starting this month, in July, and goes on to February. We all read all the books from all periods. Which fiction and nonfiction writers do you admire?I will say Hilary Mantel. Otherwise, I’m quite lowbrow as far as fiction goes. In terms of nonfiction, I just like very, very good history books. So I devoured Mary Fulbrook on the Holocaust [Reckonings], I devoured John Blair on Saxon England [Building Anglo-Saxon England]. It’s the joy of seeing someone do the job as well as you could do it yourself. You can just lie back and bask in their professionalism. How do you arrange your books at home?With anal exactitude, by subject. The history goes through all the periods and so I can be looking for a book and say: “Ah well, that’s early Tudor biography, so I know where that is.” Because the other part of my career is writing these great windy generalisation books on large subjects, like all Christianity across all time, my library is very broad indeed. I’d be lost if it was disorganised. What sort of reader were you as a child?I was voracious. I started with the books which my kindly and conventional 1950s parents gave me, which were Biggles (by WE Johns) and Enid Blyton. I went on to the children’s historical authors of an earlier generation – GA Henty and the like. My father was really quite old – he was born in 1903 – and he had two older sisters, who gave me the books that they’d enjoyed when they were young. They had an unerring instinct as to what a child would be interested in – Edith Nesbit, PG Wodehouse. They lost the plot a bit when I was 14 or 15, but up till then, they got it just right. I had that foundation of the best of children’s books. I loved John Buchan, terrible old high Tory that he was. He wrote a wonderful young adult book about Henry VIII. Not many people know that. It’s called The Blanket of the Dark. It’s chilling. Brilliant. What was the last book you put down without finishing?I have not finished Hilary Mantel’s A Place of Greater Safety, and that is because I found everyone in it utterly repellent. • Thomas Cromwell: A Life by Diarmaid MacCulloch is published by Penguin (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99