Every elite athlete understands how to learn from a loss. As the old saying goes, “sometimes you win, sometimes you learn”. The challenge for the Australian national team as they attempt to claim a fourth consecutive Netball World Cup is figuring out how to learn from a win. That is the puzzle for Diamonds’ performance analyst Dr Mitchell Mooney as the team seek to make their way through the early rounds of the tournament in Liverpool. “When you have a look at it, at the [Glasgow] Commonwealth Games and the [Sydney] World Cup, we actually had a result where it was very close early in the tournament,” he says. “We lost to New Zealand in the World Cup, we only beat England by one goal in the Commonwealth Games, but we leveraged that and went on and had a really great back end of the tournament. “Whereas in the Commonwealth Games in 2018 I think we had it a bit too smooth, perhaps. We won every game by 20-plus goals up until that final game. So we analyse those types of things and say ‘what could we learn from those previous wins?’” Dr Mooney has been working with the Diamonds since 2013 and a key part of his role has been introducing the idea of systems thinking. As he explains it, the fundamental idea is looking at netball teams as a system that can’t be reduced to individual parts. “It’s about the connectivity of the players on court which will give them a system,” he said. “In cricket, or even in the football codes, players tend to analyse their direct opponents and they know a lot about them. “But sometimes they sort of forget why they’re doing what they’re doing and what’s the broader context in which that’s happening. And when I analyse on a team scale we can actually see patterns that you probably wouldn’t pick up if you were looking at the independent parts.” While Dr Mooney’s main role is to concentrate on the opposition, the Diamonds have another key figure in their preparations whose focus is squarely on them. Angie Bain is the team’s wellbeing manager, assisting the players with their lives outside of netball. “We have a big emphasis on players having an identity away from the game,” says Bain. “So we encourage that they pursue an interest – and we support them with that. A big part of it is just making sure that every player has multiple identities – that netball isn’t their only identity – and that these are things they’re interested in and passionate about.” It’s something that netball has always done well – so long an amateur and semi-professional sport that additional identities were a necessity. It is fortunate in some ways that the sport is stepping into the professional era at a time when many of the male professional sports are realising that a life fully encompassed by sport is the not the dream it appears. A major shift that Bain has noticed in her six-year tenure with the Diamonds is the willingness with which players will discuss mental health issues. “We talk about mental health as we talk about physical health,” she says. “So you go to training, you do a warm up and you feel a tight stretch in your hamstring. And after you feel it, what do you do? Well you go over to the physio, you tell them what’s going on. So that’s the same way we’ve got to approach mental health. It’s about players feeling safe to talk about when they’re being challenged and perhaps when they’re not coping so much.” Bain also works on empowering athletes’ families and partners to play their role during the World Cup. “We bring them into the environment and we show them what we do,” she said. “We talk to them about what we expect of our players and our staff. We want them in, not on the outside. Which is a bit of a different approach to some other sporting teams. We say to the parents and partners ‘You’re one of us’.” While some teams would lock the families out to allow the players to focus, Bain is aware that the emotional support they can offer to the players is invaluable. “We talk about what happens with the players during the tournament and then what happens at the back end,” she says. “Because we don’t just finish and win a gold medal and everything’s great. There are players who would have met their expectations, but there will also be players who haven’t got as much court time as they would have hoped. “It’s really individualised, we can’t forecast it too much, so we wait until after the event. But we know what to talk about, so if you see these kinds of things and they’re not changing, their energy, their socialisation, they’re not engaging in getting back to a normal routine, then I’ve got to know about it.” With Mooney and Bain working behind the scenes – physically and mentally, on and off the court – the Diamonds are as prepared as they possibly can be. Whether that results in the coveted fourth consecutive gold medal depends on how much they can learn from their wins.