“We’ve still got a fishmonger. How many places still have that?” asked Kate Gander, listing the merits of her home, Market Harborough. In fact, she struggled to find anything negative at all to say about the Leicestershire town. “It’s got fantastic railway connections and it’s not too overrun by big businesses,” she said. Market Harborough today comes top in a league table of the most – and least – liveable places in England. Balancing the affordability of homes with factors that make a place desirable to live in, such as employment opportunities and the performance of local schools, Harborough, Hart in Hampshire, the Isles of Scilly and Chorley in Lancashire are at the top of the table. Hackney, in east London, Middlesbrough and Manchester languish at the bottom. Gander’s enthusiasm was echoed by stallholder Tina Horton. “I deliberately set up a business in Harborough. The market is just like a big family. All the little shops make it what it is.” House prices in the town are generally a little higher than the national average, but rents are a little lower – and above-average earnings of the town’s population (£33,700 compared with a national figure of £30,400) bolster its “affordability” score, one of the report’s key criteria. Nearly nine out of 10 locals are in work, and the area’s secondary schools score well. Residents can expect to live two years longer than most people in the UK. But it’s not just about statistics. Small independent retailers reign supreme in the quaint town centre, which is dominated by the medieval St Dionysius’ church and 17th-century timbered Old Grammar School, now a covered market and museum. Last week, colourful flower displays were standing up well to the pouring rain and there was a striking absence of empty shops. Next month, the town will host the Leicestershire County Show, featuring motorcycle stuntman Flyin’ Ryan, sheep shearing and donkey rides. The Harborough Theatre is screening the National Theatre’s production of Small Island, adapted from Andrea Levy’s novel, this weekend, and the Royal Shakespeare Company’s Measure for Measure at the end of the month. London is an hour away by train and there are direct services to Leicester, Nottingham and Sheffield. “Market Harborough is a beautiful market town, the villages surrounding it are beautiful, and there is such a strong sense of community. We’re thrilled to be recognised in such a positive light,” said Neil O’Brien, the local Conservative MP. The report, written by a former Treasury economist, Chris Walker, for Your Housing Group, aims to “create a more real-world and accurate picture of what affordability is, and where exactly more affordable new-build housing is most urgently needed”. It has given every local authority in England a score based on three metrics – affordability, opportunity and desirability – based on factors such as jobs, income, educational attainment, burglary rates, the number of empty homes and life expectancy. London fares badly in the resulting “liveability index”, mainly because of its unaffordability and average quality of life. Four out of the country’s 10 least-liveable places are in the capital – Hackney, Newham, Barking and Dagenham, and Enfield – and there is no London borough with above-average affordability. In Hackney, a house typically costs £619,000 and the average monthly rent is £1,856 – both more than double the national average, says the report. Employment there is below average, at 70%, and the area has a higher-than-average burglary rate. Outside London, the north-east is the worst region for liveability. The East Midlands dominates the top of the table, with five of the top 10 most liveable places, and the south-west scores best overall. Brian Cronin, head of Your Housing Group, said: “The big divide in living standards this report exposes is a direct result of the private sector’s failure to build enough affordable homes in the right places, and we are calling for a much bigger role for housing associations to fill the gap. What we need, though, is the ability to access private as well as public finance and we will be publishing new ideas for this later this summer.” The report identified “where exactly we need more new homes that meet the needs of the majority of people on modest earnings”. Alex Cunningham, the shadow housing minister, said: “By looking at the cost of housing in its wider context – availability of jobs, average incomes, quality of schools, safety of an area – we get a much fuller picture of Britain’s dire housing crisis. This research shows that, from Stockton to Southampton, hard-working families are facing a crisis of liveability.” The country needed more affordable homes, investment in skills and education, and more money for our police, he added.