After playing a starring role in New Zealand’s thrilling last-four victory against India, Trent Boult has said he would rather face Australia than England in the World Cup final on Sunday. Boult dismissed the India captain, Virat Kohli, in a devastating opening spell at Old Trafford and took the key wicket of Ravindra Jadeja during the closing stages of a nerve-jangling run chase. The left-arm fast bowler is eager for a trans-Tasman rematch at Lord’s so New Zealand can avenge the defeat against their closest rivals in the 2015 final in Melbourne. England, the tournament hosts, take on Aaron Finch’s team in the second semi-final at Edgbaston on Thursday and Boult said: “I think Australia pumped us in 2015 in the final so it would be nice to do that again. But two quality sides are going to play, we’ll be watching with interest and we’re just more excited about being on the stage of Lord’s and a Cricket World Cup final. It doesn’t get bigger than that in my opinion. Whoever it is we’re definitely looking forward to it.” New Zealand lost both their group matches against England and Australia as they scraped into the semi-finals ahead of Pakistan on net run rate. Boult does not believe those earlier games will have any bearing on Sunday’s final. “You’ve got to lose one to win one, so it’s nice to have been beaten by them,” he said. “Obviously playing Australia at Lord’s might have been a decent hit-out and a good learning curve. “We’ll just have to see what happens. If we do the things well that we know we can do, especially with the ball, I think we’re good enough to beat anyone on the day.” New Zealand’s cricketers have now emulated the All Blacks, their country’s all-conquering rugby union side, by reaching successive World Cup finals. But the captain, Kane Williamson, said: “I don’t think it will change the No 1 sport [in New Zealand]. I’m sure people back home are pretty excited and it’s another great opportunity to play in a World Cup final. It’s a special moment.”