There is a lot of turbulence in the European airlines business. Strong competition among carriers and weak consumer confidence are pushing down fares as fuel costs rise. Brexit and slowdowns in the UK and other large economies threaten to make matters worse. Ryanair, which reports first-quarter numbers on 29 July, has low costs and a strong balance sheet, and usually steers a confident course through rocky patches. Chief executive Michael O’Leary’s mantra has been that once weaker operators dropped out of the market, his no-frills carrier would be the strongest one standing. He has usually been proved right, but Ryanair’s own flight path has been erratic for some time. A series of strikes by pilots and crew in the past couple of years forced O’Leary to begin recognising unions – which he once said he would never do. The strikes and a rostering fiasco caused many thousands of flight cancellations, undermining the company’s reputation for reliability. Shareholder pressure finally forced Ryanair to agree to replace its chairman of more than 20 years, David Bonderman, and highly rated chief operating officer Peter Bellew is defecting to arch-rival easyJet. O’Leary, who has run Ryanair since 1994, cleared up questions about his own future last February when he said he would stay for five more years. He also said he would step back from the day-to-day running of Ryanair to oversee four subsidiary airlines, each with their own chief executives. Progress here appears to have been slow. Six months later, Ryanair DAC, the biggest airline in the new group structure, is still looking for a boss. Ryanair issued its second profit warning in four months in January and has told investors to expect more disappointment this year. Reporting a 29% fall in annual profit in May, O’Leary said when smaller rivals dropped out of the market, fares would rise and Ryanair would have more clout to deal with unions. Investors appear doubtful: the shares have almost halved since hitting a record high of €19.78 in August 2017. In the same period, easyJet’s shares have fallen too, but by 20%. Andrew Lobbenberg, HSBC’s airlines analyst, has cut his rating on Ryanair shares from “buy” to “reduce”. Citing weakening economies and consumer confidence, he also argues that Ryanair’s non-fuel costs (mainly salaries) are rising while those at rivals are falling, negating one of its traditional strengths. Labour relations are still a problem: cabin crew in Portugal have announced strikes, and pilots in the UK and Ireland are voting on whether to strike in August. As well as facing increasing wage costs, Ryanair has to rework the legal and tax complexities of its employment contracts to reach agreements with unions. Delays to the delivery of 40 Boeing 737 Max jets after two of the planes crashed will also create planning difficulties – if passengers want to get on board. This all adds up to serious management distraction at a time when Ryanair needs to rethink how it does business. In many ways O’Leary has proved a brilliant businessman, and Ryanair’s success has made him a euro billionaire. Now he has to show that he can steer Ryanair through choppy conditions while reinventing his own creation.