Federal prosecutors will not charge the New York police officer implicated in the chokehold death of Eric Garner, the African American man killed almost five years ago, authorities announced on Tuesday. The decision, due to be formally announced later on Tuesday, is another blow to Garner’s family, figureheads in the Black Lives Matter movement, who have campaigned for years to hold the city’s police department accountable. In a decision handed down in December 2014, a grand jury in Staten Island declined to charge officer Daniel Pantaleo. Garner’s death, on 17 July 2014, became a focal point for the national conversation on race and policing in America. Garner’s last words, “I can’t breathe”, were chanted by protesters across the country. The arrest was captured on cellphone video, which showed Garner repeating the phrase 11 times as Pantaleo pulled him to the ground in what has been described as a banned chokehold. The incident was ruled a homicide by the investigating medical examiner. Federal prosecutors have long been considering whether to bring civil rights charges against Pantaleo in a case that has spanned the Obama and Trump administrations and four attorneys general. The decision comes a day before the statute of limitations was due to expire. Reports indicated that civil rights prosecutors recommended bringing a case against Pantaleo in 2018 but were blocked by senior justice department officials. The reports came under Trump’s first attorney general, Jeff Sessions, amid a reversal of an Obama era push to hold police accountable for excessive force and racially biased policing. Garner’s family are expected to meet with justice department officials before the decision is formally announced. Pantaleo’s attorney, Stuart London, told the Associated Press he was not aware of any decision. The apparent decision not to indict Pantaleo means the Garner family’s only recourse is now a secretive internal investigation into the death. Pantaleo’s administrative trial concluded last month and saw a number of witnesses to the incident, the medical examiner and senior NYPD officers testify against him. The most severe punishment the officer faces is losing his job. Under New York privacy laws the decision, which will be made by NYPD commissioner James O’Neill, does not have to be announced. Pantaleo has remained employed since Garner’s death, working desk duty and earning a salary of more than $100,000. Speaking to the Guardian during Pantaelo’s administrative trial, Garner’s mother Gwen Carr expressed exasperation. “There is no justice at all for Eric,” she said. “The harshest punishment is firing. They murdered him and if there was going to be justice, it would have been at the point when he said ‘I can’t breathe’.”