Your article on the conscientious objectors held at Richmond Castle implies that all the absolutists who were sent to France under military orders were initially imprisoned at the castle (Report, 19 July). This was not the case, Some were imprisoned in Abergele, Seaford and Harwich. It is to be hoped that the castle will honour these men along with those imprisoned at Richmond. My uncle by marriage, Alfred Evans, was imprisoned at Harwich. In a memoir he composed for a TV programme, he tells an illuminating anecdote that indicates that military officers could respect COs who were willing to face death, which they certainly wouldn’t have extended to those willing to undertake non-combatant duties. A captain in the Notts and Derbys came to see Uncle: “I have just left the Company Office, Evans, looking at your papers. They are marked ‘Death’ in red at the top. Do you intend to go on with this?” I said: “Yes, you see, Sir, men are dying in agony in the trenches for the things they believe in and I wouldn’t be less than them.” To my astonishment, he stepped back a couple of paces and saluted me and then came forward extending his hand, which I shook eagerly.Malcolm PittockBolton • Hardship for conscientious objectors continued long after 1919, with the stigma and lack of employment. One such young man was Arthur Raistrick, imprisoned for three years in 1916. After the war his determination to work and study led to a university post in engineering. Then in 1941 he again refused any type of conscription into military service and was suspended from his job (effectively dismissed). He survived for four years on low-paid work so as not to pay tax for the war. In the following decades he became a leading authority on geology, mining and the history of the Yorkshire Dales. He was aged 87 when I visited him in 1983 to reprint some of his books. He told me, without any bitterness, that he was still being ostracised by some people for his pacifist record. George Kelsall Littleborough, Lancashire • Good news that English Heritage is launching a project to highlight the stories of the conscientious objectors imprisoned in Richmond Castle. But I missed a key acknowledgement in the description by Richard Mason of English Heritage of how they found the 400 names, though there is a reference to “using existing databases”. The Peace Pledge Union is one such source. Another is the monumental database assembled by historian Cyril Pearce, who I’m sure will have given English Heritage free access to his research. The reason we know there were 20,000 first world war COs is because of Cyril Pearce’s work over several decades. His generous sharing of this database gave historians all over the country a head start with their research into local COs during the centenary. I trust that English Heritage will be acknowledging their debt to Cyril Pearce even if this was not apparent from your report.Valerie FlessatiHaringey First World War Peace Forum • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition