Police fired several rounds of teargas at protesters in residential areas of Hong Kong in the third day of mass protests as political unrest in Hong Kong deepens. Groups of protesters attending an anti-government rally on Sunday defied police orders and fanned out from the sanctioned area in central Hong Kong, streaming west and east, occupying roads and setting up barricades, prompting major roads and shops to close. Riot police confronted hundreds of protesters attempting to reach Beijing’s representative office in Hong Kong, a target in the protests. After a short standoff, police held up a warning flag and began to fire continuous rounds of teargas at demonstrators. “It lasted a whole minute. It was at least 10 rounds,” said Long, 25, a medical volunteer who said he had helped pull demonstrators back from the frontline when they were stumbling and unable to see. “Even the protesters are peaceful … they keep throwing the teargas. I don’t know why they keep throwing,” said Hinton, 16, who had tears in his eyes after being gassed. Protesters said police tactics against them were escalating, with officers firing earlier and more frequently. Some said they believed the police were hemming them in to arrest them. Demonstrators in gas masks and goggles choked on the gas. When police began firing, two women in a nearby apartment building opened their door, ushering in protesters, who rushed in and collapsed on the stairwell. One demonstrator was seen bleeding from the ankle from a foam bullet. As police fired on protesters, pushing them back towards central Hong Kong and the starting point of the rally, demonstrators retreated to smaller roads. Tourists and residents ran from the scene, covering their eyes and mouths with their clothes. The government said police had begun to disperse protesters, adding that they had set a cart on fire and pushed it towards the police, “seriously affecting the safety of everyone at the scene”. “Police condemn the protestors’ escalating violence and appeal to everyone at the scene to stay calm,” a statement said. Opposition to a proposed extradition law has broadened into a wider movement against Hong Kong's leadership, its relationship with China  and the future for the special administrative region. Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, has offered a ‘solemn’ personal apology for the crisis and also hinted that she had in effect shelved the controversial legislation. However, protesters criticised her as insincere and said she had ignored their key demands. The demonstrations have continued. The bill concerned legal changes that would make it easier to extradite people from Hong Kong to China. Supporters say the amendments are key to ensuring the city does not become a criminal refuge, but critics worry Beijing will use the law to extradite political opponents and others to China. Under the amended law, those accused of offences punishable by seven years or more in prison could be extradited. The government claims the push to change the law, which would also apply to Taiwan and Macau, stems from the killing last year of a Hong Kong woman while she was in Taiwan with her boyfriend. Authorities in Taiwan suspect the woman’s boyfriend, who remains in Hong Kong, but cannot try him because no extradition agreement is in place. Officials have promised to safeguard against abuses, pledging that no one at risk of political or religious persecution will be sent to the mainland. Suspects who could face the death penalty would not be extradited. Hong Kong officials have repeatedly said the bill has not come from the central government in Beijing. However, Beijing has voiced its backing for the changes. Many fear the proposed extradition law will be used by authorities to target political enemies. They worry the new legislation spells the end of the ‘one country, two systems’ policy, eroding the civil rights enjoyed by Hong Kong residents since the handover of sovereignty from the UK to China in 1997. Many attending the protests say they cannot trust China because it has often used non-political crimes to target government critics. They also fear Hong Kong officials will not be able to reject Beijing’s requests. Legal professionals have also expressed concern over the rights of those sent across the border to be tried. The conviction rate in Chinese courts is as high as 99%. Arbitrary detentions, torture and denial of legal representation of one’s choosing are also common. Police have clashed directly with demonstrators, and have been accused of standing by during attacks on protesters and commuters by groups of men in white in Yuen Long on 21 July. After the current crisis, analysts believe the Hong Kong government will probably start a new round of retaliatory measures against its critics, while the Chinese government will tighten its grip on the city. Lily Kuo in Beijing and Verna Yu in Hong Kong Protesters have been demonstrating for more than seven weeks; Sunday’s protest was the third consecutive day of mass dissent. On Sunday night, protesters appeared determined to continue. “They see us as a threat because we are having an impact,” said Jonathan, 19, who had covered his face with a scarf and had armed himself with an improvised shield made from a kickboard. The organisers’ original plan for Sunday’s protest involved a march towards a park near China’s representative office where police had fired teargas and rubber bullets at protesters last weekend, but officials had denied authorisation, granting permission permission to hold a rally in Chater Garden, a park east of the government’s legislative complex. In the last few days, tens of thousands of demonstrators have rallied to condemn an attack on commuters by suspected triad gangs last week, which has led to accusations of government collusion, denied by Hong Kong officials. On Saturday, a peaceful march in the town of Yuen Long turned chaotic as police fired teargas, rubber bullets and sponge grenades, and charged protesters in a railway station. “We want to fight against police violence,” said Eunice Chan, 55, who has attended almost every weekend protest since the demonstrations started last month. Chan, who grew up in Hong Kong before it was returned to Chinese control in 1997, said Beijing’s growing influence on the city’s media, legal system and way of life was “obvious”. “It seems to us that this is our last chance. If we don’t do this now, we won’t be able to later,” she said. “We are so afraid they will make Hong Kong like another Chinese city.” Robert Kwok, 55, another demonstrator, said: “If we draw back, we lose everything.” Sunday is the second time demonstrators have defied a police ban on protesting. Authorities declared Saturday’s rally in Yuen Long illegal and on Sunday one of the organisers, Max Chung, was arrested on suspicion of inciting an illegal assembly. “It is very likely they are going to abolish the freedom of assembly. So we are asking people to come out because it may be the last time that we are going to have a peaceful and lawful protest in Hong Kong,” said one of the organisers on Sunday. Amy Yeung, 26, has been attending as many protests as she can. “I am mentally tired. Watching the news, you cry … and we’ve waited for a long time for the government to respond to our demands,” she said. “I free all my Sundays and Saturdays for the protest. At least standing here, we are giving the message that we are not alone.”