Like its two teenage protagonists, Wolfenstein Youngblood has gone rogue. This new, two-player entry in the long-running shooter ditches many of the conventions of its parent game, opting for a more open-ended structure with a lot less story and a lot more action. It’s a messy, hyperactive experience that struggles with some teething problems, but ends up the most entertaining of all the recent Wolfenstein games. Youngblood sees players assume the roles of Soph and Jess Blazkowicz, twin daughters of Wolfenstein’s square-jawed hero, BJ. Raised in a Texas liberated from the Nazis in an alternate retro-future, Soph and Jess live a (relatively) normal life until their father disappears while on a secret mission in occupied Paris. With their mother helpless and the FBI clueless, Soph and Jess take it upon themselves to track down their father and bring him back, allying with the French Resistance hidden in the Parisian catacombs. Led by Swedish developer MachineGames, Youngblood is co-designed with Arkane Studios – the creators of the magnificent Dishonored series. The influence of the latter is highly apparent. Instead of a linear sequence of levels, Youngblood takes place in four distinct districts of Nazified Paris, three of which can be explored from the get-go. Your primary goal is to infiltrate and disable three “Brother” security towers, looming concrete abominations filled with more far-right goons than an EDL member’s phone. These towers are heavily fortified, and attacking the front gate is likely to turn your American heroines into meatloaf. But the Resistance has plenty of other Reich-related problems that need solving, from rescuing hostages from interrogation centres, to assassinating Gestapo officers. Several of these sidemissions open up secret pathways into the towers, making your approach considerably easier. At the outset, Youngblood’s Paris is both an intriguing and frustrating place to explore. There’s always more than one route to your objective, be it straight down a rue prowled by Supersoldaten and robotic Panzerhunds, or across balconies and through abandoned apartments for a quieter approach. Environments are crammed with secret routes and hidden places, including an expansive underground containing as many secret Nazi bunkers as the towers overhead. This environmental richness implies that you can sneak your way through the game. But in practice, stealth is very challenging to pull off. Youngblood’s cooperative play means twice the opportunity to be spotted, while your enemies are perceptive and quick to raise the alarm. This isn’t too much of a problem – Wolfenstein is a shooter first and foremost – but it does mean that your play options aren’t quite as broad as they initially appear. More importantly, Youngblood does a poor job of explaining itself. There’s a lot of bouncing aimlessly around in the early hours, searching for the fun. It wants you to go off and do side missions before taking on the towers, but instead of making this clear, it implies you can head straight in if you want. It also doesn’t notify you when new side missions become available at your home base. I explored several locations that seemed to serve no purpose, only to discover that I hadn’t unlocked the appropriate missions. Once you crack that first Brother tower, however, it blossoms into something tremendously exciting. Each of the towers is a huge, multi-staged mission with breathtaking visual design. To conquer Brother Two, for example, you infiltrate via a vast subterranean docking area, ascending tooth and nail to the still-under-construction summit, leaping between crane-loads of building materials, while Nazi zeppelins fly past at eye level. Youngblood has no single mission as showstopping as The New Order’s brilliantly bonkers Moon level, but it makes up for this with its broader and more complex environments. This change in structure makes combat more free-flowing. There’s greater opportunity to experiment with weapons and abilities, figuring out how to clear a street in the most efficient and/or spectacular way possible. Youngblood works fine if you’re playing alone, but it’s undoubtedly best when you’re playing with a friend. Not only can you coordinate your attacks more effectively, but playing as a twosome amps up the combat, giving you larger numbers of tougher opponents. As you hone your skills and expand your arsenal, the Nazis evolve, too. Toward the end of the game you’ll be exchanging laser fire with hulking Nazi mechs and pole-axing soldiers with a single well-flung hatchet. Perhaps the best ability, “Crush”, not only lets you jump on enemy heads like an antifascist Super Mario, but also enables you to run into enemies so hard it bursts them. Youngblood is adolescent in all the right ways, anarchic and ferocious on the surface with thoughtful design running underneath. Characters Jess and Soph are loud, goofy and annoying, but that’s exactly as they should be. Some of the writing is a little iffy, and you won’t find much in the way of nuanced storytelling, but to be honest it isn’t required. This a game about two young women blasting racists into goo – for me, that equals a bloody good time. Wolfenstein: Youngblood is released on 26 July; £29.99.