Donald Trump has suggested that certain US congresswomen might go back to “the totally broken and crime-infested places from which they came” (Trump intensifies racist attack on congresswomen despite outrage, 16 July). How sad to be chief of state of any of those countries. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez’s mother came from Puerto Rico. Her father was of Puerto Rican origin, though himself born in the Bronx. The chief of state of Puerto Rico? President Donald J Trump.Adam SleeLondon • Woody Guthrie wrote a song about a notorious apartment block built by Donald Trump’s father. Black people were free to apply but none were acceptable as tenants. Racism is generally learned in the home.Duncan GrimmondMarkington, North Yorkshire • It’s surprising that so few people are pointing out that none of Trump’s grandparents and only one of his parents were born in the US or spoke English as their mother tongue. But at a deeper historic level, by his insane logic, everyone in the US today who isn’t Native American/First Nation should consider going back to the countries they came from and leave the continent to the people who were living there for 10,000 years before the Europeans arrived and set about creating a broken, crime-infested society.Norman MillerBrighton • Perhaps we can spend a bit more time discussing the critical question: what makes a person, organisation, or nation, great? It is not the size of your GDP. Or the size of your skyscrapers. It is much more about having the ability to justifiably occupy the moral high ground. Could someone try to explain this basic point to the those so-called leaders, who appear to be driven by an indulgent sense of their own sense of importance.Dr Bruce LloydEmeritus professor of strategic management, London South Bank University • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition