Caitlin Bassett clearly never wants to feel like she did on 15 April 2018 again – the day her Australian Diamonds lost the Commonwealth Games final to England. From the moment the Australian captain walked out on M&S Arena for her side’s pool clash with New Zealand in Liverpool, the 31-year-old had a steely-eyed, but calm demeanour: the look of someone with a job to do, with a title on her mind. And while it took her a while to settle into the game, she did exactly what her team needed her to do. It helped that the Australian defenders picked off plenty of ball for her. The 193cm spearhead, who came into the sixth match of this tournament with 132 goals from 145 attempts at 91% accuracy, shot 37/41 at 90% and led the Diamonds to a heart-stopping 50-49 win. After being benched in the third quarter, Ferns star Maria Folau, who was watched from the stands by her husband, the sacked Australian rugby union player Israel, re-entered the game with less than three minutes to play and had a chance to tie it all up on the hooter. But the Kiwi shooter missed the crucial shot. At the other end, Bassett refused throughout to take a backward step against disruptive Kiwi keeper Jane Watson, who has had an excellent tournament to date, banking 12 intercepts and 18 deflections in the Ferns’ first five victorious matches. While the trans-Tasman rivals were both already booked into the semi-finals, this match mattered a great deal. It leaves Australia, along with England and South Africa, as the only unbeaten sides, with the other pair facing off in the later game on Thursday. Lisa Alexander started Bassett with her former Sunshine Coast Lightning teammates Steph Wood at goal attack and Kelsey Browne at wing attack – a line-up masterminded by Kiwi coach Noeline Taurua. Liz Watson cemented herself as the starting centre, although she was patchy throughout, and World Cup debutant Jamie-Lee Price started at wing defence, replaced by Paige Hadley at times. Jo Weston got the nod at goal defence and Courtney Bruce, who has led all-comers with 33 deflections this tournament, started back at keeper. The match started like a final, with an intensity that hasn’t been seen this tournament. Every pass was contested and tiny moments – a fingernail to a ball in defence, offensive contacts, seemingly missed held balls, a Maria Folau long bomb that rolled off the lip – swung momentum. Bruce was mighty, getting three deflections and a rebound in the first quarter. Bassett and Wood both missed just one, but each felt monumental. The Diamonds’ defensive dominance saw the quarter finish 13-10. In the second, Australia went on three three-goal runs, again on the back of defensive pressure and the Ferns started to make small errors, which the Diamonds capitalised on. A few minutes before the break, wanting to give Weston and Bruce something else to think about, Ferns coach Taurua sent the rangey Bailey Mes to replace Ameliaranne Ekenasio, who had only shot two, at goal attack. Hadley also replaced Price at wing defence for the Diamonds. At the main break the Diamonds led 28-22, with Bassett on 19/21 and Wood 9/11. The game got scrappy in third, as the Ferns clawed their way back into the match thanks to countless personnel changes and outscored Australia by two. Ekenasio came back on at GA and Mes went back to shooter. The Diamonds led 40-36 going into the last. The final quarter could have gone either way, but the Diamonds clung on, shooting just 10 more goals before being let off the hook by Folau’s late miss. The win ensured Australia’s place in Saturday’s semi-finals where they will play either South Africa or England.