Michael Cheika will reveal the biggest secret of his coaching career when the Wallabies play South Africa in their opening Test of the Rugby Championship in Johannesburg on Saturday (Sunday morning AEST). But will he reveal all? At the start of the year the coach announced his intention to introduce a new style of attack to the Wallabies, saying the team would look very different. You would hope so; the Wallabies won only four of 13 Tests last year, their worst record since 1958. Something had to change. Former attack coach Stephen Larkham departed, citing philosophical differences with Cheika. With Larkham gone, the coach has devised a new attacking strategy for the Wallabies, which has been kept closely under wraps. But how much of the new strategy should Cheika show during the Rugby Championship and how much should he keep up his sleeve for the World Cup in Japan? The Wallabies have only five Tests before their opening World Cup game against Fiji at the Sapporo Dome on 21 September. It is a relatively short period of time to bed in a new style of play, which will put pressure on Cheika to show his hand in the Rugby Championship. But the Wallabies will have to keep something in reserve for the World Cup, especially their key pool game against Wales in Tokyo on 29 September, which will determine whether they secure a favourable passage through the knockout stage of the tournament. In other words, avoiding the All Blacks until the final. If the Wallabies have a secret weapon – the rugby equivalent of Australia II’s winged keel – they must hide it at least until the Wales game. Giving too much away too soon will allow Wales and other teams in Japan enough time to figure out how to negate the new game-plan. It will be intriguing though to finally get a glimpse of the Wallabies’ new attacking system when they play the Springboks. My guess is that Cheika will go back to his Randwick roots and re-introduce a flat-line attack, which will be the core element of the Wallabies’ new strategy. Cheika has coached all around the world, but his blood still runs myrtle green while the Wallabies’ new attack coach Shaun Berne, another Randwick man, implemented the flat-line attack as attack coach of the Melbourne Rebels in Super Rugby this year. Of course, that may just be coincidence and Cheika may concoct something completely new and revolutionary. But whatever the Wallabies’ new attacking style is, the Rebels’ performance in Super Rugby offered a cautionary tale – they were impressive at the start of the Super Rugby season, but once teams figured out how to negate the flat-line attack, they had no plan B. The same fate could befall the Wallabies at the World Cup if they do not have sufficient variety in their attack. If the Wallabies do plan to play a flat-line attack at the World Cup, the Springboks will provide a wonderful opportunity to rehearse it. To make the flat-line attack work, ball-players must get up into the teeth of the defence and work the moves. It takes a lot of skill and discipline to execute it, especially against a rush defence like the Springboks’. There is little concern at the moment about who will win the Rugby Championship. The only thing that matters from this point is the World Cup. But Cheika has signalled his strong desire to start the Wallabies’ World Cup preparation with a win by spending two weeks in Johannesburg to acclimatise to the altitude. The Wallabies have not won there since 1963 and a drought-breaking victory would do much to help restore lost confidence and self-belief. It does not matter that Springboks coach Rassie Erasmus is resting several of his star players for the Test with an eye on the All Blacks the following week, which may devalue any victory. Cheika desperately needs to re-create a culture of winning at the Wallabies, something they seem to have forgotten how to do. They have to aim to win as many games as they can in the Rugby Championship and take a positive mind-set into the World Cup. While the Wallabies have to go all-out to win, Cheika will be wise to keep something special hidden until then. The only way the Wallabies will win the tournament will be to take the world by surprise.