Igors Rausis, at 58 the oldest among the world top 100 grandmasters, was last week caught analysing in the toilet during his game in the Strasbourg Open. Rausis later told the Czech newspaper Lidovky: “I signed a statement that I am guilty in full … I completely ruined my name and also destroyed the trust of all my colleagues and friends”. Rausis’s steady advance up the rankings in his 50s, after many years at the 2500 moderate grandmaster level, was clearly abnormal. He played in smaller events which could not afford the strict anti-cheating measures of major tournaments, and he exploited a rule where a win against an opponent 400 or more rating points lower gains 0.8 of a point. Rausis played many games where the rating difference was much higher, so that the statistical odds favoured him. The curve on Rausis’s rating graph changed from level to rising from 2013, raising questions. But now there is interest in a game which Rausis played at Sunningdale in August 2011 in what was probably his third visit to England after Hastings 1997-98 and Liverpool 2008. The Guardian column about Sunningdale 2011 covered the winner Ameet Ghasi’s IM norm and Ghasi’s penultimate round win against Rausis. In the final round Rausis met GM Keith Arkell. Both top seeds had been outpaced by Ghasi, so a quick GM draw might have been expected, but instead Rausis sacrificed three pieces for a brilliant mating attack. Arkell, 58, was the 2014 European Senior (50+) champion, is an endgame expert, especially on R+B v R which he has won some 20 times with no draws, and a much respected grandmaster. He said nothing in public at the time, but this week wrote on Facebook, as quoted on the English Chess Forum: “Me and Rausis were always about equal, then suddenly he beat me with a three-piece sacrifice. Something didn’t feel right”. Arkell later clarified that he has no clear memory of what triggered his suspicions, but thought that Rausis had probably left the board for a while at the critical moment. It also emerged that Rausis had another game with exactly the same position before 13 Nxf7! a few months earlier, against the Hungarian GM Denes Boros in a tournament in Belgium. In that game Rausis was Black, not White as against Arkell, and Boros went 13 Ne4? when the game was quickly drawn. It would be expected that Rausis would analyse the obvious sacrifice 13 Nxf7 with a computer after the Boros game, and realise that it was a winning brilliancy in the style of the legendary Mikhail Tal. He could not have foreseen that the Arkell game would follow the same course from a rare opening sequence. Did he at the critical moment successfully reconstruct the analysis at the board, or did he succumb to the temptation to pop out to the loo or to his room at the hotel venue for a memory check? There were possible difficulties with the latter, including the less advanced technology of mobiles in 2011 and the need for a pass to the player’s hotel room. If these were overcome, it could have been Igors Rausis’s first fatal step on an ultimately career-destroying path. The answer remains a mystery. Only Rausis himself knows the truth. 3628 1 Rxg7+! Kxg7 2 Ra7+ Kg8 3 Qh5! with the winning double threat Qxh7 mate and Qxg5+. If Black tries 2...Qc7 then 3 Rxc7+ Rxc7 4 Qg4 and White emerges a piece ahead.