Scarlett Johansson is once again feeling the heat over claims of insensitive casting. After playing a whitewashed character once known as Motoko Kusanagi in Ghost in the Shell (2017), the actor withdrew from playing a transgender man, Dante “Tex” Gill, in the forthcoming Rub and Tug, after a social media outcry that a cisgender woman had taken the part. Both storms had blown over until Johansson gave an interview to As If magazine in which, it is claimed, she said: “You know, as an actor I should be allowed to play any person, or any tree, or any animal because that is my job and the requirements of my job.” Johansson has since clarified that her quote was taken out of context, adding that she meant “in an ideal world, any actor should be able to play anybody”. Judging from the rest of her statement, Johansson recognises that, in the actual world, as a globally famous, cisgender, white actor, her involvement in films such as Ghost in the Shell and Rub and Tug could block a Japanese or a trans actor from being cast. If we are to see more authentic casting in Hollywood, it starts with A-listers stepping aside and letting roles go. Look at Ryan Murphy’s Pose. It can be done. However, I will say that Johansson should be able to take on whichever tree roles she wants. Trees, for the most part, are not an oppressed minority. It is also the case that trees lack the desire or means to enter the acting industry, and that it is therefore necessary for human actors to take on arboreal roles when such a need arises. To help Johansson’s agent, I’ve selected some plum parts she might be interested in. I think there’s real scope for character development here. We know JK Rowling is prone to announcing extraneous character details many years past the event, so why not expand on the Whomping Willow? Why is she so angry? Why does she whomp so? Maybe she’s a cursed bad witch, Yolanda Yumplebrighton, forced to live as a tree for ever for aiding and abetting Grindelwald. We have already seen the humanoid plant grow, change and evolve and, although played at present by Hollywood hardman Vin Diesel, there is no reason why Groot couldn’t be played by a female actor (and I’m sure the Twitter sexists would love that). There is an obvious Marvel Universe clash, but this is sci-fi; Scar-Jo could play all the roles. All of them. Johansson may wish to steer clear of this one on the grounds that Pocahontas’s sentient talking tree and spiritual leader would be best played by a Native American actor. Let’s be honest, though, the saccharine Disney version of what was essentially the story of the genocide of an indigenous people is hugely dodgy, so Johansson’s casting would probably be the least problematic part. Remember when Johansson released an album of Tom Waits cover versions? There is nothing she can’t do, so why shouldn’t she play a singing, man-eating plant? In the 1986 movie, Audrey II was superbly voiced by Levi Stubbs of the Four Tops, however, so it might be nice to hear a black vocalist continue this tradition. I fully support this. The Peter Jackson films had to create or expand the female roles in the very male-dominated Lord of the Rings universe, so they are desperately lacking in heroines. They might have to do something about the name though? In the 2016 adaptation of Patrick Ness’s novel, the monster of the title – a yew tree – is voiced by a gravelly Liam Neeson. We know from her voice-acting in Her that Johansson possesses one of the sexiest voices on the planet. If her tree visited a teenage boy of an evening, I wonder if it would become a very different learning experience for him. This tree doesn’t say much (or anything), but is iconic. Perhaps in a sequel, the tree could have a more active part. Can Johansson speak Spanish? Although there are several literal trees in Terrence Malick’s artsy 2011 film, I think the title refers to a metaphorical tree. This is a film that explores nature and interconnectedness, roots, history and evolution. In a way, Johansson’s career is metaphorical, too, because whoever, or whatever, we are, she will one day portray us in a Hollywood movie. All life is connected.