With six rounds to go the intense drama of the Super League relegation battle shows no sign of letting up – much to the chagrin of anyone associated with Leeds Rhinos. At various junctures this season the eight-times Super League champions have lured their fans into believing brighter times lay ahead. There was even one such example here on Sunday in West Yorkshire. Having trailed 20-6 midway through the second half, Leeds seemed set for a routine defeat against a Hull side chasing success on several fronts. Yet two tries from Tom Briscoe either side of an Ash Handley interception in a blistering 12-minute passage of play put the hosts ahead for the first time and hope was renewed for the Rhinos. Victory, and another significant step towards safety, seemed on the cards. Yet while the Leeds sides who swept all before them over the past decade did not know when they were beaten, this current crop have the trait of throwing away winning positions all too often. Within seconds of going ahead they dropped the resulting kick-off – and what happened next had a familiar feeling about it. Leeds did their best to hold Hull out but, when Ratu Naulago dived over in the corner with seven minutes left and Marc Sneyd converted from the touchline, there would be no comeback this time – and, with London winning on Sunday, the Rhinos are again joint-bottom of the table with time running out. “We’ve got a dejected changing room but still a determined one,” said their coach, Richard Agar, whose emotions were in stark contrast to that of his counterpart. Hull have a Challenge Cup semi-final against Warrington next week but before that there was the opportunity to right a particular wrong from their recent history. Hull had not won at Leeds for 12 years before this and, after tries from Bureta Faraimo and Sika Manu put them in control at half-time, Jamie Shaul’s scintillating long-range effort, coupled with a penalty from Sneyd, left many feeling their Headingley hoodoo was set to end with some ease. Leeds, however, at least deserve credit for making a firm contest of it. “I haven’t got any fingernails left; that tells you what you need to know,” Lee Radford said. The Hull coach watched as Briscoe dived over in the corner, before Handley collected an errant pass to race the length of the field and reduce the gap to two. Then, with Leeds sensing a potentially season-defining chance, they kept the ball alive long enough for Briscoe to score his second, making it 24-20. But when the Rhinos made the most crucial of errors – Agar called it the biggest moment of the match – it shifted the focus back on to Leeds’ defence, which was eventually breached for Naulago to score. The final act was Sneyd’s and somehow everyone knew what was going to happen. He duly converted from the touchline to deepen the Rhinos’ woes. Leeds Rhinos Walker; Briscoe, Newman, Hurrell, Handley; Lui, Sutcliffe; Seumanufagai, Lunt, Singleton, Smith, Martin, Merrin. Interchange Ferres, Cuthbertson, Dwyer, Peteru. Tries Hurrell, Briscoe 2, Handley. Goals Martin 4. Hull FC Shaul; Faraimo, Griffin, Tuimavave, Naulago; Connor, Sneyd; Taylor, Houghton, Paea, Manu, Minichiello, Westerman. Interchange Bowden, Fash, Lane, Ellis. Tries Manu, Faraimo, Shaul, Naulago. Goals Sneyd 5. Referee M Griffiths.