In challenging Tom Watson to leave the Labour party, Dawn Foster ventilates a widely held frustration – that members of the PLP find it easier to attack their own leadership than this useless government (If Tom Watson had guts he’d quit Labour, Journal, 9 July). Many of us voted for Jeremy Corbyn and Tom Watson because we thought their different skills and interests would make a formidable team. Sadly, based on performance to date this has proved to be a deeply flawed judgment. Watson should not be forced out of his party, but clearly he has too much time on his hands. Every week I receive an interesting and lively mailing covering politics, policy and popular culture that does much to promote love and admiration of Tom. I wish he could be managed and supported to turn his energy towards doing the same for the party of which he is currently the deputy leader.Les BrightExeter, Devon • What a depressing article by Dawn Foster. It just won’t do to blame criticism of the supreme leader for the failures that Jeremy Corbyn should own himself. He lost the 2017 election, came fourth in the recent European elections and we should not forget his lamentable performance during the referendum campaign (with voters not knowing where Labour stood) that undoubtedly contributed to the success of the leave campaign. If Corbyn had the guts he would consider his position as to whether he is the right person to lead the Labour party at this momentous time, as defeat in either a referendum or general election will consign most of the country to years of hardship under rightwing Tory rule.Aviva Le PrevostGroombridge, East Sussex • So the only place Dawn Foster meets people with so-called centrist views is in TV studios? Really? Well I meet them every single day as my social circle consists largely of lifelong Labour supporters like me who will never again vote Labour under its current leadership because of its spectacular betrayal of its own tribe during the biggest political crisis of the last 70 years. Foster’s prediction that Labour’s internal schism could hand the likely general election to the Tories is tragically correct, but the blame for that catastrophe will lie at Corbyn’s door and nobody else’s. Corbyn and his extremist acolytes are not waving but drowning and they are pulling the whole of progressive Britain down with them. For many millions of us, the sensible voices of Tom Watson and his like are the only lifeline of hope we have left.Alan ClarkLondon • Dawn Foster’s attack on the “centrism” of the Labour party, in the shape of Tom Watson, Ed Miliband and in particular Tony Blair, as being “responsible for the long-term problems” of the British economy is not borne out by the facts. The approach of a government that, over the 13 years after 1997, brought peace to Northern Ireland, dramatically reduced poverty and unemployment, and indeed through its aid policies reduced poverty in the developing world as well, cannot be described as divisive and can still provide inspiration for a divided country.Paul MosleySheffield • Matthew d’Ancona (The centre is Labour’s for the taking, but it isn’t interested, Journal, 8 July) is wrong to suggest that the purpose of the Labour party should “be to construct a pretty decent cabinet … with a fighting chance of uniting the country and governing it competently”. At some point in the 1990s the Labour party was hijacked by just such a group. Enter Tony Blair and corporate friends resulting in an ever increasing acceleration of social inequality that started in 1979 with the election of Margaret Thatcher and continued under Cameron and May. What Labour party members wanted when they elected Jeremy Corbyn in overwhelming numbers was societal change. An end to “greed is good” and “devil take the hindmost”: the creation of something truly different from the divided, atomised society of today. While Yvette Cooper and Stella Creasy may be talented politicians, they both stood on “more of the same” politics in the Labour leadership and deputy leadership elections. That’s not what members wanted and it’s now our party again. Yes, societal change is a big ask, but it’s better to try and fail than never to try at all.Stephen ShieldsLichfield, Staffordshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition