Mary Berridge’s mother was a glamorous interpreter employed by the British War Office in Rome during the 1940s. It was there that she met an English colonel, fell in love and, in 1947, left her family to marry and settle in England. In death, 72 years later, she wished to return to her native Rome, so Berridge contracted Co-operative Funeralcare in Seaford, East Sussex, to make the arrangements. The repatriation was scheduled for a Monday in May and she was advised to organise the funeral two days later in case of delays. Late on the Friday before the coffin was due to fly out, she contacted the Co-op to check the arrival time in Rome. Only then was she told that the flight had not been booked. The firm could not confirm when a new flight could be organised since the weekend was pending: the funeral had to be cancelled until further notice. “Family and friends were coming from all parts of Italy as well as from New York, Canada and France and about 15 people had to cancel their plane and train tickets,” Berridge said. “Some of the tickets were non-refundable and others incurred high cancellation charges.” Berridge and her husband were left £1,800 out of pocket after paying cancellation fees for flights and hotel, a contribution towards relatives’ costs and charges from the Italian undertaker, who had to reorganise the funeral. They also had to reprint the funeral notice in the local paper. The body was eventually flown out a week later and only a third of the mourners who had promised to attend the funeral on the original date made it to the service. Berridge, who paid the Co-op nearly £5,000 to organise the repatriation, claimed that staff seemed oblivious to the impact on the family. “They were very unhelpful, defensive and quite rude, and at no point apologised or showed any sensitivity to a very distressing situation,” she said. “The email finally confirming when they would fly Mum out to Rome was signed off with ‘Have a good day Mrs Berridge!’, which I found insensitive if not downright offensive.” Only when she returned from the funeral and raised a formal complaint did she receive an apology, she said. The company offered her £500 compensation, which it increased to £800, but when she tried to cash the cheque it was refused. “I contacted the Co-op again to complain and they said they had passed the issue to their head office who would duly be in touch. They haven’t. What sort of organisation not only messes up my mother’s funeral and then bounces a compensation cheque?” The Co-op told the Observer that a “miscommunication” between its repatriation team and the funeral home caused the delay and that a “mistake signing the cheque” led to it bouncing. A spokesperson for the company said: “We are truly sorry for the upset that we have caused. We’ve contacted Mrs Berridge directly to apologise for our failings and while we know we cannot put this right for her, we’re doing what we can to see how we might make amends.” It has since issued a new cheque for £800 and added £990 for her additional costs. Repatriation of bodies is a complex process involving extensive paperwork and detailed legal requirements. Martyn James of the complaints website Resolver says Berridge’s experience is not an isolated incident. “I know of at least five cases where the body has actually been lost in transit,” he said. “If a firm lost an expensive painting we’d be hearing about it nonstop, but expensive paintings don’t get lost because valuables are tracked meticulously. Tracking should be standard on repatriations, so that if something does go wrong, the mistake is rectified straight away.” This year the Competition and Markets Authority announced an investigation into the funeral industry after prices were found to have soared by almost three times the rate of inflation for a decade. The average price charged by undertakers stands at £4,200 and repatriations can double that. Despite the dire consequences when arrangements go wrong, there is no ombudsman to adjudicate if a funeral home fails to resolve a complaint. Instead, bereaved families have to use arbitration schemes operated by the two industry trade bodies, if the undertaker is a member of one, or else resort to court action. Nor can they rely on consumer protection if problems are caused by the air industry because the deceased do not qualify for compensation payments under EU rules if they are delayed. “As insensitive as it sounds, the coffin and deceased person would be considered cargo and therefore covered by the Montreal Convention, as opposed to EC Regulation 261/2004,” says Coby Benson, a solicitor with the law firm Bott and Co. “The consignor is entitled to recover damages caused by the delayed receipt of the cargo unless the carrier can prove that it took all reasonable measures to avoid the damage. The carrier is liable to a fixed amount, dependent on the weight of the ‘cargo’, which is approximately £20 per kilo. Unfortunately, the Montreal Convention would not allow families to claim damages for the distress and anguish caused, but they could claim for financial loss.” Berridge says the undertaker’s bungling compounded her grief. “The effect was utterly devastating on me and on my family,” she said. “It was made worse by the Co-op’s refusal to take any responsibility or show any understanding of the distress and problems they had caused. We did eventually achieve closure when the funeral took place, but the Co-op could not have made a worse job of something that was meant to be a smooth and trouble-free journey.”