“Full many a glorious morning have I seen … Kissing with golden face the meadows green,” wrote Shakespeare once, but he was never the first punter on to Henman Hill so sucks to be him. On Tuesday that privilege went to a London couple, Laura and David, who secured perhaps the most-coveted piece of real estate in SW19, a picnic table on the mound. Like everything at the All England Club, there is tradition involved in the opening of the gates. Stewards usher in early birds behind a long white rope which moves slowly on to the site. A security guard also stands duty on the Hill, his role to show fans that it is “open” and hasn’t been pre-booked by VIPs. That such a thought should cross spectators’ minds is probably telling, but on this occasion it wasn’t necessary as the early-morning rush was quite subdued. “It was a bit of an anti-climax,” Laura confessed. “I was hoping for some elbows.” A reminder that life as a British republican can be a lonely affair came on Court 14 where Kate Middleton, the Duchess of Cambridge, was watching England’s Harriet Dart defeat the American Christina McHale. For a royal to appear at an outer court is very much against protocol and every attempt was made to keep it low-key, including the discreet dispersal of a not inconsiderable security presence. The paparazzi loved her in a white Suzannah frock and Audrey Hepburn sunglasses, and so did the crowd who gathered to pay, er, court. “It’s Kate,” said one woman. “She’s a babe,” said another. “Come on, concentrate,” said a third to her partner, whose rubbernecking was causing something of a traffic jam. While we are on the subject of the ruling class, there were three Kings in the royal box on day two. The first was plain old Chester King, current head of the British Esports Association, the second the architect Ian C King, whose company designed both the indoor courts at the All England Club and a high-security immigration facility at Gatwick airport. Finally there was Lord King of Rothbury, previously Mervyn King, a former governor of the Bank of England. Kings among men, as the saying goes. It’s the sensation that’s sweeping the nation; steaming grass like it’s a baby’s bottle to sterilise it from disease. Well it’s big at Wimbledon anyway where it could potentially cut out pesticide use at the Championships. The technology is imported from the Netherlands and involves puncturing the courts with holes, covering them with polytunnels and then pumping in steam until the ambient temperature hits precisely 70C. Et voila, no more mites. The AELTC has been testing the technique for a couple of years and is pleased with it; it’s been used to prepare several courts for this year’s events. Hopes that the system could soon be available for use in teenage boys’ bedrooms, however, are likely to remain unfulfilled.