Channelling what I believe the kids call “Big Dick Energy”, I wandered into a car showroom last Saturday and casually bought a car. I can’t drive. Not legally, anyhow. I failed many times in the 90s. Then a few more times in 2005. I want to say six, it could be seven. Each time got more shameful, more hazy. “I’ll have that one,” I said, regardless, to the man in the Volkswagen dealership, pointing at a zippy black thing. And with that I was a car owner. It’s the kind of thing a woman can do when she does not have children – no looming university fees or guilt about squandering an inheritance. My estate will be divided between whichever nieces can bother to show face at the retirement home and, as my plan is to be a terrifically fractious pensioner, I may as well spend now. I bought a Volkswagen up! by the way, which speedwise is essentially a BaByliss Speed Pro hairdryer attached to a skateboard, but after just seven days together we are deeply in love. (And no I’m not being sponsored by either company). I had been forced to admit defeat in my attempt to live a modern, car-free life. I’ve tried. God knows I’ve tried. As a society, we talk endlessly about reducing emissions and saving the environment, but from where I stand, after 25 years car-free, life without one has become more complex. Not remotely easier. This is regardless of apps or schemes or touchy-feely ridesharing concepts. In the north, where I live some of the time, I am at the mercy of too few rural bus routes and too few taxis. Trips to NHS appointments for my elderly parents at far-flung clinics miles apart are undoable. Meanwhile, practical things, such as buying paint or looking at a sofa, now involve retail parks, set 900 metres back from a dual carriageway. In London, being unable to drive is more acceptable, until a grownup task like “going to the garden centre” rears its head. Or worse still, taking a sick pet to the vet, when the first five taxis you attempt to flag down simply leave you on the side of the road, weeping and pleading, holding a sad bundle. That last incident happened a couple of years back, but it has mentally scarred me. How could anyone be so awful? In buying wheels, what I was really buying was a chance to say, “Screw you, I’ll do it myself”, and I wonder if that is what we are all doing when we get into our little metal boxes spattering carbon monoxide into the ether. “Sod you, Richard Branson,” we say, avoiding the £180 for a Virgin Train from Manchester to Edinburgh, “I’ll get there myself.” The ice caps may be melting, sure, but inside our cars, with the aircon on, listening to The Climb by Miley Cyrus, well, hey, the temperature feels perfect. I must stress that saving the environment has had little to do with my failure to pass my test. The real reason is the fact that from the moment a Driving and Vehicle Standards Agency (DVSA) examiner says, “OK, Miss Dent, I’d like you turn right out of the test centre,” I tend to drive like Bingo from the Banana Splits. Roundabouts, in particular, make so little sense to me that friends have suggested I go and pass my test in Alabama. However, a nice patient instructor called Lee took me out for an initial batch of “mature driver” lessons this week. He warned me about newish test requirements like the “forward into a parking bay” manoeuvre and did not wince as I slammed the gear from first to fourth or knocked the indicator with my wrist, while taking a hand off the wheel and entering the right-hand lane. Learning this time is terrifying. Being in control of a car feels gravely serious, an almost improbable task for a human being. I miss how I felt at 17, battering a Renault Clio around the backroads of Carlisle feeling invincible, laughing down the sleeve of a Chelsea Girl bandage dress at the sad-sack fortysomething women bumbling through nine-point turns. What do old women like that need driving licences for? They only need to go to bums’n’tums and Asda. They don’t even go raving. Last night I retired to bed at 8pm with a riveting chapter of The Official DVSA Guide to Driving on the mirror-signal-manoeuvre routine. Because I know exactly where women of my age need to drive to. The local tip has never seemed so exciting. • Last week Grace Dent won food writer of the year at the Guild of Food Writers awards.