Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from last week. First, a surprising reading experience for BMacLean: Over the past year or so, I’ve been reading on and off an Oxford paperback collection of Mallarmé’s poems. After not having looked at it the last few months, I picked it up again about a week ago and continued from where’d I’d left off. Much to my surprise, I found the poems in this middle section of the book noticeably more straightforward and easy to follow compared to my previous experience with this poet, notoriously oblique and difficult to interpret. “He must have drastically changed his approach to writing after a certain point in his life,” I thought, “Or no, wait - I must be getting smarter!” Much pleased and encouraged, I carried on with renewed enthusiasm. It wasn’t until a few days later that I noticed I wasn’t reading Mallarmé at all – it was an Oxford paperback Verlaine with a similar cover. The Past by Tessa Hadley has provoked lonelybloomer to ask some difficult questions: What can be as good as The Past by Tessa Hadley? I love a novel where a bunch of people have gathered in a remote home to vacation for a month or so, and to stir some old pains and quarrels. Can anyone recall this plot, done as nicely as Hadley’s book? “I’ve belatedly discovered Lauren Beukes,” says lizz. “Currently reading Broken Monsters”: Wow. A cross between Elmore Leonard and Neil Gaiman. Can’t quite believe she’s South African, by which I mean her grasp of US reality (Detroit), her rendering of the speech rhythms is pitch perfect. Vassily Grossman’s Life and Fate has impressed Bloreheath: A really great novel, in the classic Russian mould. One thing, among many, Russian writers could do was somehow to lend importance to persons who may initially seem perfectly ordinary — which may indeed mean most of us. No gimmicks here, none of what Angus Wilson called “the high jinks of experimentalism”, just wonderful straight writing. Offshore by Penelope Fitzgerald has received a gold start from safereturndoubtful: Set in 1962 in Battersea Reach on the Thames the story is of the residents of permanently moored boats, considered by house dwellers then as being somewhat strange. The focus is on Nenna and her two daughters as she considers the future for her and the girls; estranged from her husband and the children not attending school. She confides in Maurice, another boat-dweller, also male prostitute and storer of stolen goods. I’ve a favourite few pages when the Austrian boy, Heinrich, visits. A novella with a huge amount crammed in, Fitzgerald’s character development sneaks up on you, so much so that after only a few pages you feel you know the boat folk well. There’s occasional bursts of humour, that are even better appreciated when re-read, and an abrupt ending that may not surprise, but is extremely rewarding. A View From The Foothills by Chris Mullin has provided good bedtime reading for greenmill: It’s late 1999 and Mullin is a junior minister in John Prescott’s environment etc department. Mullin’s deadpan, self-deprecating humour is a delight. He is also generous to others (even some Tories) and is warming to Prescott despite his boss’s complete lack of management skills as he glimpses the fundamentally decent human being which lurks beneath the motor-mouth exterior. He quotes Simon Hoggart in the Guardian reporting on a Prescott speech at that year’s Labour Party Conference “he announced the creation of two new National Parks in the way you might announce the annexation of the Sudetenland”. And pubbore “finally” got round to Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury: Absolutely brilliant and scarily prescient of course, but I’m more affected by Bradbury’s afterword: ‘the fire chief in mid-novel says it all, predicting the one-minute TV commercial with three images per second and no respite from the bombardment. Listen to him, know what he says, then go sit with your child, open a book and turn the page.’ Excellent advice. “There were some books I didn’t regret losing. A couple of hundred academic books called Modernism and …” Ian Patterson has been clearing his shelves. Beware the writer as houseguest. Ugh. Yuck. No thank you. Chuck Klosterman gets deep into the semantics of the writers he’d like to invite for dinner. 40 writers’ writers readers should read. If you’re on Instagram, now you can share your reads with us: simply tag your posts with the hashtag #GuardianBooks, and we’ll include a selection in this blog. Happy reading!