On a field in east London where WG Grace notched a century in 1898, Riswan Bishar, a mobile phone shop owner originally from Islamabad, watched his son take part in a fast-developing national programme to try to use cricket to boost social and ethnic integration. Dashing after balls on Leyton cricket ground, Izaan, nine, was joined by Ongon, eight, wearing a Bangladesh cap, Orson, a nine-year old white boy in an India shirt and half a dozen others as they were put through their paces by coach Ray Tudor, a former Surrey fast bowler whose own heroes came from the fearsome West Indies team of the 1980s. The scene was a long way from the divisive rhetoric of Norman Tebbit, who in 1990 when MP for neighbouring Chingford created the “cricket test” asking: “Which side do they cheer for?” and suggesting migrants who did not support England were “harking back to where you came from”. The historic ground is in Waltham Forest, one of the most diverse boroughs in the country, with a 21% Asian and 17% black population. Now both the England and Wales Cricket Board and the government have chosen it as a place to use sports to integrate communities. England’s win this month at the cricket World Cup, featuring leg-spinner Adil Rashid, whose parents emigrated from Pakistan, Barbados-born fast bowler Jofra Archer and Irish captain Eoin Morgan, has given the campaigns a bigger platform. The Ashes Test series against Australia offers another chance to promote the country’s level playing fields as a place for people to come together without prejudice. When Morgan said “Allah was with us” after England’s narrow victory in the World Cup final, Bishar was among those moved. “It was quite emotional for me to hear that,” he said. As he watched the boys play at Leyton, he reflected: “They will be comfortable being mixed. That’s the efforts clubs should make – make sure it is mixed. Integration is what we need now. We had the latest stabbing last week. If they were playing cricket and were in this group, they would never think about stabbing someone.” The ECB wants more south Asian players from places such as Leyton to break through into the professional game and is ploughing resources into better facilities, including more than 100 artificial pitches. Alongside the council, it has built a new indoor cricket school in Leyton. There has been a gulf in facilities, as shown by the recent emergence of an midnight to 4am league in an local Asda car park using trollies for stumps. The ECB is also targeting Asian players in Birmingham, Bradford and Leicester and over the next year has said it will consider how to encourage harder-to-reach black players into the game. “We need to capitalise on the fact Jofra is quickly becoming a role model,” said Tom Harrison, the chief executive of the ECB. Local leaders in Waltham Forest trying to prevent gang criminality and violent extremism are also pinning their hopes on cricket. The area has been beset by knife crime including a triple stabbing in April and the killing of Jaden Moodie in January. The council is considering week-long residential courses for 11 to 14-year-olds, funded by the government as part of community integration pilot schemes also happening in Peterborough, Bradford, Walsall and Blackburn. “We believe sport transcends religious boundaries, ethnicities and beliefs,” said Ahsan Khan, the Waltham Forest cabinet member for community safety, who is steering the £2m two-year pilot. “It’s a place where people come together across communities and class.” Yet many hurdles remain to greater integration in a game still perceived as elitist and expensive. South Asian cricketers often remain loyal to their own leagues, which they formed in an era of greater exclusion. More than 100 teams compete in Asian leagues in London such as the Gujarati Metropolitan Cricket League, but to rise to county level often means leaving. Efforts to persuade deprived black youths to play have also amounted to little, partly because of the competing allure of football and athletics, coaches said. “There are no black kids here,” said Tudor, who is himself black. “Football and cricket are getting exposed a lot. Cricket used to be free. Now it’s on Sky. They are thinking, who are the role models? Mine were the West Indies team and Gladstone Small, Devon Malcolm, Phillip DeFreitas,” black England bowlers of the 1980s and 90s. It is a missed opportunity for people of different backgrounds to play together in a game that offers time to observe and understand one another and thrives on differences between people to create balanced teams. The drinking culture after cricket matches can also isolate non-drinking team-mates, as was seen by Adil Rashid and Moeen Ali quickly getting out of England’s champagne-spraying group photo after winning the World Cup. At club level, non-drinking Asian players sometimes leave quickly after games when jugs of beer are produced. “It’s about ensuring that the relationship on the sports field carries on off the sports field,” said Arfan Akram, the Essex county cricket coach responsible for the amateur game in east London. “They might take it in turns about whether they go to the pub or a cafe after a match.” The ECB is also considering ways to make watching big matches more family friendly. Harrison said plans are being considered for lower-alcohol beer, specific drinking zones and entertainment programmes geared to children, to create an atmosphere that doesn’t feel like the last few hours of a drinking session. “There aren’t too many ways we can start building integration and cricket cuts through a lot of the noise and political backdrop,” said Harrison. “It comes down to a battle between bat and ball.”