Nicole Cooper’s Hamlet is putting the first player through his paces. Warming up for the performance that will catch the conscience of the king, the actor gives her an impassioned speech in praise of Hecuba. His pretence at emotion sends her into a reverie. “What’s Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba, that he should weep for her?” she asks. “What would he do, had he the motive and the cue for passion that I have?” Her answer, that “he would drown the stage with tears”, is the key to her superb performance. In Gordon Barr’s outdoor staging for Bard in the Botanics, Cooper is emotionally exposed. She weeps in mourning as mother Helen Logan and uncle Alan Mirren tuck into their wedding feast. She sobs after meeting her father’s ghost, and fights back the tears on “to be or not to be”. Her eyes well up when Stephanie McGregor’s Ophelia returns her letters and she wails upon the death of Alan Steele’s Polonius. In silky grey skirt and black shirt, this Lady Hamlet is driven not by revenge or intergenerational aggression, but a deeply felt sense of bereavement and injustice. At least once, she has to shake her hands in front of her face just to keep her composure. This heightened emotional state explains her madness; when the world makes no sense, where’s the advantage in thinking straight? It also fuels her anger at Mirren’s Claudius, a suave captain of industry with slicked-back hair and an air of confidence that makes him look unassailable. If she hesitates to act, it’s because his crime seems unpunishable. It’s not all tears, however. Cooper is an actor with tremendous range, hitting peaks of ferocity and lows of despair. She’s not morose nor introspective, as Hamlets can be, just an amiable woman caught off guard. Sometimes Barr’s actors yield to the pull of naturalism and talk to each other instead of singing out to the audience, but not Cooper, who never loses her hold over us. It is a performance of unassuming authority, her delivery clear, fresh and true. Meanwhile, indoors in the neighbouring Kibble Palace glasshouse, Jennifer Dick is staging a lean Richard III, stripped down to just four actors and delivered in a brisk and lucid two-and-a-bit hours. Robert Elkin’s Richard, one arm hitched pathetically into a belt around his chest, is a glass-half-empty kind of psychopath, more inclined to moan about his lot than relish the successes of his murderous enterprise. He’s like a gambler taking no pleasure in his wins save the opportunity to gamble again. Wild-eyed and impulsive, he grows from embittered to vitriolic as fate turns against him. His cynical wooing of the women he has bereaved, first Kirsty McDuff’s Lady Anne, then Vanessa Coffey’s Queen Elizabeth, relies on angry oratory more than charm, which makes their capitulation hard to credit, but both make fearsome adversaries. McDuff, in particular, has a bright confidence, standing her ground in the face of this malevolent force. Like Adam Donaldson playing the Duke of Buckingham as an obsequious politician, they speak with clarity and muscularity. With its modern-day setting, Dick’s production uses press conferences and one-way phone conversations to get around some of the elisions of her compact adaptation. If it necessarily loses a sense of Richard’s wider world and misses some tonal variety, it is nonetheless a vigorous and assured production. • At Glasgow Botanic Gardens until 3 August.