Justin Bieber made a dramatic intervention into US politics on Saturday, comparing the plight of migrant children detained on the southern border to that of the US rapper A$AP Rocky, who is in custody in Sweden over an alleged assault. The White House is attempting to free A$AP Rocky, at the behest of Kim Kardashian and husband Kanye West, to the extent that Trump on Twitter offered to “personally vouch for his bail”. Rocky has been held for almost three weeks while Swedish authorities investigate allegations of “gross assault”. Bieber tweeted: “I want my friend out. I appreciate you trying to help him. But while your at it Donald Trump can you also let those kids out of cages?” The Canadian pop star was responding to a Trump tweet posted on Friday in which the president said he would engage in Rocky’s case. On Saturday, Trump duly tweeted that he had “just had a very good call with [Swedish prime minister] Stefan Löfven, who assured me that American citizen A$AP Rocky will be treated fairly. Likewise, I assured him that A$AP was not a flight risk and offered to personally vouch for his bail, or an alternative.” He went on: “Our teams will be talking further, and we agreed to speak again in the next 48 hours!” In Sweden, Löfven said he was glad to speak with the US about the rapper’s detention but he “cannot and will not attempt to influence prosecutors or courts”. The Swedish leader said he was aware Trump “has a personal interest in the case” and described Trump’s desire for a conversation as “certainly positive”. Löfven said: “I will explain that the Swedish judicial system is independent. In Sweden, everyone is equal before the law, and this includes visitors from other countries.” A$AP Rocky, whose real name is Rakim Mayers, has been held by Stockholm police since 2 July, when he turned himself in. TMZ posted a video of him allegedly throwing a man across the street as a fight broke out. In two posts on Instagram, two men can be seen following the rapper and his entourage on a Stockholm street. One of the men hits a security guard with what appears to be a pair of headphones. Rocky wrote: “So a few drug addicts are not my fans. We don’t know these guys and we didn’t want trouble. They followed us for [four] blocks and they were slapping girls’ butts who passed.” After a Swedish court ruled that he should be detained while the incident is investigated, the rapper’s manager, John Ehmann, complained that “conditions of the facility are horrific, and include 24/7 solitary confinement, restriction of amenities for the most basic of human functions, lack of access to life-sustaining food as well asunsanitary conditions”. Bieber, meanwhile, was trying to draw Trump’s attention to conditions in migrant detention centres at the border with Mexico, where reports have described children, families and single men held in squalid and sweltering conditions. The Trump administration’s inability or unwillingness to decently house migrants from Central America has fuelled an international outcry and a domestic political battle. A$AP Rocky’s congressman, the New York Democrat Adriano Espaillat, said he had seen the tape of the incident which led to the rapper’s imprisonment. It was clear, Espaillat said, that Rocky was “provoked, and harassed, and followed, and accosted, and I think he acted in self-defense”. Espaillat later accused Swedish authorities of using “KGB tactics”. Ehmann said Rocky had been allowed to meet a US embassy official and a lawyer, “but only in the presence of Swedish officials. It is troubling and worrisome that the laws are not being applied equally.” In a statement to Politico, the US state department said that said “there are certainly some facts about the arrest and detention that raise concerns”.