There were many au pairs through my pre-teen life – but then you arrived. Dark brown eyes. Brown‑black hair, naturally wavy. A skin colour I hadn’t seen up close before: delicately tanned, even though it was winter. You wore stone-washed slim jeans, and you stole a little nine-year-old boy’s heart. Mum would work night shifts as a nurse; Dad would be out convincing people to buy his wares. We remained with you in the evenings. I remember watching you in the kitchen. You wore brightly coloured gloves when washing-up: something Mum never did. I was happy to watch and be near you. Then I would go to my room, put on my Transformers pyjamas, and wait for you. You attended my younger brother first and my older brother last, so I knew that every moment of our time together was precious. You would tuck me in and read a very short story. I’d look at you while you were reading, noticing the simple delicate earrings, your eyebrows, your hair, your eyes, your neck. I was immensely happy for those few moments: a precious relief from the chaos, the drinking, the smoking, the violence, the noise of our household. I suppose I was infatuated. I didn’t know why; I just knew what I felt. One evening you arrived as usual but seemed to have forgotten something. I watched as you walked back to a waiting car: a green VW hatchback. You stayed in the car for a little while, and you kissed the man inside before returning to me and our house. I had thought you had eyes and kisses only for me. Not long afterwards, my parents divorced and we went to live with our mum in a new house. You were there, once or twice, but Mum couldn’t afford to keep you on her salary. The last time I saw you, you said night-night to me and gave me a kiss. I like to think that you stayed for a few seconds more than you normally would have done, smiling, cherishing the final moments. You did seem upset, though I now wonder whether I imagined that. I was 11 years old. I never saw you again. Every now and again, I wonder whether you ever think of me and of us. I sometimes think of searching for you, though I don’t know your name, or where you were from. And it turns out that every woman I’ve ever had a significant relationship with has looked rather like you. • We will pay £25 for every letter we publish. Email family@theguardian.com, including your address and phone number. We are able to reply only to those whose contributions we are going to use.