Robin McKie left the crucial point about population to the very end of his otherwise excellent article (“Eight billion up: we can’t go on like this”, Focus). It is the lifestyle of a small proportion of the population in the developed world that is responsible not only for the burning of fossil fuels causing global heating, but for the massive impact on the environment of agribusiness and our rapacious appetite for any resources Mother Earth can provide. As the US environmentalist Bill McKibben said: “My daughter, four at this writing, has already used more stuff and added more waste to the environment than most of the world’s residents do in a lifetime. In my 37 years I have probably outdone small Indian villages.” Eileen PeckBenfleet, Essex It was a pleasure to see my father’s farces being recalled by Vanessa Thorpe (“Tour de farce: how the West End rediscovered joy of broad comedy”, News). Farce’s heyday was not from the 60s to the 80s, however. It was successful almost throughout the 20th century. My dad [the actor-manager Brian Rix] had a fairly successful 1950s, for example. In that decade he was in three plays at the Whitehall, totalling more than 4,000 performances. By 1961, the Whitehall farces had broken the record as London’s longest running farce team. Jonathan RixHenfield, West Sussex In this time of political turmoil, with parliament and political parties stuck in infighting, no group has done more to keep the country running than the civil service, and no group has received as little praise. It is they who handled the detail of the Brexit negotiations, despite contradictory and unrealistic demands from parliament. It is civil servants who have made sure we are as prepared as possible for no deal. And while ministers have checked out to focus on internal leadership elections, civil servants have kept the ship of state afloat. As a reward, civil servants have been subjected to sustained attacks from across the political spectrum. We have seen a malicious briefing campaign against individual civil servants involved in Brexit negotiations, attacks on Treasury officials when their forecasts warn of the dangers of no deal and the disgraceful attempt to blame civil servants for the national security leak involving Huawei. Then just a few weeks ago we learned that civil servants will once again receive some of the worst pay awards in the public sector, far below what MPs have received. The culmination has been the disgraceful and unprecedented treatment of Sir Kim Darroch. This episode is extraordinary and shameful, but it is part of a wider culture of abusing civil servants that has been allowed to develop over the last few years. Civil servants cannot respond to these attacks, and must not be a punchbag for politicians from the right or left. They are not part of a secretive deep state; they are deeply committed men and women doing their best to serve their country. If only more politicians would act in the same manner.Mike Clancy, general secretary of Prospect unionDave Penman, general secretary of FDA union  Over the past four years, we have watched the unchecked spread of vicious antisemitism – anti-Jewish racism – in the Labour party with bewilderment and disgust – all the more so since we respected Labour’s long previous history of fighting racism, and its many brave and decent members. As accusations of antisemitism became too insistent to ignore, the Labour leadership set out to change the narrative from hate to housekeeping. Yes, there were minor issues, the Labour leadership conceded, but those related only to the time it was taking to identify the few actual or seeming antisemites in the party and the occasionally flawed system of dealing with them. Otherwise, all suggestions that racist hate against Jews was becoming endemic to Labour were mendacious, mischievous and malign. Now, after the BBC’s Panorama programme, we can see for ourselves what is and isn’t false. The extent of Labour’s antisemitism, the degree to which it has been protected, sanctioned and propagated by the leadership faction, can brook no further denial; the labyrinthine attempts to deflect attention from the problem and discredit officials supposedly charged with identifying and rooting it out, are now laid bare. There is nowhere left for the Labour leadership to hide. It is clear this is not just about Jeremy Corbyn but the pernicious world view of a faction that has – temporarily, we hope – taken control of Labour. But yet again, rather than seize this moment to face up to the racism at its heart, the Labour leadership remains determined to go on piously protesting its innocence, rejecting the message and blaming the messenger. People prepared to bear witness have been forced to sign gagging orders; those who have dared to speak out have been bullied, defamed, and stigmatised as dishonest and disloyal. What drives them, the leadership insists, is nothing other than political or personal disaffection. We are where we were before. Whistleblowers would be heroes to any other Labour party; to this Labour party they are traitors. Regrettable double standards are therefore operating, where Labour is keen to support whistleblowers elsewhere but not in its own house. In our view, those whistleblowers and Labour members who could no longer stomach what was happening in a party they loved, and were in some cases driven to the point of nervous breakdown by it, have shown a rare moral courage and decency that belongs in a great tradition, and gives us hope. In the meantime, trust between Corbyn’s Labour and most Jews in Britain appears to be fractured beyond repair. The very fact that Labour is, like the BNP before it, being statutorily investigated by the Equality and Human Rights Commission for racism is not a matter of housekeeping, but a taint of international, historic shame. There are procedures that could take the heat out of this – a fully independent complaints body, for example, over which Corbyn and his inner circle exert no covert influence. Not with the aim of shuffling off blame, but in order, finally, that the party will honestly own up to what can no longer be filed away in a folder. After Panorama, damage limitation should not be the first priority for Labour. Draining the antisemitism that lies like a pool of poison in the party’s soul is. Now, nothing else will do.Howard Jacobson, Simon Sebag Montefiore, Sir Simon Schama, Neil Blair, Tracy-Ann Oberman, Rabbi Julia Neuberger Far from criticising Sally Wainwright for writing Gentleman Jack through “the prism of Halifax and West Yorkshire”, Richard Brooks should praise her and the BBC for offering those of us not living metrosexual lives the chance to see life from different perspectives (Behind the scenes, New Review). A glance through any TV listings will tell him how much is seen “through the prism” of London, not to mention the main news bulletins. He should get out more.Barbara StreetCardiff Andrew Przybylski and Amy Orben rightly highlight that we don’t fully understand the impact of big tech on our society and that more research is needed (“We’re told that too much screen time hurts our kids. Where’s the evidence?”, Comment). Frontline clinicians, like me, regularly encounter young people who are self-harming, engaging with pro-anorexia content or are being groomed online to devastating effect. Gaming addiction and online gambling are other areas of concern, and we welcome the announcement of new NHS England-funded gambling clinics to support them. Research must not only look at the impact of screen time but should also consider the nuances of what content is being viewed by whom, how technology is being used and how it can affect mental health. We call on a levy to be paid by technology companies to fund this much-needed independent research and to invest in further studies on how technology can also be used to help young people. Przybylski and Orben’s largely retrospective data mainly focuses on the effects of screen time in the general population rather than exploring the harms of online content on more vulnerable users, or detailed analysis of how young people use technology. The death of Molly Russell is a tragic example of a young life needlessly ended after viewing harmful online content linked to anxiety, depression, self-harm and suicide. We must continue to bang the drum to ensure vulnerable users like Molly are protected against the risks of online content. Screen time is a different issue; content is crucial.Dr Bernadka Dubicka, chair of the Child and Adolescent faculty, Royal College of PsychiatristsLondon E1  Sam Leith (“Philistines were not that philistine after all”, Comment) says he had a schoolmate who called them “palestines”. My son Tim, when younger, often exclaimed: “You are such a Flintstone!”David ShannonIreland’s Cross, Shropshire