Episodes of on-course levity appear key to Lee Westwood’s continued competitiveness. Old school caddies probably looked on with scepticism when Westwood opted to place his girlfriend, Helen Storey, on the bag after the end of a long-term connection with Billy Foster. Westwood, and Storey, are enjoying the last laugh. Westwood’s 67 on Friday moved him to seven under and firmly into Open Championship contention. Storey took up caddying duties at the end of last year but this marks her first major. Westwood was asked what on-course discussion generally entails. “Dinner, where we’re going on holiday,” he replied with a smile. “You’d be surprised the sort of things we talk about out there. The favourite one was from Denmark the first week she caddied for me and I took out a divot because it was big and soft and she’s walking back with the divot. I said: ‘What’s wrong?’ She said: ‘I hope there’s not a worm in this.’ It makes me smile. It’s a big advantage. “She’s delighted because they’ve got their own rakers here. She doesn’t have to rake the bunkers.” Joking aside, Westwood has enjoyed taking ownership of his game, where he need not rely on a caddie for shot detail. “Obviously I get on well with Helen,” added the former world No 1. “She doesn’t know too much about golf but she knows a lot about the way my mind works. So she keeps me in a good frame of mind and focusing on the right things at the right time. There’s more to the caddying than carrying and getting the wind direction. Get the yardage, pull the club, it’s all my responsibility, and I’m 100% clear in my mind what I’m doing.” This Open marks the 10th anniversary of a Westwood close shave at Turnberry, where Stewart Cink prevailed. Now 46 and regarded as one of the finest players not to have won a major, the Englishman places no expectation whatsoever on himself in these environments. “There’s no pressure on me,” Westwood said. “I just go out there and have fun. I’ve never felt under that much pressure, to be honest. You lads write about it, I’ve always gone out and done my best. If it’s going to happen, it’s going to happen, and if it doesn’t, it doesn’t. Go home and have dinner, go on holiday the next week. Do the same things, life won’t change.”