Here’s the solution to last week’s guest puzzle, the astonishing cluedoku by Chameleon. If you haven’t started it, download it now; if you’ve finished it, feedback is welcome below for next week’s Q&A. As we noted last month, Theresa May will have a long and enduring legacy in crosswords. For now, though, it helps if she’s indicated with a qualifier, such as in the novelist Picaroon’s clue … 19d Chatter about current leader with a stammer on the rise (6)[ wordplay: RE (‘about’) + how the PM’s name might be said with a stammer, both reversed (‘on the rise’) ][ RE + MMAY, both reversed ][ definition: chatter ] … for YAMMER. That answer is not part of the puzzle’s wonderful theme. Morph, meanwhile, reminds us of what might come next … 14d Tory safe bet elected upon Theresa’s end’s a noisy windbag? (10)[ wordplay: abbrev. for conservative (‘Tory’) + synonym for ‘safe bet’ + synonym for ‘elected’ + last letter of THERESA (‘Theresa’s end’) ][ CON + CERT + IN + A ][ definition: a noisy windbag? ] … with a clue for CONCERTINA. If you haven’t tackled Phi’s recent puzzle in the Independent, it’s very solvable. And if you have, did you notice the theme hidden in entries OISE, NEODYMIUM and MANCHESTER and hinted at by the across entries UNITARY PERFECT? Many happy returns, Phi. What do you make of the Financial Times’ weekend experiment … The across clues are straightforward, while the down clues are cryptic … a kind way in for novices, or an attempt to be all things to all solvers? The down clues, from Aldhelm, are relentlessly gettable and lovely, such as this one … 9d Bug devastated salesmen – a contagious disease (6, 7)[ wordplay: synonym for ‘bug’ + anagram (‘devastated’) of SALESMEN ][ GERM + ANMEASLES ][ definition: a contagious disease ] … for GERMAN MEASLES. Much like “Spanish flu”, this name seems unfair. Spanish flu did its damage all over the world during the first world war, but in the UK and elsewhere, news of its spread was censored because it was thought morale could be damaged. Not so in neutral Spain, relates Tara Finn, official Foreign Office historian, in an excellent official blog: The fact that the Spanish king, prime minister and various members of the cabinet fell ill sealed the international notion that the disease had originated in Spain. A hundred years later there are still several theories concerning the source of the disease, but no one now considers it to be Spain. With german measles, it’s even worse: it was German doctors who distinguished rubella from the regular kind of measles; if anything, it should be called “measles that Germans helped to save people from”. With thoughts like this in mind, the World Health Organization has suggested that would be best to avoid using names that reference countries or people. This mild and sensible thought was fashioned by the Mail into a piece containing the misnomers “ban” and “political correctness” and two fruity photos: one of Nigella Lawson (Cooks syndrome) and one of an old-fashioned domestic for the subject of our next challenge. Reader, how would you clue HOUSEMAID’S KNEE? Many thanks for your clues for WILCO. It lent itself to acrostics, such as Seandmcc’s gleeful “When in love, cry out initially ‘Yes!’” and the letters seemed pretty handy this time, leading to such unexpected surfaces as MelonMouse’s tonsorial “Cowlick is shorn and tousled, okay?” and Porcia’s not necessarily rude “Go floppy briefly, then firm – that’s not a problem!” The runners-up are Lizard’s quaint “Wife I ultimately will take care of makes commitment to obey” and JollySwagman’s jolly “To give us pleasure they sing Jerusalem with the London Chamber Orchestra”; the winter is Volante’s poignant “Briefly unwell in toilet ahead of love affirmation”. Kludos to Volante; please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics below. Philistine manages to pack three definitions into fewer letters than the answer … 3d Suit(e) trio (5-5)[ multiple definitions: clothing, furniture and music ] … the answer being THREE-PIECE. Should Philistine need a third vocation, here he is discussing heart surgery (full programme or clip below) and reminding me that I would happily hear his euphonious tones reading Book at Bedtime.