There may not be an overwhelming favourite for automatic promotion but certain teams appear streets ahead in the firepower stakes. None more so than Fulham, who will likely start with an attacking diamond of Aleksandar Mitrovic, a Premier League striker in all but name, Anthony Knockaert, Ivan Cavaleiro and Tom Cairney, a player capable of running games in this division. Fulham deservedly took flak for their lavish and directionless spending last summer but it is impossible to ignore their latest business. They were, though, a soft touch in defence last season, so Scott Parker still has plenty to address, and the expectation will prove a test of his credentials. Leeds United, too, possess ample bite, despite Marcelo Bielsa sanctioning the departure of Pontus Jansson. As Leeds flailed in April, the Argentinian stated his squad would struggle to reproduce the performances that propelled them from 13th to third but Bielsa was doing himself a disservice. Bielsa has tickled a small squad – Helder Costa, Jack Harrison and Ben White have arrived on loan – but after a brutal pre-season, including a trip to Sydney, triple and even quadruple sessions, they are down to bare bones after injuries to Luke Ayling and Kemar Roofe and will start with one fit senior striker, Patrick Bamford. If Bielsa were not in situ, Leeds’s hand would be considerably weaker. Write off Neil Warnock at your peril, with the 70-year-old targeting a record ninth promotion. Cardiff City’s squad is packed with Championship quality and Warnock has supplemented it with the smart additions of Joe Day, Aden Flint, Curtis Nelson and Will Vaulks, who will take on Aron Gunnarsson’s long-throw duties. “The first meeting I had with him, I knew he was our cup of tea,” Warnock said of Vaulks, who earned a Wales call-up after impressing at Rotherham. “This is probably the best Championship team I’ve ever managed.” Having kept hold of the excellent Neil Etheridge in goal, a defence led by Sean Morrison, as they were when promoted last time, is going to be hard to beat. If West Bromwich Albion are to succeed under Slaven Bilic much will hinge on Kenneth Zohore filling the goalscoring boots of Jay Rodriguez and Dwight Gayle. The return of Romaine Sawyers, who left the Hawthorns for Walsall without a first-team appearance six years ago, will freshen up the midfield but the arrival of Zohore, who scored once last season, may not be enough up front. Should Sam Vokes and Benik Afobe strike up a partnership, a new-look Stoke City could threaten in Nathan Jones’s first full season, having added seven players including the nonchalant Nick Powell. Several clubs will fancy their chances of breaking into the top six but Bristol City are among the best equipped. They have made several eye-catching additions, with Jay Dasilva and Tomas Kalas arriving permanently from Chelsea, joining a vibrant team determined to improve after knocking on the door last season. Brentford, too, will feel this could be their year. If they can keep Saïd Benrahma and Neal Maupay they could make a play for the top two, with Jansson and Ethan Pinnock sound defensive additions after losing Ezri Konsa. “The players are in a very good place, there is a very good spirit and atmosphere,” said head coach Thomas Frank. “The five new signings have integrated and settled.” Jan Siewert has tasted victory only once since taking over at Huddersfield Town in January but will be quietly confident of restoring the Terriers to the top table. They have added a leader in Tommy Elphick and the Liverpool loanee Kamil Grabara excelled at the Under-21 European Championship for Poland. Karlan Grant made a big impression at the end of last season and will be joined by Josh Koroma and Reece Brown, intriguing additions from Leyton Orient and Forest Green Rovers respectively. Nottingham Forest do not lack experience but have a bloated squad of more than 30 players and are an unknown quantity under Sabri Lamouchi. A youthful Swansea City could prove dark horses, though the imminent loss of Oli McBurnie to Sheffield United has dampened optimism and it remains to be seen how Steve Cooper fares as a first-team club manager after more than a decade coaching at youth level with Liverpool and England. The teenage defender Ben Wilmot, who spent six months of last season with Udinese in Serie A, has joined on loan from Watford and is an interesting acquisition. The same can be said for Jonathan Woodgate in his first managerial post at Middlesbrough, though he has promised to entertain supporters after a few staccato seasons . Woodgate, who counts Sir Bobby Robson, Terry Venables and Aitor Karanka among his mentors, will have to eke out more from a squad that for too long has flattered to deceive. Then there is Derby County, who may need to give Phillip Cocu time to implement his methods. Whether Pep Clotet can get a tune out of a Birmingham City squad hit by the departure of Che Adams remains to be seen and it is difficult to envisage Queens Park Rangers faring too well without their star performer, with Luke Freeman sold to Sheffield United. But Mark Warburton has padded out an extremely green squad with some senior heads, with Marc Pugh and Geoff Cameron accomplished at this level. That experience and the arrival of Jordan Hugill on a season’s loan should complement the flair and trickery of Eberechi Eze and Ilias Chair, who excelled on loan at Stevenage last season. Millwall narrowly survived last season and, despite bolstering their ranks, are likely to be in for another scrap. Whether Jarrod Bowen stays at Hull City will likely dictate their whereabouts, while Barnsley, Charlton and Luton must adapt following promotion. “We ain’t ready to go in and compete like we want to but I’m hopeful before the window closes we will have another four or five bodies in,” said Lee Bowyer, who signed a one-year contract extension at Charlton in June, hours after the club appeared to announce his departure. “We have to bring in men and people that are ready because it is a dogged league.” Daniel Stendel’s Barnsley had the meanest defence in League One last season but captain Adam Davies, Liam Lindsay and Pinnock have departed. They have, however, made a number of exciting signings, notably Mallik Wilks from Leeds, while Luton must also rebuild defensively after being raided by Leicester and Bournemouth for James Justin and Jack Stacey respectively. Wigan have struggled to strengthen, while José Gomes plans to elevate a youthful Reading to new heights after steering them clear of trouble last season. The England Under-20 striker Danny Loader, 18, midfielders Josh Barrett, 21, and Andy Rinomhota, 22, defender Tom McIntyre, 20, and striker Yakou Méïté, 23, will lead the charge, aided by the experience of signings Charlie Adam and Michael Morrison. Dan Crowley, Birmingham City Still only 21, the playmaker formerly at Arsenal was once considered one of the country’s brightest prospects. Encouraged to go to the Netherlands to repair a bad-boy image, he impressed for Eredivisie side Willem II last season. Crowley, who started at Aston Villa before leaving for north London as a 15-year-old, returns to the Midlands with something of a point to prove after unsuccessful loan spells in League One at Barnsley and Oxford. Steven Sessegnon, Fulham His twin brother, Ryan, needs little introduction but this season could be the chance for Steven to make a similar splash. The 19-year-old, who operates at right-back, is also of considerable interest to Tottenham despite the fact he is yet to make his league debut. Part of the England Under-17 team that won the World Cup two years ago, he featured for the Under-20s this summer. Will battle with Cyrus Christie for a starting berth if he stays. Sammie Szmodics, Bristol City Last season was his most productive, scoring 15 goals for Colchester, whom he joined aged seven before making his debut six years ago. The 23-year-old attacking midfielder possesses plenty of verve and has whetted supporters’ appetite with a delicious lob in pre-season. Could prove a snip at £750,000 and has all the tools to be a fans’ favourite. Another former Colchester player, Macauley Bonne, could shine at Charlton.