At about 5pm on the hottest day of the year I was to be found clambering reluctantly into my little-used black tie attire. Ahead of me was an evening way out of my comfort zone: a leavers’ ball at a reassuringly expensive boarding school luxuriating in pastures green somewhere to the north-east of London. When you live on the western flank of the city, that’s an awful long way round. I am the worst kind of hypocrite when it comes to private education. I can boast – and I do boast – about my state education. But my school was in a relatively middle-class community outside Birmingham; I wanted for nothing there. When my dad made some money, a plan was hatched to send my brother and I to something called, mysteriously, a “prep” school. We went to visit it. It looked like the kind of stately home we would be dragged round if we had people staying. We weren’t keen. We were ushered around by someone who, forbiddingly, called himself a “master”. At one point he said: “Yes, we push them very hard here.” My brother and I had heard enough. We fought tooth and nail over most things, but on this we were united. We moaned and sulked and threatened a sustained campaign of domestic disobedience. Sense was soon seen and we remained where we belonged, in a perfectly good state school. As for my kids, they went to the local state primary school and then, at 11, to a nearby fee-paying girls’ school. It wasn’t my idea, but I didn’t push a better one. Don’t judge me – or, actually, do judge me. Throw stuff at me in the street if you like, for parents such as me, the ones who cannot defend private education but then send their kids there, are the worst. Anyway, back to this leavers’ ball. The leaver in question was my friend’s son, who I care for very much. Walking through the gates felt like walking on to a location for a film in which every boarding school cliche had been overdone. There was a beautiful old building with an imposing clock tower eyeing the scene. Across an immaculate cricket pitch stood a splendid marquee, in front of which, parents and their now come-of-age sons and daughters gaily clinked glasses. I hugged our boy and he said: “See that clock face? If you hit it with a six you have to pay to repair it, but you get a whole year’s fees paid!” I said he should have bunged a visiting bowler a few quid to loop him a couple of dollies down the track to see what he could do. Greatly to their credit, this ruse had occurred to neither him nor his friends. I suppose I should regale you with tales of braying toffs brimming with entitlement. Maybe I could, but it wouldn’t be fair. Everyone I spoke to was charmed and charming, interesting and interested. At one point, a couple of nice ladies waved me over. “Mr Chiles, what on earth brings you here?” I explained and, for want of anything else to say, I told them we’d had a right old schlepp getting there from Chiswick. “Have you come far?” I ventured. “Bermuda,” they said. I couldn’t really think of much to say to that. • Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnist