Independent business economist and member of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee (MPC) from 2006-11 One of the most striking pieces of economic data we have received this month is the latest results of the CBI industrial trends survey, which has monitored the British manufacturing industry for over 60 years. The survey shows manufacturing output going into reverse, with both domestic and export orders weakening. The trends in orders and output are the worst we have seen for 10 years. Business confidence has dropped sharply and investment plans are being cut back. Uncertainty about demand is cited as the main factor holding back investment and this too is at the highest level for a decade. The fact that many of these responses are the weakest we have seen since the depths of the financial crisis is very worrying. Some of the weakness may reflect the international economic climate. The International Monetary Fund has scaled back its projections for global growth this year and next, blaming rising trade tensions. But this does not seem to be the whole story. Brexit is the other obvious explanation for this sharp reversal in industrial fortunes – given the significance of EU markets for UK manufacturers. The general air of political uncertainty and the growing risk of a no-deal Brexit under Boris Johnson appear to be hitting industrial output, confidence and investment hard. These uncertainties look set to persist over the summer and into the autumn as the 31 October deadline looms. The monthly index of GDP has been broadly flat so far this year, so it is quite possible that the second quarter shows little or no growth when the initial quarterly GDP estimate is available next month. The current quarter is likely to be no better while there is so much talk of a no-deal Brexit. 2019 looks set to be another disappointing year for the UK economy. Professor of economics at Dartmouth College in the US and member of the MPC from 2006-09 Donald Trump lost the popular vote in 2018 but still had 680 times more people voting for him than Boris Johnson did last week (63 million versus 92,000). The question going forward is what Johnson can deliver on Brexit and the economy, assuming he can pass legislation with a slim majority that could vanish into the ether. His occupancy of No 10 may well be short-lived, given he only has 100 days to deliver on his dreamland Brexit pledges. An economically disastrous no-deal Brexit seems increasingly likely. The markets did not move much at first on the news of Johnson stepping up to the plate, but sterling has sunk sharply since. The name of the game is that uncertainty, rather than Britannia, rules the waves. Parity in the pound with the US dollar is not out of the question. The latest labour market release showed that unemployment remained at 3.8% with wage growth remaining steady at 3.4%. Still, real wages are 5% below pre-recession levels and real average weekly earnings are up just £1 in the last eight months to £498 in May. Employment growth has also slowed to a crawl, growing 3,000 on the month. Growth in the UK seems to be slowing. The CBI’s industrial trends survey suggests that factory orders have slumped, declining at the fastest pace since the start of the financial crisis. The weak data led the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, a thinktank, to argue that economic growth in the UK has stalled and there was a one in four chance that the UK was already in recession. On the horizon, the Office for Budget Responsibility warns a no-deal Brexit could shrink the economy by 2% by the end of 2020 and push unemployment above 5%. The IMF reckons matters could be much worse, with an impact for the global economy too. Company bosses continue to warn Johnson against pursuing a no-deal Brexit and he ought to listen. Such a scenario is the biggest downside risk to the UK economy and would be a disaster for living standards. A lot of nerve calming is going to be needed in the months ahead.