Timothy Garton Ash (The time is ripe for a fightback of liberal Britain, Journal, 23 July) suggests Jo Swinson’s election as leader of “the Liberals (to give them back their proper name)” offers her party a chance to lead a fightback for liberal Britain. Throughout the leadership contest, both Swinson and Ed Davey repeatedly referred to “we liberals” and “our liberal values”, having apparently forgotten that their party was created by a merger between the old Liberal party and the SDP. The full name of the new party at that time, the Social and Liberal Democrats, was initially abbreviated simply to “the Democrats”. Only after lobbying from the more dominant liberal wing was the name changed to its current incarnation. This was possibly a mistake. If this centre party is to attract the huge swathe of social democrats it needs from the Labour party and elsewhere, declaring itself, as Garton Ash suggests, as really a re-emergence of the old Liberal party is surely going to be problematic. As Swinson attempts to lead this much-needed fightback, perhaps Chuka Umunna’s self-description of “social democrat with liberal values” may serve the party better.Brian WilsonGlossop, Derbyshire • Timothy Garton Ash enthuses about the election of Jo Swinson. Would that be the same Jo Swinson who, when part of the coalition government, voted against a ban on fracking, voted for the bedroom tax, voted for raising student tuition fees, voted over 20 times to cut welfare spending and voted to back a potential £100bn renewal of Trident? Good to see at least one columnist keeping up the radical, progressive political tradition of the Guardian.Dr Jack FawbertLakenheath, Suffolk • Jessica Elgot makes the most perceptive comment on the Lib Dems (After Brexit, the party loses the USP behind its resurgence, 23 July). She is right to pose the problem, for the party, but she underestimates the electorate. For the first time in decades of my experience in liberal politics, the party gained significant electoral support on an issue of principle, held by the party since 1955, rather than on mending pavements or saving post offices. Pro-remain voters weighed up the political situation and chose the Lib Dems as the most principled pro-Europe party. I am optimistic that they can now be persuaded to look at other long-held liberal policies, such as land value taxation, worker co-ownership and local democracy, and see the value in working with the party to stand up against the reactionaries in both major parties to create a more sensitive and communal society.Michael MeadowcroftLeeds • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition