The US rapper A$AP Rocky has been charged with assault over a fight in Stockholm last month. Prosecutor Daniel Suneson said in a statement on Thursday that he filed charges against the artist and two members of the rapper’s entourage, “having come to the conclusion that the events in question constitute a crime and despite claims of self-defence and provocation”. Rocky, a platinum-selling, Grammy-nominated artist whose real name is Rakim Mayers, has been in custody since 3 July as authorities investigate a fight he was allegedly involved in on 30 June before appearing at a music festival. The case has drawn the attention of fellow recording artists and Donald Trump. On 19 July, the president tweeted about the rapper’s situation from aboard Air Force One: “I will be calling the very talented Prime Minister of Sweden to see what we can do about helping A$AP Rocky.” Prime Minister Stefan Löfven’s office said in a statement that he would not intervene and “underlined that in Sweden everyone is equal before the law.” Footage emerged of the rapper hurling a man to the ground as he and his entourage punched and kicked him. Other members of his entourage were filmed attacking another man. Mayers posted a video on Instagram that showed him being followed by the two men who were later attacked – one appears to attack Mayers’ security guard by throwing a set of headphones at him. The guard is heard telling a bystander: “He hit me with the headphones, he cut me on my head – I could really beat the shit out of him, I don’t even know him, he’s following us. Tell him to leave us alone.” Mayers says: “We don’t want to fight you … We don’t want no problem with these boys – they keep following us.” Mayers wrote in an earlier caption on Instagram: “We don’t know these guys and we didn’t want trouble, they followed us for 4 blocks.” Prosecutor Suneson said in his statement: “It is worth noting that I have had access to a greater amount of material than that which has previously been available on the internet,” and that “in addition to video material, the injured party’s statements have been supported by witness statements.” The three suspects will remain in custody until trial. The Stockholm District Court will set a date for the proceedings.