Seven days, six games, 410 goals scored and 188 turnovers: it is fair to say England’s netballers have earned their rest day before Saturday’s World Cup semi-final against New Zealand. But Jo Harten insisted there would be “no switching off” as the team approach the final weekend of the tournament, knowing this is their best chance of winning the title in its 56-year history. Harten, the goal attack whose superstar shooting partnership with Helen Housby is the driver of this England team, said England would spend the day studying their semi-final opponents after the victory over South Africa on Thursday confirmed they would face the Silver Ferns. New Zealand finished second in their group after being beaten by Australia in a nailbiting final group game, a match that Tracey Neville and several of the England players had chosen not to view before they took to the court. “I haven’t watched them too much,” said Harten. “I’ve analysed them before coming in here and I’ll analyse them again … I just know they are a class act. Losing by one to Australia is no mean feat.” Many of the Kiwi players are well known to Harten and her teammates, who compete against them in the Australian Suncorp League. “I’ve played with some of their defenders,” said Harten, “so I know what they are capable of and what they are going to try and do to us in the shooting circle. For me it will be about nullifying the threat of their defenders but [also] knowing it will need a 60-minute performance to make the final.” The symbiosis of Housby and Harten in the shooting circle is always a crucial factor when England take on Australia and New Zealand, the superpowers of world netball. It even has its own moniker, H2, and the unintended nod to science seems to capture their essence – two atoms, locked together in perfect harmony, filling their end of the court with Brownian motion. As Harten has said, it is a symmetry born of mutual affection and plenty of strategising: “It doesn’t just happen overnight. We’ve been working solidly on our own games out in Australia.” Another key player will be the captain, Serena Guthrie, the bulldog of England’s performances this week, earning the admiration of many of her rivals including New Zealand’s captain, Laura Langman. The veteran centre of 157 caps, who has called her opponent “the most influential centre in the world”, anticipates a titanic battle. “I think she looks so fit,” said Langman. “Serena loves an event and it’s going to be one.” Given how fervent the atmosphere inside the M&S Bank Arena has been all week, there is a chance the semi-finals will rupture a few eardrums. Neville has admitted that early on the intensity of the England fans scared her and even made her players a little nervous. Now she does not want to live without them. The New Zealand coach, Noeline Taurua, expects home advantage to play a role for England. “I think a crowd does make a difference but you’ve also got to be able to deliver,” she said. “It can bring a bit of pressure either way.” Her own side will be looking to raise their game after on-the-buzzer defeat by Australia, who remain the favourites to lift the trophy. “It’s good to get a taste of that sort of pressure and that challenge,” said Taurua. “We’ve still got a little bit to go to be able to keep up and put our dominant performance out there.” As for England, she praised their attacking line, including Chelsea Pitman – who has been a world champion once already, for Australia, before switching her allegiance to England. But the Silver Ferns coach is also well aware that, ever since Layla Guscoth ruptured her achilles at the start of the week, the Roses squad is a defender down and that has meant a bigger workload for the remaining players. “It will be interesting to see how their defence handle it, knowing that they’ve been one down for the last couple of days,” said Taurua. Nor is England’s backline a young one – Eboni Usoro-Brown is 31 and Geva Mentor, still rated as the world’s best goalkeeper, is 34. Rotating players has been essential for Neville ever since losing Guscoth, with even a 10-minute rest on the bench vital for preserving energy levels. And while Mentor was looking forward to a day of rest and recovery, England’s second-most capped player also said her body was “holding up nicely. I’m actually feeling great out there,” said Mentor. “I keep surprising myself every time I go out for a run.” England’s semi-final will be the second of the day at 3pm. Australia play South Africa at 11.15am in a game they will be widely expected to win after Norma Plummer’s Proteas were humbled by England in their last group match. An Australia-England final on Sunday afternoon would be a repeat of the Commonwealth Games gold medal match that Neville’s players stole in the final second of the game, and there is no doubting that the Diamonds’ coach, Lisa Alexander – and her players – would relish the chance for revenge in front of an England crowd. As Langman pointed out, there is no reason to fear the roar of the Roses fans: “You’ve just got to pretend they are cheering for you.”