One face has always stood out from a picture on the clubhouse wall at Western Gailes Golf Club. Rory McIlroy’s participation in the 2007 European Amateur Team Championship in Ayrshire, won by Ireland, came just days before an Open Championship debut at Carnoustie. It was never a case of ‘Whatever happened to Shane Lowry’ but his teammate claimed by far the greater weight of attention before events at Royal Portrush on Sunday. Twelve years and a few heartaches on Lowry is in possession of the Claret Jug. On that score at least he now sits 1-1 with McIlroy. There is a glaring dichotomy attached to Lowry’s Open win, which came 48 hours after McIlroy missed the cut at a championship where he was in such sharp focus. McIlroy admitted as much, when posting praise of Lowry on Monday alongside a photo of the duo in their amateur days. “Even though last week wasn’t the week I had envisaged for myself, I couldn’t be happier and more proud of Shane,” McIlroy said. “How he handled everything over the weekend … emotions, nerves and conditions tells you everything I’ve gotten to know about him over the past 15 years. 2019 Champion Golfer of the Year! Enjoy some good stuff out of the Claret Jug!” The final point can be taken for granted. So, too, barring something unexpected, can McIlroy and Lowry teaming up in Ireland colours once again, at the 2020 Olympic Games. That McIlroy’s delight for Lowry is heartfelt can be backed up by the fact he expressed a desire for the 32-year-old to win before exiting Portrush. Padraig Harrington, who was there to congratulate Lowry as he stepped from the final green, knows what it takes to win majors. “He believes he can win,” said Harrington. “And that’s more than you can say for a lot of guys who could be in that situation.” Lowry’s talent has never been open to question; amateur players do not make a habit of winning professional events, as he did at the Irish Open of 2009. Yet there were always waves of emotion attached to professional pursuits. Failure to convert a chance to win the US Open in 2016 – Lowry was four ahead with 18 holes to play – left scars that took a long time to heal. “I always said after Oakmont, if I could have got the last four holes back I’d give anything to be standing on the 14th fairway again,” he said. Generally, Lowry appeared frustrated at not reaching the heights recurring promise had suggested even if his career has hardly been humdrum or impoverished. When Lowry wins he tends to win big; a World Golf Championship, a premium European Tour event in Abu Dhabi and now a major sit on his CV alongside that extraordinary Irish Open success of a decade ago. Although the official qualifying process has not started, Lowry is a near certainty to feature in the Ryder Cup for the first time, next year at Whistling Straits. Neil Manchip’s claim to fame was seeing off Darren Clarke to win the 1999 Irish PGA Championship before moving into coaching. Scotland’s loss – Manchip hails from Edinburgh – has been Ireland’s gain; he is credited with development of young players in his adopted country, where he is the national coach. James Sugrue, the recently crowned amateur champion, has pinpointed Manchip as a major influence. With Lowry the omnipresent Manchip is more of a mentor. The day before the Open the latter had to relax Lowry. The result could hardly be more stunning. No wonder Manchip, an understated character, revealed his immense satisfaction at Lowry’s performance. “The people around me really believed that I could [win an Open], which helped me an awful lot,” Lowry said. “I do remember a lot of times in the past when I’m down on myself and serious chats with Neil, he always reminded me, he always said that I was going to win one, at least one, he said. So I suppose when the people around you really believe in you it helps you an awful lot.” An alliance from late last year with Brian ‘Bo’ Martin, from Northern Ireland, has also been of obvious benefit to Lowry. Martin, a long-time and respected bag man for Irish players, inserts the levity in moments of self-doubt. The extent to which this pair laugh and smile on the course is instantly apparent. “He doesn’t have to prove to anybody that he’s a good player,” said Martin. “But he had to prove it to himself.” An emotional homecoming to Esker Hills Golf Club in rural Ireland will be forthcoming. Lowry’s grandmother, Emily Scanlon, provided wonderful footage for RTE television on Monday when describing weekend nerves. “I hadn’t drank a brandy since 2009,” she said. “I drank two yesterday and it’s nearly killing me. I am a very proud granny.” Ireland’s deep appreciation – and celebration – of sporting heroes means Lowry’s triumph has resonated way beyond traditional boundaries. “I can’t believe I’m a major champion,” said Lowry before exiting Portrush for what social media confirms as an epic celebration in Dublin. “There are a lot of benefits that come with being an Open champion but I’ll just try and be the same old Shane Lowry that I’ve always been.” Difficult though that may prove, you get the feeling he means it. After a 12-year wait, Lowry is back alongside golfing aristocracy.