Born in South Africa, Mabuse, 28, began dancing as a young child. After studying civil engineering at university, she moved to Europe to become a competitive Latin and ballroom dancer. Since 2015, she has been one of the professionals on Strictly Come Dancing. She leads the Tesco health charity campaign, Dance Beats, which includes a dance marathon relay world record attempt at Wembley stadium this weekend. She is married and lives in London. When were you happiest?When I realised that I was meant to be a dancer, aged 19. What is your earliest memory?My eighth birthday at home in Pretoria. It was my first big birthday party and also my mum’s master’s graduation. I remember wearing a beautiful yellow and orange dress. What is your most treasured possession?My shoes and earphones. I have a thing for earphones – I have five types. I have different styles of shoe for different dances and I love sneakers, flats, platforms, heels, boots. Especially my thigh-high black leather boots from Kurt Geiger. What would your super power be?Mind control. When people are sad, I would make them happy. What makes you unhappy?When people don’t give 100%. And poverty – when I see homeless people in the street I buy them food or water. Who would play you in the film of your life?My life is so boring I’d feel bad for anyone who has to play me. But I’d ask [former Strictly contestant] Natalie Gumede. What is your favourite smell?My perfume, Dylan Blue by Versace. What is your favourite word?Massive. What did you want to be when you were growing up?A paediatrician, then I was like, I can’t dissect frogs! Then I fell in love with making things and understanding how things work. What is top of your bucket list?I want to go to Hawaii. What is your guiltiest pleasure?Spare ribs – love ’em. What or who is the greatest love of your life?My husband, Marius, who is Romanian-German. When I switched from engineering to dancing, Marius was the first guy that I started dancing with. We competed together, ended up dating and then we got engaged. We got married five years ago in Denmark in the countryside. We chose a country we thought would be special – I had never been. A few years later, my parents wanted us to have a wedding at home and we ended up having another in South Africa. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party?Kimberly Wyatt – she’s super, super fun. Which words or phrases do you most overuse?Unleash the power from within. I tell everyone that! It keeps you going if you’re already feeling good and, if you are down, it uplifts you. What single thing would improve the quality of your life?I couldn’t ask for anything else. I am super, super happy. What keeps you awake at night?Too much energy. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?To have a better attitude and think positively – when a door closes, a window opens. If something doesn’t go your way, then look for another way. If something’s broken, fix it.