We were enjoying a final barbecue with our two younger children on the last night of a holiday in Cornwall. Earlier we had dropped Jake, our 16-year-old, at the station so he could go home for a party. What we didn’t know, as we watched another dazzling sunset, was that the party was at our house. Jake was the host. And it had been flagged on social media for more than a week. Skip to the next day. We were driving home when we received an ominous phone call from Jake: “I’m really sorry,” he said, “but Josh broke the overhead light in the kitchen skateboarding round the table.” There were several things wrong with this statement. But, most alarmingly, why were Jake and his friend in the house, which we had locked up and fully secured before going on holiday? Within five minutes of arriving home it became clear that he’d had a Facebook party. A gathering for 25 mates – his story, anyway – had turned into a bacchanalian bash for 200. The carpets were ruined, almost turned black with footprints. There were alarming drops of blood on the walls, which were also filthy, and a cupboard door had been wrenched off its hinges. No room was left undamaged. “Someone’s slept in my bed,” my 13-year-old daughter called from upstairs, furious. “There are cigarette burns on the sofa,” said the eight-year-old, thrilled, as he ran from room to room inspecting the wreckage. There was worse to come. A precious Gurkha’s knife belonging to my husband John’s late father was missing, a bike had been stolen and surrounding the house was a sea of smashed beer bottles. We were picking up fragments of glass for weeks. We live in an ancient farmhouse. It’s withstood centuries of pillaging and plundering, and can more than cope with a crowd of drunk teens. What bothered us – aside from the deceit – was what could have gone wrong, without any adults on hand to pick up the pieces. We have a thatched roof – no need to spell out the risks there. What if someone had needed to go to A&E, a 45-minute drive away? Or a kid had fallen asleep and – my personal terror when teenagers are involved – choked on their vomit? To be fair, Jake was distraught. The party had quickly raged out of control. He’d watched in horror as people he didn’t know charged upstairs, ignoring his pleas that it was out of bounds. He said he’d hated the whole night, and we believed him (although it must be said, his timing was immaculate; he started sixth form with street cred intact). Beware the email from an unknown parent: it may well be a fake. Ban social media invites. Hide your valuables We confiscated his phone, which was humming with texts (“Sick party” was the gist) and banned him from going out for a few weeks. But we couldn’t gate him for ever and, eventually, we had to make a decision about what to do next. In the following weeks, we’d overhear the odd phone call, along the chilling lines of “so-and-so’s got a free house”. We knew Jake wouldn’t put us through a Facebook party again, but how was he going to see his friends? When you live in the sticks, as we do, there are few places for teenagers to go. Chances are they are going to see their friends and get drunk anyway, and they need a safe place to do it. Taking a somewhat different approach, we decided to be the safe place. Full-on parties at home were off the agenda; instead we told our son he could have small gatherings, provided we were both present. “Are you crazy?” our friends said. “Look what happened last time.” But we went ahead, and here’s the thing: over the next two years we got to know Jake’s circle of friends pretty well. They would crash at our house after a party – six of them squeezed into his bedroom – and more often than not our house was the party. Weekends became a mishmash of Butterflies meets Skins. To help make it work, we established some unbreakable rules. The gathering must be banished to one room as far away from our bedroom as possible; no smoking inside; no drugs. (Oh yes, the thorny issue of drugs. I am grateful that John’s job as a festival promoter gives him the inside track on the worst drugs doing the rounds – things with numbers rather than names: 2CB anyone? – so we aren’t clueless, but having your teenager partying under your roof gives you an unrivalled opportunity to look into their eyes. If something was going on, we’d have known about it.) And here’s another thing you learn when you see your kids’ friends slightly pissed, guard down: they really care for each other. If someone’s throwing up, they will be looked after. If one of them is having a bad time, a friend will take them home. If there’s a relationship trauma, they will not be crying alone. Jake is now at university and recently he invited the old crowd around for a reunion. We were genuinely thrilled to see them. They cooked and sat around the table drinking wine - how things change in the space of three years. Getting to know our children’s friends has given us an insight into the modern teenager; they are kind, funny, intelligent and polite. And they are welcome any time. Here’s six things we learned. 1 Never leave your house emptyDon’t be tempted to allow your teenager to have a gathering while you’re away, however small and “safe” he or she says it will be. I have friends with teenagers who book a housesitter rather than leave the place unguarded – some teenagers live for an empty house. Always remember that after a few beers, sense, logic and the moral compass tend to go out of the window (one friend had a new car smashed up at an illicit teenage party). And if you need to farm them out, make sure it’s to an adult you genuinely know and can check in with. Beware the unknown parent’s email: it may well be a fake. 2 Get to know your child’s friendsThis might sound obvious, but it’s surprisingly easy to lose sight of your kid’s friends once they start at secondary school. Allowing your house to become the party place (with strict boundaries) once in a while means you see them in a much more relaxed setting. Without exception, we’ve found them to be lovely. Plus, you get to prowl your terrain from time to time to see what’s going down. Literally. 3 Ban social media invitesSocial media can get out of control fast, and if strangers or friends of friends begin to turn up, no amount of rule-setting will save you. Instead, set a limit of 10-15 friends, which is a manageable number. 4 Treat it as a giant sleepoverIt’s easiest to allow everyone to stay, especially if transport links are weak (and few parents relish a 1am pick-up). They will happily crash on floors, sofas, chairs or the back of their car. And, talking of cars, if you have them to stay you don’t have the worry of late-night dangerous driving. 5 Hide valuables (booze included)I’m still smarting from the loss of an unopened bottle of rhubarb gin, a birthday present, which was handed out freely as shots at one gathering. We move anything we care about, such as good glasses, put throws on sofas and cloths on tables. I learned the hard way that wet beer bottle tops leave nasty marks on surfaces. 6 The key ingredients are beer, pizza and baconMostly they want to drink beer and it does seem to be the best option: the time they drank Jägermeister wasn’t pretty. Pizza at any time of day or night goes down in industrial quantities. Same goes for breakfast the next morning. Get the bacon frying and hand out a few bin bags, you’ll be pleasantly surprised by how quickly order is restored. • Him, by Clare Empson, is published by Orion Fiction. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site. If you would like a comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).