Unless you suffer from sparklophobia, there is something magical about light-reflective grains redolent of 70s discos. Alas, most are plastic, aka, planet destroyers. Still, you don’t have to eschew the shimmery stuff entirely. Biodegradable glitter will get you this Halpern SS19 look. Prep eyes with glitter primer, line the crease with a liquid liner, brush on glitter and finish off with gloss. It’ll still get everywhere, but at least you’ll shine while you save the world. 1. Eco Stardust Emerald Biodegradable Glitter £6, ecostardust.com2. DiorShow On Stage Liner £27.50, dior.com 3. YSL EyeGloss Smudger £19, boots.com 4. Illamasqua Iconic Chrome £22, illamasqua.com 5. Sleek MakeUp Glitterfest Biodegradable Glitter £5.49, lookfantastic.com Shiseido After Sun Intensive Recovery Emulsion, £31, johnlewis.com Once upon a time I was the type of person who thought that slathering on baby oil, olive oil, any hi-shine oil, and basting in the sun like a Christmas turkey, was a wonderful idea. Yes, me, who harps on about avoiding sun damage and wearing SPF. Back then I saw my sun care principles in the same way I view the roasting-potatoes-in-goose-fat technique – ie the only way for best results. I would leave the beach with an even, chocolate tone and a self-satisfied expression. One day, I arrived back in my holiday apartment to get ready for an evening out. I stepped into the shower and as I begun to wash, the skin on my chest came off in my hands. It taught me two things: 1) The human body is not made for roasting and 2) The power of After Sun. The now-discontinued offering I used then was an absolute godsend. Not only did the clear gel ease the burning sensation on my skin (well, where my skin once was), it healed and hydrated quickly. This new one by Shiseido is a different texture - milky – but nonetheless fabulous. It is a super-light emulsion that replenishes moisture levels, improves the look of your tan and prevents the inevitable dryness that follows whenever you spend any time in the sun. And if you do find your skin is peeling off in spades, it is incredibly soothing. But let’s hope it doesn’t come to that. Surf’s up Perfect for removing beach residue from hair while prepping it for styling, think of this as a scalp exfoliator. Davines SOLU Sea Salt Scrub Cleanser, £22.50, libertylondon.co.uk Way out Jen Atkins, the superstar hairstylist behind the cool girl haircare brand Ouai (pronounced ‘way’) has launched a fragrance range. North Bondi, think jasmine and musk, is exquisite. North Bondi Eau De Parfum, £46, thequai.co.uk Happy landings This handy kit from Aesop, the cult brand adored by design enthusiasts, includes seven skincare and hygiene formulations. An excellent-value travel companion to take on your trip. Departure Travel Kit, £45, aesop.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.