What were you hoping for?To meet the love of my life, obviously. First impressions?Considering I was 10 minutes late, I thought his first impression of me would be fairly low. But he was 15 minutes later than that, so I was both relieved and a tad irritated. What did you talk about?His friends, his family, his job... there was little leeway for a two-way conversation. Any awkward moments?Our debate about Pip from Great Expectations – turns out you either love him or justifiably hate the guy. Good table manners?He stole his unfinished pint to take on the tube. Best thing about Ty?He knew what he wanted to talk about, and he did it well – he is clearly confident, which is a good trait. Would you introduce him to your friends?I’m not sure he is particularly similar to my pals. Describe Ty in three wordsTalkative, self-assured, tipsy. What do you think he made of you?I think he thought I was quite chill? But if I’m honest, I’m not very sure, we didn’t talk about me much. Did you go on somewhere?We were both quite hungover and I was ready to call it a night by 9.30. Make of that what you will. And… did you kiss?Nope. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Him taking a bit of interest in what I had to say. Marks out of 10?Four for effort. Would you meet again?I don’t think so – although it turns out we roam similar parts of London, so it may be more of an awkward run-in than anything else. What were you hoping for?A manic pixie dream girl or free hummus. First impressions?She was cool and comfortable with my lateness. What did you talk about?Books I hate, stuff my friends told me to say on the date, philosophy, this other date I’d been on, this other date Rachel had been on. Any awkward moments?It was remarkably un-awkward. Good table manners?Her ability to manipulate food with a knife and fork was good. Best thing about Rachel?When we divided the leftovers, she let me have first pick – I’m sure the homeless guy I gave all my food to appreciated that. Would you introduce her to your friends?They wanted to FaceTime me and say hi, but I was being sensible. Describe Rachel in three wordsActually quite safe. What do you think she made of you?Probably that I’m a bit of an idiot. Did you go on somewhere?Rachel got the tube home and then I went and hung out with my fake cousin and a girl we met who was on a stopover in London. And... did you kiss?Nope. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I’d do it the same, but in Greece. Marks out of 10?I’d give Rachel a four, not because the date wasn’t good but because I wanted to make a Mean Girls reference (Four for you Glen Coco, you go Glen Coco!). Would you meet again?As friends, for sure. • Rachel and Ty ate at the Real Greek, London W1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com