Michael Barrett (Letters, 9 July) calls upon the religions to join with ecologists to take action on climate change as it offers “a compelling cause” to tackle declining memberships. We are already on board. Since Pope Francis’s letter to the world, Laudato Si’, Catholics have been reflecting on how we can work for climate justice. Thousands of our churches now run on renewable energy, while thousands of parishioners have taken to the streets to demand political action. Last month, for instance, nearly 1,500 Cafod supporters joined people from other faith communities as part of a climate and environment lobby of parliament. Some 12,000 people of all faiths and none travelled from across the country to speak to more than 350 MPs about the political and economic decisions needed if the UK is to reach net-zero emissions. And faith leaders undertook a Walk of Witness down Whitehall to show our commitment to protecting creation and our poorest sisters and brothers – those who will pay the greatest price if we fail to urgently cut emissions. So, people in faith communities are taking action. But not because it’s a membership drive. It’s because we hear the cry of the Earth and of the poor, who experience the injustice of climate change right now through lost lives and livelihoods. We care for our common home because it’s our moral duty to act.Christine AllenDirector, Catholic Agency for Overseas Development • The government may be responding to the climate crisis like a “Dad’s Army” (Report, 10 July) but more than 120 local authorities led by all of the main political parties have declared that this really is a climate emergency and that they will go into battle with or without government support. Between us we have multibillion-pound budgets, cross party determination, increasing public support and some legislative powers. We are already building up some impressive examples of what can be done and are pooling our experience and expertise. But we can’t win the campaign our own: we need the government to send reinforcements, bringing legislation and resources to support renewable energy, zero-carbon building, public transport, carbon sequestration, action on biodiversity and much more.Cllr Kevin FreaCo-chair, UK Climate Emergency Network • Your coverage of the Committee on Climate Change’s report, with its stinging criticism of government failure to tackle climate change, does not sufficiently identify how the aviation industry needs to be held to immediate account. Given that parliament and many city councils and local authorities have declared a climate emergency, aviation should no longer be protected from scrutiny. The suggested action by the CCC is for a plan to be published limiting the increase in air traffic to 60%. This target is too generous, and is unattainable if all airports are allowed to expand as currently planned. It certainly does not enable the government to achieve net carbon neutrality. We call for no airport expansion, and for a process to begin to roll back existing flights. This could begin with the introduction of a frequent-flyer levy, banning short-haul flights, and forcing airlines to fly planes full (ie to share passengers and cancel low-density flights). A citizens’ assembly should sort the details of how to reduce air travel.Mark Smalley XR Bristol, John Adams Professor emeritus and chair of Stop Bristol Airport Expansion, Hilary Burn Chair, Parish Councils Airport Association, Stephen Clarke Green councillor, Bristol city council, Tanguy Tomes Environmental consultant, Tarisha Clarke Airport Action, Dr Steve Melia Senior lecturer in transport policy, University of the West of England • That the government’s climate advisers, the committee on climate change, reveal little preparation has taken place to deal with extreme weather isn’t, in itself, a shock. What is shocking is that the government, distracted by the not-so-smooth process of grappling with Brexit, still doesn’t appear to get it. By failing to see the problems with fracking despite all of the evidence, green-lighting climate-damaging infrastructure like more new roads, and blithely approving another runway at Heathrow, it’s clear the government has been resisting the hard and immediate policy work needed to kickstart a massive programme of change. This change will be for the unalloyed good of all of us, as well as make for a healthier environment – even if it possibly dents some multinationals’ balance sheets.Mike ChildsHead of science, Friends of the Earth • In Weatherwatch (9 July), Paul Brown highlighted the risks to nuclear power stations with climate change. As he pointed out, nuclear reactors are not a reliable source of base load power. The increasing number of heatwaves threatens their supply of cooling water, particularly in France, which exports electricity. In the UK, reactors use sea water, but there are dangers ahead there, too, with the risk of flooding from rising sea levels. Add to that the whopping costs and the dangers of terrorist attacks, technical failures, human error and radioactive contamination, and it is difficult to understand why politicians are supporting “new build” nuclear reactors. Why are they not choosing to put money and resource into sustainable energy sources?Rae StreetLittleborough, Lancashire • The disavowal that leaves us heading for climate catastrophe was well captured on page 8 on 10 July, with your reports about “Dad’s Army” climate crisis preparations and David Attenborough’s warning that pollution will soon be as reviled as slavery sharing the page with an advert for a car with a twin power turbo engine and the exhortation “Don’t have fun. Have the most fun.”Breda KingstonBath • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition