1) Now we can laugh about it. OK, we laughed about it then too – here are some of the most humiliating World Cup moments endured by the England men’s cricket team. In the 1987 World Cup final, they were doing so well that Allan Border brought himself on to bowl, which was, of course, the perfect moment for Mike Gatting to deploy his fabled reverse-sweep. In 1996, Neil Smith discharged his guts on to the pitch and then Sri Lanka knocked his team out in the quarter-finals, chasing down 236 with nearly 10 overs to spare. In 1999, the last time the competition was held in the green and pleasants, the opening ceremony had to be cut short because of rain and England were eliminated before the official song came out, dismissed for 103 by South Africa and 169 by India. Here they are in 2007, struggling to beat Canada in the aftermath of the Fredalo jaunt; and here they are losing to Ireland in 2011, a moment greatly appreciated by the people of Pune. And, because we can’t help ourselves, a bit of 2019: the ICC’s montage of the staggering denouement. 2) It’s that time of year again when we begin preparing for the World Chase Tag championships, to be held at London’s York Hall on 24 August. Here’s the final of WCT 3, and a best chase compilation from the same. 3) On a similar tip, check out the finals of the Ultimate Dodgeball Championships. Next week: murderball, red rover and British Bulldogs. 4) When hosting an event it’s important to be hospitable – a maxim pushed to the limit by South Korea’s women’s water polo team at the weekend. Playing Hungary in their home World Aquatics Championships, they were beaten 64-0 to smash the previous record defeat of 33-0, set earlier that day when Netherlands pipped South Africa. However, things have looked up a bit for them since then … 5) With the key match of 2000 Bledisloe Cup reaching its conclusion, Australia trailed New Zealand 23-21 and won a potentially decisive penalty … except the regular goal-kicker, Stirling Mortlock, was off the pitch. So Australia captain John Eales – 6ft 7in, 18 stone-plus, nicknamed Nobody, “because Nobody’s Perfect” – assumed responsibility. Here he is, telling us all about it. 6) To the unbridled joy of no one you would dream of speaking to, pre-season football is under way. Schalke, it seems, beat Stadtauswahl Bottrop 20-1 so, for the Bottrop fans among us, here’s the glorious own goal that failed to ignite a comeback for the ages. 1) The rules of Kabaddi – explained. 2) A costly poker miscount. 3) The NFL tries announcerless games in 1980. 4) The heavy metal knitting championships. 5) Kimi Räikkönen goes lawnmower racing. 6) Sorana Cirstea makes six successful challenges in a set. 7) A T-Rex race. Spotters badges: LeeWall, whobroughtoranges, GrahamClayton, Vesuvial. Guardian YouTube football channel Do subscribe if you fancy. Do subscribe if you fancy. 