These days our fears, being spoilt for choice, can take many shapes and sizes. Mine have settled on a vague image of an ill-fated stash – a giant heap of trouble. Is the age of the terrible stockpile upon us? The stockpile exudes foreboding. Recently Iran confirmed that its uranium stockpile had exceeded the limit originally set by the 2015 nuclear deal. You’ll also remember this concept – as mundane as a store cupboard, as frightening as a cache of semi-automatics – from the many news stories about Brexit no-deal “preparations”: carmakers gathering parts; supermarkets amassing nonperishable goods. Judging by the no-deal verve, it’s possible to conflate the desperation of the stockpile with the charm of the harvest The word stockpile began, blandly enough, as an American mining term. It was first used in the 1870s, when the General Mining Act formalised the mechanisms through which private speculators and companies could extract resources from so-called public lands – the act didn’t acknowledge Native land rights. The mining stockpile signals a certain kind of prosperity: increased construction and production, trade opportunities, grand projects of expansion. It underwrites promises of jobs and profit. The infrastructure of the modern industrial world was conceived among the 19th century’s stockpiles. But, in a fearful symmetry, the stockpile returns when industrialisation’s ruthless promises fail. When resources are exhausted, when networks supporting the flow of goods are disrupted, when trade relations break down or are bizarrely self-sabotaged, then the other, bleaker kind of stockpile appears. In this final form, the promising extraction of copper is now a hoard of emergency supplies. The stockpile is modernity’s beginning and its end. Brexit hoarding stories reflect these two faces of the stockpile, capturing the promise and the panic. Tales of people clearing out supermarket tinned food supplies, or Unilever creating a store of Magnum ice-creams for the long, sovereign summers to come, sit alongside warnings to the NHS to stockpile vital medicines. For some, the prospect of no deal, despite endlessly grim expert warnings, carries a nostalgic excitement for self-sufficiency. Cupboards full of tins and bulk-buys of toilet roll gain an atmosphere of pastoral cosiness. It’s like the description of Badger’s house in The Wind in the Willows. His winter stores “took up half the room – piles of apples, turnips, and potatoes, baskets full of nuts, and jars of honey”. Judging by some of the no-deal verve, it’s possible to conflate the desperation of the stockpile with the charm of the harvest. Even objective fiscal measurements can be duped into mistaking one kind of stockpile for another. The UK economy grew earlier in the year because the manufacturing sector, producing goods for no-deal stockpiles, recorded strong output. Sure enough, in the months after this “good news”, Bloomberg reported a slump in manufacturing “as Brexit stockpiling boost fades”. The stockpiles now making headlines signify crises in globalised trade and its associated diplomacy. Iran claims to be enlarging its uranium stores because of new, punishing US sanctions. Whether the stockpiling is of weapons or medicine, such accumulation fortifies the idea of nations working alone at a time when we need maximum international cooperation. Since the threat of global heating is blind to borders, for practical if not moral reasons we must find collaborative strategies and complex international regulation to survive. But, going back to the days of private speculators looking for gold in them-there hills, the stockpile has always symbolised self-interest at the expense of truly communal gain. We need to abandon the insular logic of the stockpile, in either its prosperous or emergency guise. Cross-national collaborations to fight ecological collapse will necessarily involve local economic alternatives to the unjust, environmentally damaging effects of globalisation. We can’t deny the planetary costs of modernity’s uneven luxuries, the many pollutions of fiscal prosperity. We should follow the Badger’s lead and eat more food grown nearby; we have to move around much less. But the no-deal Brexit stockpile is a parody of such solutions, a grotesque kind of localism which rather than being a radical alternative to globalised markets is merely a product of their breakdown. Yet even these ecologically catastrophic times can’t seem to dampen the lucrative future promised by the stockpile. With tactless irony, countries such as Russia and China are racing to protect their own economic prospects in the Arctic, where rapid heating is revealing ice-bound assets. Russia is planning to transport the first mobile nuclear plant (by tugboat!) to one of its ports in the Arctic Circle, in order to power its mining operations in the region. The more we continue to do this kind of stockpiling, the more likely we’ll need to do the other, subsistence kind. Despite “stockpile” being a banal, administrative word, we should think of it as a mythological two-faced creature, with one offering a smirk and the other grimacing. Imagine this creature as our warning to adopt all the qualities it doesn’t embody: the sustainable and responsible circulation of resources in universally beneficial ways. • Laurence Scott is an author and lecturer in writing at New York University, London. He is the author of Picnic Comma Lightning: In Search of a New Reality