A touch of ballet came to the Liverpool stage last night as England showed off some serious style to beat South Africa 58-47. Goalshooter Jo Harten hailed one of her side’s “best performances in the last two years” as they finished top of their group and set up a semi-final against New Zealand on Saturday. After some workmanlike performances, England seemed to raise their game against what Harten described as their bogey team. “Whenever we come up against them they take it down to the wire,” said Harten, who had tasted defeat against South Africa in January’s Quad series. “We were really nervous going into that one.” The pre-show butterflies worked. Under the mesmeric marshalling of centre Serena Guthrie, England established an 11-goal lead by half-time. The Proteas were not helped by the fact that the only person who might have been able to combat Guthrie – their own captain, Bongiwe Msomi – turned her ankle and hobbled off court after 11 minutes. Karla Pretorius and Phumza Maweni, who play alongside each other in the Australian Superleague, were supposed to be the strongest defence pairing that England’s attack had yet faced. But they had no answer to the dance that unfolded in front of them from the sixth minute, when a rebound off the baseline parlayed the ball back to Harten, who sent in a long-range shot that screamed confidence. Three more unanswered goals followed from her pas de deux in the D with Helen Housby, and by the end of the first quarter, England had scored 19. The last was a piece of almost ridiculous flair from Harten, who received a long ball on the edge of the circle and plunged it towards the net with one leg cocked coquettishly behind her. In the centre of the court, Guthrie exchanged long balls with Chelsea Pitman, their clean, clear arcs overwhelming the South Africa midquarters. There was something fun, almost flirty, about the way the ball kept making its way back to the England net. It had little interest in the other end, and when it did make an occasional appearance, South Africa’s own attack looked rattled. Maryka Holtzhauzen finished the first half with five misses from her nine attempts, while Geva Mentor and Eboni Usoro-Brown doubled down on Potgieter to keep her contained. South Africa returned stronger after the break, and England – who had previously not conceded a single quarter in the tournament – were even outscored 17-15 in the final 15 minutes. But at no point in the second half were the Proteas closer than nine goals in what coach Tracey Neville described as a “clinical” display and what Harten’s shooting alter ego, Housby, simply called “having fun”. England’s upcoming semi-final opponents New Zealand finished runners up in their own group, after they suffered defeat to Australia by a single goal in a stunning morning game. The Silver Ferns had fought back from a six-goal half-time deficit – but Israel Folau could only watch from the stands with everyone else as his wife Maria, New Zealand’s go-to pressure shooter, skimmed the rim with her last-second attempt to draw level. It was the World Cup’s best day of drama, which included Northern Ireland’s first ever victory against Barbados. After the high paced first half ended 23-23, captain Caroline O’Hanlon – who took hits to every part of her body, including her face – inspired her troops and even a late wobble as Barbados halved their six-goal lead with three minutes to play could not deny Northern Ireland their 46-43 win, or the reward of a place in the 9th/10th place play-off. Scotland were only a single goal from meeting them in that fixture, after their thriller against Trinidad and Tobago ended in the first draw of the tournament. Forty-five minutes of see-sawing scoreline climaxed in a frenetic final five minutes, Ellie Barrie levelling the scores with a shot that reached the net after the hooter sounded. With the two teams finishing Group G on equal footing, a lower goal average means Scotland now play Barbados for the 11th-12th placing.