The Wallabies have scrummaged their way to a 16-10 Rugby Championship victory over Argentina, with halfback Will Genia calling the shots in his Brisbane Test farewell. The Japan-bound Queensland favourite handed Australia just their fifth win from the past 17 Tests and was cheered off after his 60-minute stint at Suncorp Stadium on Saturday. Argentina replied to Reece Hodge’s first-half try with six minutes to play to make it a six-point game, but the hosts controlled the ball from then on to eliminate any prospect of an agonising defeat. Missed opportunities would have again frustrated coach Michael Cheika, but an improved defence and dominant set piece were both promising signs just three Tests out from September’s World Cup. The Wallabies had their line crossed five tries in South Africa last weekend, but an improved defensive effort held the Pumas at bay until Facundo Isa scored after an 11-strong line-out drive. In another encouraging sign, five-eighth Christian Lealiifano was solid over his 51-minute contribution after starting in place of Bernard Foley, while props James Slipper and Taniela Tupou both dominated after coming off the bench for Scott Sio and Sekope Kepu. However, James O’Connor barely got a touch in his first Test action since 2013 after he centre Tevita Kuridrani with 10 minutes remaining. Early on, Australia’s tardiness at the breakdown cost them twice when they were within striking distance, while frequent dropped ball also undermined their attack for a second straight weekend. Yet Argentina’s ball security was no better, with the visitors blowing a try-scoring chance in the 26th minute. Departing Reds captain Samu Kerevi put on one last show at his favourite stadium, but was denied a try assist when Kuridrani shelled an offload. Fortunately Reece Hodge was more clinical when he had an opportunity to finish off a key attacking foray in the first half after fellow winger Marika Koroibete broke the line before the ball headed to the right flank. Hodge wasn’t helped by a floated pass from Kurtley Beale but he coolly collected the transfer and stepped inside a defender before diving over. The relief was palpable among a crowd of 31,599 who then enjoyed seeing the Wallabies securing a spate of scrum penalties, a welcome development after Australia’s long-term scrummaging woes. Australia lost to South Africa 35-17 last weekend while Argentina was beaten 20-16 by New Zealand. Earlier, New Zealand and South Africa played to a 16-16 draw. Due to the upcoming Rugby World Cup in Japan beginning in late September, the tournament has been reduced to three rounds. In two weeks, Australia hosts New Zealand at Perth and South Africa travels to Buenos Aires to play Argentina.