Cobham, the UK aerospace and defence supplier, has agreed to be bought by the US private equity firm Advent International in a £4bn cash deal. Shareholders in Cobham will receive 165p for each of their shares – 34% more than the company’s closing share price on Wednesday. The shares rose 35% to 166p after the takeover was announced. Cobham employs about 10,000 people and operates in more than 100 countries. The company supplies radar and other electronic products for the defence and aviation industries and says its components are in every passenger jet now made by Airbus. The company has only recently stabilised itself after five profit warnings between 2015 and 2017. It raised £500m from shareholders in 2017 to strengthen its finances after taking on too much debt for the botched takeover of Aeroflex in the US. The acquisition of a British defence contractor by a US buyout group could face political resistance. Melrose Industries’ hostile takeover last year of GKN, another engineering company that supplies the defence industry, was opposed by unions and some MPs. The government has also toughened up rules on foreign takeovers, particularly on national security grounds. Cobham said the takeover would give shareholders the opportunity to cash in their shares and that Advent would invest in the business to help it grow. The offer is 50% higher than Cobham’s average share price over the past three months but at Wednesday’s closing price of 123p the shares had halved since peaking in 2015. David Lockwood, Cobham’s chief executive said: “We have worked intensively over the last two and half years to focus on our customers and our financial and operating performance. “This offer reflects the potential for future growth and improving performance, and is an endorsement of our turnaround strategy and our hard working people.” Advent’s recent deals in the UK include buying Laird, an electronic components maker, for £1bn last year. Lockwood was Laird’s chief executive before he took over at Cobham in December 2016. Cobham published its first-half results alongside the takeover announcement. In the six months to the end of June underlying operating profit, excluding proceeds from asset sales a year earlier, rose 12% to £107.1m. The company said its outlook for the year was unchanged but that free cash flow should be better than expected. The FTSE 250 company’s board will unanimously recommend the takeover to shareholders. The deal will require approval by at least 75% of shareholders at a meeting held no later than October. Cobham’s directors, who own 0.04% of Cobham between them, and Artemis Investment Management, which owns 5.13% of Cobham shares, have agreed to vote for the deal.