Southampton have signed Che Adams from Birmingham for an undisclosed fee. The 22-year-old striker, who scored 22 Championship goals last season and was named in the team of the season at the EFL Awards, has agreed a five-year contract at St Mary’s. He becomes Ralph Hasenhüttl’s second summer signing, after the Mali international winger Moussa Djenepo joined from Standard Liège for £14m. Hasenhüttl said: “Che fits the profile of player we want to bring to Southampton and is very driven to show what he can do at the highest level. We have been monitoring his progress for some time now. He has shown a desire to join us above all other clubs, which shows the positive reputation Southampton has built for developing young players. “I am delighted to have signed Che and Moussa ahead of the start of pre-season. They are both young, dynamic players with the level of enthusiasm and hunger we are looking for that can help us improve as a team.” Adams said: “I’m delighted. There was interest in January, when it didn’t quite happen, but I’m happy now that it’s all gone through. You can see with the track history – the amount of young players they’re playing, the gaffer’s belief in the young players, the squad in itself – where the club is going to be. I want to be part of that.” Aston Villa have signed the defender Matt Targett from Southampton for an undisclosed fee. His new manager, Dean Smith, said: “He’s a player we have been looking at for a considerable amount of time. He fits our criteria of being a young player with experience of playing in the Premier League and having the potential to develop further.” Jürgen Klopp has assured Marko Grujic that he remains in Liverpool’s long-term plans despite the midfielder being allowed to rejoin Hertha Berlin on a season-long loan. Grujic resisted offers from Frankfurt and Werder Bremen – plus late interest from Brighton and Atalanta – to re-sign for the Bundesliga club where he enjoyed a productive loan spell last season. The Serbia international scored five goals in 23 appearances for Hertha and despite a change of head coach, with Ante Covic replacing Pal Dardai on Monday, the 23-year-old player preferred to return to a team that he feels is suited to his style. Liverpool will receive a £2m loan fee from Hertha with the potential for an extra £500,000 in bonuses. The German club will also pay Grujic’s salary in full plus any penalties arising from a lack of game time. Grujic has now made three loan moves since arriving at Liverpool for £5.1m from Red Star Belgrade in 2016 – playing for Cardiff City before his deals in Berlin – but Klopp believes the midfielder can develop into a first-team player at Anfield for the 2020-21 campaign. Liverpool gave Grujic a new five-year contract before he joined Hertha last summer but with several midfield options available to Klopp, including the fit-again Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain, the club view another loan and more regular first-team football as better for his development. Leeds have completed a double loan signing with Manchester City midfielder Jack Harrison and Brighton defender Ben White joining on season-long deals. Harrison, 22, spent last season at Elland Road and scored four goals in 42 appearances for Marcelo Bielsa’s side. Leeds have an option to sign him on a permanent deal at the end of the season.