After 27 years of misery brought about by unrelenting cock‑ups whenever the cricketing nations of the world have come together, England now have another go at winning the one-day trophy that matters. All was quiet here on the eve of the match except in the real tennis court behind the pavilion, which has been transformed into a press room. There was not a spare seat to be found as Eoin Morgan and Kane Williamson addressed the world’s media, both captains calm yet excited. Both sides lauded the qualities of their opponents. Morgan acknowledged the influence of Brendon McCullum, one of his best friends, in England’s resurgence. Given McCullum was also Williamson’s predecessor as Kiwi captain he is in the happy position of being able to claim some responsibility whichever side prevails, though he is too much of a gentleman to do that. Given the Kiwi press corps would struggle to fill a minibus, here was a reminder that cricket’s greatest global event was about to take place. Yet all was serenity out in the middle, at least until the crucial advertising mats were being meticulously pinned down 30 yards beyond the stumps. As ever the outfield resembles a massive putting green, albeit a tricky one given the slope. On Sunday the ball will slide across what always appears to be frictionless grass at a remarkable pace. The pitch looked surprisingly green from a distance though Morgan said that the covering of grass was sparser when viewed from close quarters. Even so, whichever captain wins the toss may have pause for thought. In the first half of the tournament everybody wanted to bowl first; in the second everyone wanted to bat. Ideally, it will not be a decisive toss. The side batting first in the four games here in this tournament has won every time. Only one batsman, Albert Trott back in 1899, has launched a cricket ball over the pavilion at Lord’s, but Jason Roy has his sights set on joining him after escaping a ban for today’s World Cup final against New Zealand. It's a fanciful notion, but Roy’s response when this feat was put to him – 'Oh really? Let’s try to get an opportunity tomorrow' – was in keeping with the relaxed mood as England prepared for the game of their lives. Having struck three successive sixes twice in this tournament – including an effort off Steve Smith that found the Edgbaston pavilion’s upper tier – Roy is probably as equipped as any to repeat Trott’s blow. But the incendiary opener, averaging 71 in the campaign, nearly missed out on the final following a significant show of dissent towards the umpire during the win over Australia. Roy has apologised to the umpire, Kumar Dharmasena, and was fined. 'To get out like that was slightly disappointing, and I probably showed it more than I should have,' Roy said. 'But it’s professional sport and emotions run high.' Ali Martin Hopefully the quality of the best team will decide the outcome. Most certainly a new team will win the trophy. After 12 tournaments West Indies, India, Australia, Pakistan and Sri Lanka have won the World Cup. This will be England’s fourth time in the final. In 1979, against West Indies, they fell 92 runs short despite an opening partnership of 129 between Mike Brearley and Geoff Boycott. The problem was they took so many overs to get there. After Brearley’s dismissal, the first in the innings, England scored another 65 runs. I have been trying to think of a parallel between Brearley and Boycott and Jonny Bairstow and Jason Roy, who are opening the batting 40 years later – and I have failed. In 1987, England were closer to the trophy, losing to Australia by seven runs in Kolkata in a match always signposted by Mike Gatting’s unsuccessful reverse sweep to Allan Border’s first delivery. In 1992, in Melbourne, England controlled much of the final against Imran Khan’s cornered tigers but the irresistible combination of Wasim Akram and Mushtaq Ahmed saw them off when they were 22 runs short of their target. Thereafter, England have consigned themselves to the wasteland after a sequence of hapless campaigns – until now. New Zealand will have five players who appeared in their nation’s one and only final four years ago against Australia in Melbourne: Williamson, Ross Taylor, Martin Guptill, Trent Boult and Matt Henry. In that World Cup under the leadership of McCullum, New Zealand were fearless and refreshing and, as far as Australia’s wicketkeeper, Brad Haddin, was concerned, much too nice. The Kiwis captured the imagination of their nation but upon crossing the Tasman for the final they were swept away by Australia. Perhaps that experience will help them. Even so, New Zealand enter this match as the underdogs. It might suit them if the grass stays on the surface and their bowlers spy some encouragement. They have prospered in low-scoring matches in this tournament, which may also explain why so few of their batsmen are in mid-summer form. Williamson has stapled their batting together quite brilliantly in his understated way. He has been dismissed once under 40 and that was when he was run out for 27 at the bowler’s end at Chester-le-Street via Mark Wood’s fingertips. He has not devastated but he has not needed to; he has batted at an old-fashioned tempo as his side compiled old fashioned scores that have often been sufficient to win the game. His main ally has been the veteran Ross Taylor. The disappointment has been Martin Guptill, who has tormented England in the past, though he has done his best to atone by a serious of brilliant manoeuvres in the field. Williamson’s bowlers have been more helpful. His banker is Trent Boult on a ground where left-arm pacemen – such as Mitchell Starc and Jason Behrendorff – have enjoyed themselves recently against England. Lockie Ferguson has been one of the more unexpected stars in a tournament where few new names have barged in to the cricketing firmament. Matt Henry and Jimmy Neesham have provided handy support along with the stately Colin de Grandhomme, whose batting has been more threatening than his bowling. England are fortified by the fact that they have won three do-or-die matches on the way to the final. All of their batsmen have made runs along the way. Recently, they have not been required to do much because of the excellence of the Bairstow and Roy, who have struck four century partnerships in a row. Morgan has even been spared selectorial dilemmas. He has used 13 players in the tournament and there will be no change at Lord’s. He has picked the same team in the past three games and he is likely to stick with that combination. Chris Woakes and Adil Rashid have become more confident about their bowling and their bodies. There are logical reasons for English supporters to be optimistic. No doubt the same was true among West Indian fans in 1983 and Australian ones in Lahore in 1996 when India and Sri Lanka were victorious against the odds. Take nothing for granted. After all, this is a World Cup final.