Everything was different, yet oh so familiar, in the Wallabies’ frustrating 35-17 loss to the South African Springboks in the opening round of The Rugby Championship in Johannesburg yesterday. And this was the South African B team, Springboks coach Rassie Erasmus electing to send an advance party to New Zealand to prepare for this Saturday’s Test against the All Blacks. Nearly seven months in the making, Wallabies coach Michael Cheika unveiled Australia’s new attacking strategy, which had been a closely guarded secret. From the over-complicated and highly-structured attacking style of former assistant coach Stephen Larkham, the Wallabies’ game-plan seemed to revolve around one simple tactic – give the ball to inside-centre Samu Kerevi. Kerevi was part of a monster midfield combination with outside-centre Tevita Kuridrani, which revealed Cheika’s intention to play a power game. For all the runs Kerevi made and for all the metres he gained, the Wallabies’ plan of attack was too one-dimensional, too predictable. After only one Test and with just four more to play before the World Cup in Japan kicks off in September, the Wallabies will have to re-think their attacking strategy to create more variety in their play. They desperately need a second playmaker to take the pressure off five-eighth Bernard Foley, who was targeted by the Springboks’ rush defence. Foley looked uncomfortable trying to execute the Wallabies’ new flat-line attack under immense defensive pressure and Australia wasted possessional and territorial dominance in the first-half to trail 14-10 at the break. Cheika and his co-selectors Scott Johnson and Michael O’Connor could choose a second five-eighth, as they say in New Zealand, such as Kurtley Beale, Matt Toomua or James O’Connor at inside-centre and shift Kerevi to outside-centre. But if the selectors are committed to the powerful Kerevi-Kuridrani centre combination, they could start Beale at fullback and he could pop up at first or second receiver in phase play to ease the burden on Foley. Tom Banks, who started at fullback against the Springboks, is an exciting ball-runner, but he is not a playmaker. You could see the difference in the Wallabies’ attack when Cheika injected Beale and Toomua into the game off the bench midway through the second-half. After playing the first 65 minutes of the game with only one playmaker, the Wallabies ended the match with three. They had many more options in attack and used the width of the field rather than just trying to bash their way through the middle. The try Beale created for Foley in the 70th minute was a beauty. Standing flat in attack at first receiver at a ruck, Beale burst onto a pass from replacement halfback Will Genia and raced up-field before turning the ball back inside to Foley. Surely, there has to be a place for Beale somewhere in the starting line-up. In the end the Springboks won the big moments in the game and made fewer crucial mistakes. It will not matter what kind of strategy the Wallabies employ if they continue to make silly, unforced errors, which have undermined their game for the last four years. In the 17th minute Kerevi made a huge break out of the Wallabies’ 22 and charged up-field. He had blindside flanker Lukhan Salakaia-Loto in support, but delayed the offload a fraction of a second and the ball travelled forward, try disallowed. Winger Dane Haylett-Petty bombed a try in the 33rd minute when he fumbled the ball over the line after chasing a grubber kick by Foley. All Haylett-Petty had to do was dive on it. Haylett-Petty made another crucial error in the 61st minute which led to Springboks halfback and man of the match Herschel Jantjies scoring the second of his two tries. For some inexplicable reason Haylett-Petty joined a ruck 10 metres from the Wallabies’ tryline, which left the blindside undefended. That was exactly where Jantjies scooted, hardly believing his luck. And, of course, there was the turning point moment when replacement tight-head prop Taniela Tupou was sin-binned in the 53rd minute for a dangerous clean-out on Springbok back-rower Rynhardt Elstadt. Wallabies captain Michael Hooper asked referee Paul Williams why Tupou’s clean-out was dangerous. Williams replied: “The guy’s sitting there, I’ve blown the whistle and he’s come running in with a shoulder.” What more do you want to know? The Springboks scored two tries while Tupou was in the sin-bin. By the time the Wallabies had 15 men on the field again the score-line had blown out to 28-10. Game over. There are other issues the Wallabies will need to address if they are to have any chance of doing well not just in The Rugby Championship, but more importantly, the World Cup. While the lineout worked well, the scrum struggled badly, a real Achilles heel. That needs to be fixed. The more things change the more they stay the same for the Wallabies, and that is their biggest concern heading into their next Test against Argentina, who just fell short against the All Blacks in Buenos Aires yesterday, in Brisbane on Saturday night.