Were they robbed? The row about Manchester international festival’s Tree has tangled roots. It is hard from the sidelines to make out exactly what happened, but it’s clear that the questions raised go beyond this production. Some things are not in dispute. Idris Elba wanted to base a piece of music theatre on his 2014 album Mi Mandela. He worked on a stage adaptation with writers Tori Allen-Martin (who had performed on the album) and Sarah Henley. Some years later, Kwame Kwei-Armah, new artistic director of the Young Vic, was asked by MIF and Elba to join the project. Tree is now described as “‘created by” Elba and Kwei-Armah, who also directs. Were the two women, as they say, pushed out and silenced? Did they, as Kwei-Armah says, refuse to co-operate? Crucially – because more immediately provable – would the show as it now exists be different without their input? Allen-Martin and Henley are not claiming full-scale authorship: they dislike some aspects of the current version. But they made a cogent case on Radio 4’s Front Row for central strands of their plot having survived in the finished version, and persuaded me that they are entitled to more credit than an also-ran acknowledgment in the programme. They have set up a company, Burn Bright, to support female writers, and raised their initial target of £12,000 in two days. Kwei-Armah has reiterated that continuity between the current and former version is due to Elba’s participation. Whatever the ins and outs here, the importance of asking who gets acclaimed – and how – in theatre is considerable. There is a side issue, too, for critics, which is not to do with historical input. I often wonder if, in attributing praise or blame to a director, I have actually got the right person. It’s not always easy to detect who is responsible for a particular effect in a production. And Tree itself? This story of a young man, child of a black father and white mother, leaving London to discover a violent family history in South Africa, is in some senses pure MIF. It freewheels in a non-purpose-built space, with the audience on stage dancing at the beginning, and latterly standing for the 90-minute show. A green net spread out across the stage becomes the fronds of a tree; the audience clap to make the sound of thunder; the lights of mobile phones are held up like stars. As a soured grandmother, Sinéad Cusack, brusque and rangy, catches the wariness and confidence of a woman who has spent years fending for herself and fending off truths. Yet vibrant moments do not make up for a script that is sometimes sketchy, sometimes overemphatic, rarely surprising: “What do we do with all this hatred?” “Let it go.” Elsewhere at the festival, the clue to the difficulty of Invisible Cities is in the title. In Italo Calvino’s elusive, marvellous fiction, the emperor Kublai Khan is transfixed by places he never sees. Isolated in his palace, he listens as Marco Polo – storytelling for his life like a male Scheherazade – conjures up far-flung regions, sometimes leaping and gesturing to embody what he describes. Yet at the moment these cities become transfixingly real, their fabric evaporates: what are being evoked are mind maps, places transfigured by the memories and desires of inhabitants and visitors. It is extraordinary how much of this impossible task Leo Warner’s production pulls off. In a move characteristic of MIF (this is a festival that really uses its city), the cavernous spaces of a deserted railway depot are transformed by the design of 59 Productions (of the London 2012 Olympics opening ceremony). Tremendous videos dissolve the immediate surroundings with vertiginous closeups – bamboo, a swelling ocean near enough to make you seasick, dark underground caves, measureless to man, with rocks like rotting teeth. The studded iron pillars of the old station become palace adornments. As co-producers, Rambert supply dancers who embody Calvino’s notion of architecture becoming animate. They are the living spaces of the cities and their residents, rising from the floor to swirl weightlessly around like litter. As monsters, they stick themselves together with multiple heads and limbs, which spring out from unexpected sockets; crouching and rising together, they blow across the stage like winds. Visually buoyant, the evening dips during the exchanges between Danny Sapani’s Khan and Matthew Leonhart’s Polo. Lolita Chakrabarti – whose version of Life of Pi (reviewed by Clare Brennan is soaring in Sheffield – has impressively adapted Calvino’s coiling and intricate prose to make something theatrically manageable. But though Sapani is arresting, Leonhart gabbles, and both are overwhelmed by an echoing acoustic and a booming sound design. These words should not be wasted by being roared. In the tussle between Chekhov and Ibsen for dominance in British theatre, Chekhov has for years won out. As if suddenly we needed harsh truths, that is changing. There is a surge of Ibsen dramas – but Ibsen with a twist: Rosmersholm in a pungent new version; Wife, Samuel Adamson’s take on A Doll’s House; and still to come Cordelia Lynn’s Hedda Tesman and Tanika Gupta’s A Doll’s House, set in colonial-era India. Now David Hare’s Peter Gynt, styled as “after Henrik Ibsen”. Hare has proved an exceptionally fluent adapter of other dramatist’s plays. In transplanting to a rough 21st century this tale of a fantasist who exposes the phoney notion of a real self existing in isolation from other people, he keeps Ibsen’s main tenets but translates them into our plastic personality culture, where everyone has “stories, not lives”. Gynt is in turn arms dealer, false prophet and Trump-style rampant rich person, who cheats on his own golf course. The dreaded (by me) troll sequences are plausibly rendered as the ghastly gobbledegook of his unconscious. Jonathan Kent’s production – with troll-loving cowgirls swaggering on as a country and western trio – has a terrific central performance from James McArdle, who brims with braggadocio while suggesting glimmers of latent feeling in this anti-empathetic figure. He and Hare also make two episodes utterly extraordinary. Gynt’s mother dies in his arms, laying down with relish her funeral requirements: readings from Ali Smith and Val McDermid. And Oliver Ford Davies, calm and unswerving, lights up the stage, as serene as he is implacable as he rolls up to tell Gynt it is time to die. Still, the play – particularly at this punitive two-interval length – poses intractable difficulties. It bolts together mythic extravaganza and over-insistent morality; its goods-train structure is ungainly, with one incident clanking along after another, loosely shackled together by Gynt’s flimsy figure. Richard Hudson’s perilously sloping design – glittering black cliffs and stretches of boggy green in Scotland, DayGlo posters in Florida – offers striking snapshots rather than the engulfing peculiarity which suggests a mental landscape as well as a satirical opportunity. Star ratings (out of five):Tree ★★★Invisible Cities ★★★Peter Gynt ★★★ • Tree transfers to the Young Vic, London, 29 July-24 August• Invisible Cities is at Mayfield, Manchester, until 14 July• Peter Gynt is at the Olivier, National Theatre, London, until 8 October