Late-night hosts discussed Donald Trump’s continuing attack on “the Squad” as well as his ill-informed attempt to try to save A$AP Rocky from Swedish prison. On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert referred to the debacle surrounding Trump’s racist tweets against four Democratic congresswomen of colour as “a public relations nightmare”. Trump has said that one of the women, Ilhan Omar, is very lucky to be in Congress to which Colbert joked, in the voice of Trump: “Far too many immigrants end up being my wife.” Reports suggested that Trump only spoke out against the racist chants at his rally after Ivanka and Melania stepped in and told him to respond. At a press conference, Trump then claimed this was fake news. “I’m not going to stand here and let you accuse my daughter and my wife of being decent people,” Colbert joked. He then moved on to Stephen Miller, “a guy with the kind of face that makes you understand why racists used to wear hoods”, who appeared on Fox News to defend the president as did Mike Pence. The Wisconsin senator Ron Johnson also spoke out saying that this wasn’t as much of a problem in the 1960s. “What a great litmus test for whether or not something is racist: it was OK in the 1960s,” he said. “Remember the famous words of Martin Luther King: ‘I have a dream that some day things will be exactly as they are right now.’” Johnson also said that people should be judged on their character not their skin colour. “We are judging Trump on the content of his character: he is a racist. We have no idea what the colour of his skin is,” Colbert said. “I want to say raw chicken slathered with pumpkin spice?” A$AP Rocky is locked up in Sweden, but fear not, Donald J. Trump is on the case. pic.twitter.com/FlNmpd8Lcg On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah brought up the case of A$AP Rocky who is spending his second week in a Swedish jail after defending himself in a street fight. “At this rate, if Sweden keeps him locked up any longer, he’ll have to change the dollar sign in his name to a euro,” Noah joked. People have said that Swedish jail actually isn’t too bad. Noah’s response: “You know what else is nice? Not being in jail.” He continued to joke: “They make you assemble your own furniture.” Reportedly, Kanye West called Trump to make him aware of the case. “This sounds like a headline written by a newspaper on LSD,” Noah said. He joked that Kanye “uses his Maga hat like a magic lamp”. Swedish authorities consider A$AP Rocky a flight risk which is why he remains imprisoned. “He’s a black man in Sweden,” Noah said. “Even if he escapes, how far can he get?” On Late Night, Seth Meyers returned to the president’s poor attempt to speak out against the racist chant at his rally. “Trump is not known for disavowing racism,” he said. “In fact he won’t disavow anyone who praises him because he’s a raging narcissist.” Trump has since tweeted that “the Squad” are troublemakers. “Are you trying to sound like a Scooby Doo villain?” Meyers said. “It would make sense since your face looks like a Halloween mask.” Today sees Robert Mueller testify about his thoughts on what he uncovered during his collusion investigation but Trump claims he won’t be watching. “All you do is watch TV!” Meyers said. “If the Mueller hearings weren’t on, you’d be live-tweeting Days of Our Lives.” Meyers also spoke about Trump’s many attempts to profit from his presidency, from his staggering vacation time to renting hotel rooms to visiting diplomats. “I wouldn’t be surprised if he started selling pieces of the White House on Craigslist,” he said.