Jason Atherton has the intense air of a man who rarely has to raise his voice before his wishes are accommodated. He radiates an iron calm, but you get the feeling you wouldn’t like him when he’s angry. And that he really, really wouldn’t like you. With four Michelin stars and 18 restaurants, Atherton relies on strong kitchen teams for the success of his empire. In The Chefs’ Brigade (BBC Two), he attempts to build such a team from scratch, out of cooks with only basic skills, cherrypicked from the pubs, cafes and bistros of the land. Once the brigade is assembled, he takes it on a tour of Europe, training his charges to compete against the finest restaurants on the continent. First stop: Puglia in south-east Italy. The central battle was a competition between the brigade and a local chef – same venue, same menu, different nights. Atherton’s raw recruits had just four days to practise under the ever-present threat of instant dismissal, with a clutch of reserves waiting back home to replace them. This kind of reality TV is rarely tainted by even a whiff of reality. For all the talk of skills and hard work, this is more like winning a ticket to Willy Wonka’s factory: chosen through some kind of lottery, dazzled by possibility and gin-infused cuttlefish, set a series of artificial challenges, then booted out for not being up to one of them. In Puglia, the team arrived at a converted farmhouse, where the trainees were asked to present their chef’s kits, so that Atherton could inspect their knives and equipment. Daisy, 26, inexplicably turned up with no kit. And I mean literally inexplicably – if there was an explanation, we didn’t hear it. Did she miss an email? Were her knives confiscated at the airport? Had she sold them to pay for pastry lessons? “I know it’s not extremely professional, but that’s just what’s happened,” she said, in a drawl so posh it seemed to bend space. Scene missing, or what? This opening episode focused on a few of the brigade, while others were barely named. After cooking one meal together, two were demoted to the status of black-aproned kitchen porters: Stephen, for being so headstrong; and Shivam, for being barely there. Soon enough, Shivam, diffident and homesick, was sent packing. I understand that different characters are destined to emerge over time, but very little of what we saw was left to chance. This is the sort of programme in which people keep sitting down for scheduled conversations about their emotions, with Atherton in the role of tough-guy therapist. During training, he discovered Daisy out by the cacti on the back terrace, feeling overwhelmed. “When you feel that anxiety, is it like the walls are closing in?” he asked, when he should have said: “What the hell happened to your knives?” In the end, he chose to be supportive. “A brigade is also like a family,” he said. “We’re not just some macho machine, where anything that gets in the way we chew up and spit out.” Tell that to Shivam. Shivam’s replacement, Livia, is destined to be such a favourite that it is hard to imagine why she was relegated to the reserves bench in the first place. One suspects her late entry into episode one was a bit of narrative engineering. Overall, there was a refreshing lack of kitchen machismo on display. Early on, the tendency for the boys to talk over and ignore the girls was exposed and criticised. Atherton himself has a knack for being exacting without being a bully. None of the shrieking and swearing that has become part of the mythology of professional cooking’s hierarchy was on display. Strangely, for a show about food, The Chefs’ Brigade contained minimal cooking, mostly limited to decorative shots of hands saucing plates. A few techniques were demonstrated by Atherton over the course of the training, but it wasn’t filmed in a manner that was meant to make you care about – or even understand – what was taking place. I accept that this is not a show about how to bone a guinea fowl. Clearly, this is going to be a series about the psychological highs and lows involved in forging a tight-knit crew under pressure – which is fine, unless I already feel I have been manipulated on that score. I just don’t understand why I couldn’t be trusted with the story of what happened to Daisy’s knives.