Spoiler alert: this blog is for people watching season two of Big Little Lies, which airs on HBO in the US, Sky Atlantic in the UK and Foxtel’s Showcase in Australia. Don’t read on unless you have watched the finale. Ed may have been talking about the renewal of his and Madeline’s vows, but this finale (and perhaps the last ever Big Little Lies) was a put-a-ribbon-on-it send-off. Bathed in blue light, it was an episode dedicated to tying up what few loose ends there really were, and to its characters realising they would tell no more lies. Not even big little ones. The teaser had set up a disintegration of the group, sneakily taking Celeste’s “the friendship is the lie” line and making it seem as if it would all fall apart for the Monterey Five. Ultimately, though, solidarity prevailed, and as Bonnie made her way to the station to hand herself in, they were right there with her. It was no beach picnic, but it was, in its own way, warm nonetheless. And it was fine, as endings go. The much anticipated courtroom showdown did not play out with the fireworks I expected, though to watch Kidman and Streep go at it with relative restraint, at least at first, was one of the more elegant turns this season. Celeste was clean, quick and efficient – professional, even – in her questioning of her mother-in-law, until she brought up the death of Raymond, and Perry’s account of the tragedy, which placed the blame squarely on Mary Louise’s temper. Once again, the stress of a cross-examination so horrible and so intrusive made it difficult to watch; topping it off with a clip of Perry beating Celeste, filmed by one of their young sons, did little to alleviate the tension. The judge said last week that she had made her decision, and when it came to it, it was as expected: there would be conditions, but taking the boys from their mother would only make their lives more difficult. Celeste won. There have been a lot of these narrative cul de sacs this season, and it’s a shame the big custody battle storyline didn’t avoid it either. It left me with the sense that none of this had been particularly necessary (a criticism that could have been levelled at the whole season). I have loved watching actors of this calibre share the screen, and there have been moments of true glory – thank god for Laura Dern, whose Starbucks meltdown and trainset massacre were the only moments to really quicken the pulse. But it has felt more slight than the first outing, a showcase of strong performances in need of a plot to match them. There were no twists, no shocks, no cruelties, just the story wrapping itself up with a ribbon. What did you make of the ending? Was it satisfying? Was it necessary? And would you return to Monterey, or has Big Little Lies run its course? It has been a tawdry week for behind-the-scenes drama, with reports emerging about Andrea Arnold’s involvement (or lack of) in the final version. Here’s the Indiewire story. Would the judge really have allowed Mary Louise and Celeste to make their cases, yet again, going into some detail about each other’s flaws while the boys were sitting there listening? Mary Louise’s doorstep denial of beating Perry seemed pretty convincing. Was the implication that Celeste had done what was necessary to make her look bad? Perry’s nickname for Celeste was “Sleeping Beauty”, which Mary Louise seemed to find romantic, rather than it being quite obviously creepy and ominous. Zoe Kravitz has been great this season. I’m not sure what the point of her mother’s drowning visions were – perhaps her handing herself in is a metaphorical drowning? Or was she drowning under the weight of the lie? – but when she told Nathan she had never loved him, it was heartbreaking. Poor Nathan! Any woman who has been told to calm down will surely have experienced some vicarious pleasure from the second Renata reached for the baseball bat. Ed’s first HIIT workout and the season itself played out to Chrstina Vierra and the Ryan Rehm Band’s cover of Piece of My Heart. Ed’s second HIIT workout took place to Alkalino’s Deep Inside, and their making-up talk was to Leon Bridges’ That Was Yesterday. The big hugs-all-round montage was to the lyrically apt Willie Nelson and Paula Nelson’s Have You Ever Seen the Rain. While “You lost your sons. You don’t get to take mine” was one of Celeste’s best lines of attack, it only seems right to commemorate the TV moment of the year and pay tribute to Mary Louise: “Ahhhhhhhhhhhhh.” Episode 1: What Have They Done?Episode 2: Tell-Tale HeartsEpisode 3: The End of the WorldEpisode 4: She KnowsEpisode 5: Kill MeEpisode 6: The Bad MotherEpisode 7: I Want To Know