“Look what happens when you give young offenders superpowers!” is not the fever dream of a Daily Mail headline writer, but the plot of the E4 sci-fi comedy-drama Misfits, which ran between 2009 and 2013. A cross between X-Men and Shameless, the show gave a very British two-fingered salute to relentlessly cheery all-American superheroes, swapping mild flirtation in mansion-based private schools for snogging behind the bins on a rundown estate. The show’s premise involved the misfits of the title – who were all doing community service – being given dramatically apt superpowers after being struck by lightning during a supernatural storm. For example, Curtis – arrested for a one-off drug possession – gained the ability to reverse time by harnessing the power of his regret. Kelly, who feared everyone was judging her for her social class, became a mind reader, and so on. Despite their habit of killing the probation workers guiding their rehabilitation, the newly empowered Misfits were, at their core, good people. What made the show fun was watching them square off with other storm-mutants who used their powers for selfish purposes, while the freaks-of-the-week kept the episodes fresh. One week the Misfits would battle a horde of zombies, while the next they would take on a boy with the power of lacto-manipulation. If you think the danger posed by telekinetic dairy products is limited, just imagine being choked by the milk in your tea – from inside your body. Helping to keep the show going was its willingness to reinvent itself. When the original superpowers ran out of dramatic electricity, they simply swapped them by a convenient meeting with a “power trader”. So time traveller Curtis became able to switch gender at will, while his less-than-scrupulous cleanliness after a session of self-love gave birth to a plot where he managed to impregnate his alter ego (yes, really). Misfits first aired in 2009, and in the last 10 years some of its plots have curdled like killer cheese. Among the original Misfits was Alisha, whose power was an ability to render people uncontrollably attracted to her with a touch, at one point using this power to force Curtis to sleep with her against his will. And the less said about anally penetrating an unconscious evil-doer to remove his storm powers, the better. In short, with great screenwriting power had come great screenwriting irresponsibility. However, it was cast turnover that finally defeated our heroes. It forced the show’s writers to introduce ever more bizarre characters (including Leah who, er, doled out genital-crippling STIs), none of whom had the dramatic heft to keep the various plates spinning. Each character death felt cheaper than the last, as actors were snapped up by bigger shows, among them Iwan Rheon, who joined Game of Thrones, and Nathan Stewart-Jarrett, who starred in Utopia. A time-travel plot tied the first three seasons together in a nice temporal-spatial bow but, in the end, no inventive superpower could polish what had become a superturd.