North Korea has said an Australian student who it detained for a week had spread anti-Pyongyang propaganda and engaged in spying by providing photos and other materials to news outlets with critical views about the country. Pyongyang’s official Korean Central News Agency, or KCNA, said on Saturday that North Korea had deported Alek Sigley on Thursday after he pleaded for forgiveness for his activities, which the agency said infringed on the country’s sovereignty. North Korea has been accused in the past of detaining westerners and using them as political pawns to gain concessions. KCNA provided few details about Sigley’s alleged spying activities other than that he, at the “instigation” of the media outlets, provided them with photos and data that he had collected. North Korea, which closely monitors visitors and enforces a stringent information blockade on its citizens, is extremely sensitive about controlling the flow of information, which made Sigley, who had a lively presence on Twitter, an anomaly in the country. Sigley, 29, arrived in Tokyo on Thursday after telling reporters he was in “very good” condition, but without saying what happened to him. His father, Gary Sigley, a professor of Asian studies at the University of Western Australia, said his son was treated well in North Korea. He had been studying at a Pyongyang university and guiding tours in the North Korean capital before social media contact with family and friends ceased. KCNA said Sigley had abused his status as a student by “combing” through Pyongyang and providing photos and other information to news sites such as NK News and other “anti-DPRK” media, a reference to the country’s formal name, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The news agency said the North expelled Sigley out of “humanitarian leniency”. “He honestly admitted his spying acts of systematically collecting and offering data about the domestic situation of the DPRK and repeatedly asked for pardon, apologising for encroachment upon the sovereignty of the DPRK,” the agency said North Korea had not commented on Sigley before Saturday. Sigley was released following intervention by Swedish diplomats. After his arrival in Beijing, he went to Tokyo to rejoin his Japanese wife, whom he married in Pyongyang last year. During his time in North Korea, Sigley often shared details about his life in Pyongyang through social media and the website of his travel agency, Tongil Tours, frequently challenging negative outside perceptions about the country and at times boasting about the extraordinary freedom he had as one of the few foreign students living there. He also wrote op-eds and essays that appeared in the western media, including NK News, although none of them seemed outwardly critical about the government and political system. In a statement published on its site, NK News CEO Chad O’Carroll said it would be a “misrepresentation” for North Korea to describe the articles Sigley wrote for the outlet as anti-state. He said NK News is an independent, specialist information website that aims to provide objective news and analysis about North Korea. CEO of @nknewsorg @chadocl provides the following statement in response to the July 6 DPRK state media report on Alek Sigley. Full statement: https://t.co/3NAEhvpnwP “Alek Sigley’s well-read columns presented an apolitical and insightful view of life in Pyongyang which we published in a bid to show vignettes of ordinary daily life in the capital to our readers,” O’Carroll said. “The six articles Alek published represent the full extent of his work with us and the idea that those columns, published transparently under his name between January and April 2019, are ‘anti-state’ in nature is a misrepresentation which we reject.”