When Thibaut Pinot fell into the arms of his teammate William Bonnet by the roadside 36km into Friday’s stage of the Tour from Saint Jean de Maurienne to Tignes, the scene was heart-rending but familiar. Pinot, and the Tour, have been here before. The dramatic, tragic story of a Frenchman who has captivated the home crowd and is forced out by ill fortune and great physical suffering is a plot-line the Tour has written many times. It will be little comfort for Pinot as the torn muscle in his left thigh heals but he is in illustrious company. Pretty much every great French cyclist has been through something similar. One of the few French greats to avoid a roadside abandonment in the Tour was Bernard Hinault, who quit the race in 1980 when suffering from tendinitis in his knee and while wearing the yellow jersey. Hinault was smuggled away after the stage finish in Pau in great secrecy to avoid a media circus. He was widely criticised for disappearing because there is almost an expectation that a Frenchman will not simply walk away in secret and that the Calvary will be endured in the public eye. One episode that recalled Pinot’s fate dated back to 1996 and involved a lesser light in the same area, on the Cormet de Roselend – planned to be in Saturday’s stage but pulled due to a landslide – when the yellow jersey wearer, Stéphane Heulot, was forced to climb off in tears due to tendinitis. Like Pinot he simply could not go on. Like Pinot his injury had crept up on him. Pinot’s thigh tear was barely in evidence after Wednesday’s stage into Gap. It became obvious there was a problem only after Thursday’s leg to Valloire, when he could hardly bend the leg. His departure was an emotional national event. His directeur sportif, Thierry Bricaud, said: “You could see the sadness on people’s faces. You could see that for some the Tour had ended and they wouldn’t be watching it on television.” Pinot’s abandonment presaged an anticlimactic end to Le Tour des Français, the two and a half weeks in which he and his compatriot, Julian Alaphilippe, had dominated the headlines in their home race. For years French cycling had lacked a charismatic home champion to win the hearts of the wider French public at the Tour and in Alaphilippe they had found one; in Pinot there was a more rugged and restrained character to admire as well. Their shared story was enthralling. Pinot had had a roller-coaster of a race, igniting the fight for overall victory with a dramatic attack on the Saint Étienne stage, losing time on a windy day into Albi and then rediscovering his mojo in the Pyrenees. Alaphilippe had taken yellow early on, shared the Saint Étienne move with Pinot to regain the jersey, then had performed above expectations, daily appearing unruffled where he was expected to falter. Friday and Saturday should have seen the pair fighting tooth and nail with Geraint Thomas and Egan Bernal but the weather and Pinot’s injury suddenly intervened. For dramatic impact Friday was like a bucket of cold water dropped from on high on to a couple whose contorted relationship has enthralled Love Island viewers for days on end. Within a few hours Pinot was heading for home and Alaphilippe had ceded his yellow jersey to Bernal, after the day’s stage had been cut short due to foul weather and landslides. While quitting the Tour is almost a rite of passage for a French cycling champion, with Pinot it has become a tendency: he has not finished his home Tour since 2015. He did not start the 2018 edition and abandoned in the final week in 2017 and the second week in 2016. He has finished the Tour only three times in seven attempts. He has twice won prestigious mountain stages — L’Alpe d’Huez in 2015, the Tourmalet this year – and once finished on the podium. The trait of inconsistency is strong enough for l’Equipe to run an article entitled “The Dramatic Abandonments of Thibaut Pinot”. Pinot has been unable to complete half the 12 Grand Tours which he has started during his career. Most dramatic of these – and most similar to his fate this year in the Tour – was last year’s Giro d’Italia, where he was lying third overall at the start of the final day’s mountain stage. Suffering from the onset of pneumonia, he was shepherded through the stage by his teammates, finishing 45 minutes behind. He was taken to hospital after the stage. It may be that Pinot lacks the physical robustness needed to compete on a daily basis at the highest level in the final week of a Grand Tour. There is no doubting his power and superlative climbing ability, while he seems to have become mentally stronger in recent years in spite of his tribulations, but even before this year’s Tour started his health was highlighted as the one thing that might prevent him becoming France’s first Tour winner since Hinault in 1985. Pinot will return to his fastness in the village of Mélisey in eastern France, to the animals he tends amid the peace and quiet and he will bounce back as he has done before. Last year, once his health had been restored, he was determined enough to win two illustrious mountain stages in the Vuelta, to ride a strong world championships, then take the Giro di Lombardia, one of cycling’s five “Monuments”, the sport’s most prestigious one-day races. On Friday Pinot’s manager, Marc Madiot – never without a phrase to hit the cockles of the French cycling public’s heart – railed against fate and said he believes that “justice” means that one day Pinot will win the Tour de France. Pinot himself said he will return in 2020 and he may eventually take his Tour. Some do, even that most accident-prone of champions, the much-loved Spaniard Luis Ocaña, once described as suffering from what is “almost an occupational illness among cyclists, hypochondria”. Ocaña finished four Tours of the eight he started, winning in 1973. As Madiot said, “justice” may be served next year or the year after. Or Pinot may eventually be forced to decide it is not going to happen – that the mental and physical torture involved are not worth the potential gains – and devote himself to winning the great mountain stages and the one-day Classics that are clearly well within his reach. There would be no dishonour in that.