Gary Younge’s article (A self-serving clique runs Britain. That’s why it’s in crisis, Journal, 5 July) and Ben Jennings’ illustration are splendid, hitting the nail absolutely on the head. I would, however, go further – the point is that these posh people have absolutely nothing to lose, even if all their projects end in disaster. They will still keep their jobs as MPs, their directorships of offshore companies, their lucrative jobs as correspondents in their rightwing newspapers. How much did the garden bridge cost Boris Johnson? Nothing, not a penny. Meanwhile, food banks multiply, homelessness increases, the rich pay less tax, firms like Amazon milk the system, and the NHS is increasingly stripped of cash and threatened with being sold off to Donald Trump. I’m 87 years old and, by good luck have good health and enough to live on. But with this gang of Faragites and Borisses in charge, the generation following me are finding it impossible to buy houses and even harder to make a living and will soon be paying through the nose for health. And the cause of all this – the so-called elite – will sit on their backsides and secure fortunes and laugh.Alan BraddockWakefield, West Yorkshire • While I do not disagree with Gary Younge’s assertion that many of the UK’s political problems have roots in an establishment currently drawn from too narrow a social class range, I wonder whether he has taken time to look at the trends in Oxford’s admission statistics. For example, is he aware that the admission rate of pupils from state schools to Oxford has essentially doubled since the 1990s, and similarly for Cambridge? Change takes time, and the myth that the Oxbridge admissions are still backward and class-dominated is damaging. This fable works against the large investment these universities are currently undertaking to improve mobility to and within these institutions, through programmes such as HE+, Sutton Trust summer schools and numerous other initiatives, making the very pupils who these universities want to help less likely to apply.Tom McIverBelfast • I must object to Ben Jennings’ cartoon on the front of Friday’s Journal. Name me one town in England where the food bank is boarded up.Adrian Childs-ClarkeChichester, West Sussex • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition