The impact of Britain’s high street downturn is not just measured in frontline retail jobs. When the specialist retailer Bathstore collapsed last month, 500 shopfloor and head office jobs were put at risk. But up to 300 bathroom fitters also face an uncertain future – a reminder that behind every high-profile failure, a string of suppliers and small businesses are paying a price too. The self-employed Bathstore contractors have collectively been left about £3m out of pocket, according to the British Institute of Kitchen, Bedroom & Bathroom Installation (BiKBBI), after the company called in administrators. While the difficulties for customers left with half-finished renovation projects or no working toilet have already been flagged, the financial pain for unpaid contractors, some of whom will now face bankruptcy or be forced to borrow heavily to survive, are only beginning to emerge. Bathstore took payment from customers three weeks before work started but did not pay contractors until two or more weeks after the job had finished. When it went into administration, both customers and fitters lost out. The chain of 131 stores continues to trade as the advisory firm BDO seeks a buyer, but the self-employed fitters are unlikely to receive any money for jobs completed. Under insolvency rules, contractors must join a long list of unsecured creditors and are unlikely to receive more than 2% or 3% of the money they are owed. “The government references small and medium-sized enterprises [SMEs] as the backbone of the economy, but the backbone will be leaving the building. We need to start looking after these people,” says Damian Walters, chief executive of BiKBBI. “This is not a new issue, we have seen it time and time again. It seems like Groundhog Day. What are we going to do to protect SMEs from this situation again?” Retailers that take payment up front should have to put a contractor’s cash into a protected account until a job is completed, he suggests, so that they do not lose out if a company goes bust. The bathroom fitters’ fate echoes that of small construction firms and suppliers for Carillion, which lost out when the outsourcing group went bust, and that of thousands of self-employed couriers for City Link whose jobs were abruptly axedThe when the delivery firm when into administration in 2014. Labour MP Rachel Reeves, chair of the business committee, said: “As we saw in the case of Carillion, too often when a business collapses it’s the self-employed, the sole trader and the small businesses who are hit hardest. “It’s too common for big businesses to subcontract to armies of the self-employed who when the business fails are abandoned. “To begin to redress this imbalance, the government should as a bare minimum introduce its long-promised employment bill to help tackle bogus self-employment and deliver proper worker protection.” Here are some of the suppliers affected by the collapse: Owed £90,000With a team of six working for him on about 10 projects a month for Bathstore, Brett Thornton may have to remortgage his home to bail out his business after the sudden collapse of the retailer. “I’ve been up until 11 or 12 at night trying to sort out more work and then waking up at 4am or 5am thinking about it again to try and sort things out. It’s just a constant battle and worry,” he says. “I have five or six guys relying on me to find work.” About half Thornton’s work came from Bathstore, so he is not only owed £90,000 for jobs carried out, but he has also lost a pipeline of future work. His team was halfway through working on an elderly man’s bathroom; they finished the installation knowing they would never be paid for their work. Thornton, who had been working for Bathstore for more than three years, is particularly angry that managers had reassured him that everything was fine less than a week before administrators were called in. “The chief executive will get another job, but it is always the people at the bottom of the pile who are left to pick up the pieces.” Owed at least £20,000“I think we are going to go under,” says Paul Helm. “They are horrible people. They don’t even have the decency to give you a call. It’s a slap in the face.” On top of the £20,000-plus he is owed, he has lost a further nine jobs booked in through to September worth about £19,000. Nearly all his work was for Bathstore and it will be tough to replace. “I’m going to have to look for employment. I’ve been self-employed for 20 years. The wife will probably have to go back to work and all the lads will have to look for new jobs. They’ve worked hard to keep the contract going, working nights and six days a week. It’s absolutely disgusting. I’ve still got people I’ve brought in chasing me for money – the plasterer, the electrician. I can’t let them down. It’s embarrassing, I’ve known them for years. I’ve already had to put £5,000 of my own money in.” Owed £40,000“I had jobs [with Bathstore] booked through till August,” says Mihail Constantin, who started his business eight years ago. On top of about £40,000 owed for jobs, he’s lost more than £30,000 of work booked for the future. “Of course I’m worried about my business, especially in the near future. My guys had holidays booked – I had a holiday booked – based on income we thought we had coming in. I might have to cancel now. It’s still early days and I am just taking on any jobs offered to me to try to make up the debt. One job was left half-finished, the woman was in tears but I said I couldn’t just stay on not being paid. It’s tough for them and it’s tough for me as well.” “We’ve had some big jobs which couldn’t be signed off because products were delayed or issues with products [supplied by Bathstore]. There were jobs that were almost finished and were just waiting for a tap. Now I think those were all signs it was coming down.” Owed £4,000“I’ve been with Bathstore for seven years and I liked working for them,” says Gareth Watson. “I got on with the management and it was always quality product. I felt very much let down [when it went into administration].” He will miss out on £16,000 in future work on top of the £4,000 he was owed for work done. Watson says managers assured him he was going to get paid when the news first broke that the retailer was facing potential administration. “I carried on with my work, then on Wednesday lunchtime we got an email from administrators saying our contract was being terminated. The customer agreed to pay me direct to do the work and they are trying to get their money from the administrator. They had paid Bathstore £6,200 to have their bathroom fitted so they have been left in the lurch as well.” About half of Watson’s work was for Bathstore, but he says his business is likely to survive as he is well-established and has been able to dip into savings to pay his three workers. “I’ve been ringing everyone I know and I’ve managed to fill up the diary, so we’re not going to be out of work, but it’s not going to be very profitable. Some of it’s not work we would normally take on. I’ve just got to keep the guys in work. It’s very hard to replace good staff.”