Are opera singers born or made? Are there wonderful natural operatic voices out there waiting to get a break on Britain’s Got Talent? Or maybe on South Africa’s Got Talent, because the reason to pose the question comes courtesy of an opera-loving South African Uber driver called Menzi Mngoma whose impromptu performances in the front of his cab in Durban have caused a frisson of excitement among those who want to believe that great voices and instant opera stars are all around us. Mngoma is a self-taught tenor who likes to belt out arias for his passengers. One of his customers, Kim Davey, liked his singing so much that she posted a video on Facebook. That, in turn, attracted media attention and the 27-year-old Mngoma’s career was launched. He is said to be auditioning for Cape Town Opera. A stadium tour will no doubt follow. It generally pays to be suspicious of such stories. The media want to believe in fairytales because they make good copy. Being an opera singer is about more than giving a passable two-minute rendition of La donna è mobile. It is singing and acting a role over three or more hours in an opera house twice a week; having the vocal technique to sustain a 20- or even 30-year career; performing a wide range of parts in up to five languages. It is bloody difficult. That said, Mngoma does have the spark of something. I played the clip to the Guardian’s opera critic Tim Ashley, and while Ashley said there was barely enough to make a judgment, he thought Mngoma “sang La donna è mobile perfectly decently and with no strain at the top [of the voice]”. Ashley says that being self-taught is “unusual but not completely unheard of”; great Italian tenors of the past such as Mario del Monaco and Franco Corelli liked to downplay the role of teachers and imply that their voices were God-given instruments. Corelli even described voice coaches as “dangerous”. Similarly, being discovered in unusual circumstances, while “extremely rare” according to Ashley, can happen. The French tenor Roberto Alagna was spotted singing in a pizzeria, but he clearly had a musical background and had taken singing lessons, so the mythologising has to be treated with care. A great opera singer will need natural talent and good technical training. “You have to be born with talent – that can’t be taught – but teaching will hone that talent,” says Martha Hartman, the manager of the vocal studies department at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama. She says that singers do not have to start studying in their teens: the Guildhall has several students in their late 20s, including one who used to be a builder. But she emphasises that natural talent is not enough. “You could be an incredible singer without having a career, because there are so many other things that go into it. You aren’t going to be hired by an opera house if you’re an Uber driver who’s been discovered. There might be a promoter who hires you to do a concert because it’s a novelty, but an opera house is not going to take you seriously.” If Mngoma wants to be a professional opera singer, the hard work starts now. “If you find a singing teacher and if you hone your skills and if you have some classes in stagecraft and movement and drama and all these things that go into being a singer,” says Hartman, “then you might have some roads open to you. But most opera houses and orchestras will demand knowledge of repertoire, and that’s a very big piece of the puzzle: knowing how to learn music and learn a role.” Singing chunks of La donna è mobile in the front of a cab does not mean you are yet ready to perform in Rigoletto at La Scala.