Do we need a lawn? That was the question on my mind back in January. The weather was exceptionally mild and I was mowing the one remaining patch of grass in a garden that had been all lawn when we bought the house nine years ago. Last summer, the same sward was brown and apparently lifeless during the heatwave. That is the problem with a monoculture – if the prevailing conditions don’t suit it, there are no backups. Except that my lawn, spared from weedkiller, was not a true monoculture. Apart from different species of grasses, there were large patches of clover, which relished the heat; unmown, they flowered freely, fuelling countless bees. It was the clover that prompted me to lose my lawn completely. We are very attached to our lawns and can be obsessive about maintaining them as finely textured, evenly green carpets. A whole industry is built on turf insecurities – mosskillers, weedkillers, fertilisers, not to mention treatments for “diseases” such as chafer grubs, red thread and fairy rings. Drought and rain also challenge the holy grail of the perfect lawn. But there are alternatives. From a gravel garden or a massed planting scheme to an outdoor “room”, you can lose your lawn and recreate its open space without resorting to sterile decking or paving. Here are five ways to do this. A gravel garden achieves a similar effect to a lawn and affords more opportunity for routes through and relaxing spaces within the planting. It needs a sunny site and, if the underlying soil does not drain freely, you must incorporate plenty of grit. This is a case of spreading gravel, chippings or small stones over the bare topsoil to a depth of about 5cm and planting into that, ensuring the rootballs make contact with the soil below; add extra soil in the planting hole if necessary. Many Mediterranean plants will thrive among the sun-baked stones: think thymes, santolinas and Verbena bonariensis, with annuals, such as poppies and love-in-a-mist, scattered between to fill gaps while the garden is getting established. A mixture of carpeting, hummock and vertical shapes creates interest on different levels. Gravel is a great substrate for self-seeding, so this alternative tends to evolve of its own accord, with some editing from the gardener. Cutting your grass less frequently will result in a much richer plant community but one that is essentially native. As such, it will tend to lose visual appeal after midsummer. To create more of a show, we need to draw inspiration from further afield. The semi-arid grasslands – known as steppe – that cover huge tracts of Eurasia are rich in vegetation, ecologically diverse and the perfect inspiration for a British garden. It’s easily achieved on a domestic scale, using a wide range of plants that enjoy similar conditions to create successional phases of foliage, flowers and seedheads. Early autumn is the time to strip a lawn of turf, cultivate to remove weed roots and plant a matrix of bulbs, such as crocuses, tulips and alliums, and perennials such as hardy geraniums, achilleas, Lychnis coronaria, kniphofias and crocosmias to give a kaleidoscope of colour next year. Add a few ornamental grasses such as Melica ciliata or Stipa lessingiana for their fine texture and movement. The simplest way to diversify your lawn is to let most of it grow and see what ensues. The wildflowers endemic to your area (with the right mindset, no longer thought of as weeds) will be allowed to grow to their full height and flower. Low growers such as daisies and selfheal will be first to assert their presence, followed by taller dandelions and buttercups. The insect population will flourish. But you can’t down tools completely. Keep some mown paths across the patch and around the edge for ease of human traffic, to keep a little crispness and indicate your meadow is intentional. The end of summer is the time to strim and then mow the sward – ungrazed pasture reverts to woodland in time. If your liberated lawn borders traditional flowerbeds, you may have to accept that, with more plants going to seed nearby, you need to hoe more often. In Provence, a magical garden created by the late Nicole de Vésian, a Hermès textile designer, has a lavender field where, in a more northerly setting, you might expect to find a lawn. This is a monoculture but, unlike a manicured lawn, a very bee-friendly one, and the density of plants makes for a lovely perfume. Instead of mowing, there is regular hoeing between the rows and an annual trim at the end of summer. Dutch lavender, Lavandula x intermedia, is the most attractive to pollinating insects and more robust than English lavender. “Grosso” and “Gros Bleu” are excellent. Part of a garden (or all of it, if it is tiny) can serve as an extension of our indoor living quarters. Non-porous hard landscaping can lead to problems with water run-off and flooding in urban areas, so better to go for the semi-permeable option of old-fashioned hoggin or self-binding gravel to form a stable surface, bound together by the tiny clay particles in the mix. You need to lay a hardcore base, then spread the gravel to a depth of 5cm and roll. The final sealing stage involves rolling again while spraying with water from a hose. The result is natural enough to support the odd weed or self-seeded plant, so some tidying up is needed here and there. Add tables, chairs and a mini-pond where birds can bathe and dragonflies and damselflies can breed. Plant bee-friendly herbs such as thyme, mint, marjoram and fennel. Espaliered fruit trees can form “walls” and, along with pots of blueberries and salad crops, will provide you with a foraged supper.