Amanda and Clive had been hearing about each other for about 10 years before they met. “We had mutual friends and I would always hear about Clive doing this or that, Clive on the picket line or Clive cheating on some girl,” she says, and Clive laughs. “Clive had a reputation for not sticking with girlfriends very long and just playing the field, so I wasn’t keen to meet him at all. He sounded really dodgy.” “I would hear wonderful things about you,” he says. “That you’d had lives in London and Barcelona, that you were a journalist and artist, and you sounded like someone I’d like to meet. There were several events I remember going to where people would say: ‘Amanda’s meant to be coming’ and then she never did. I was always a bit disappointed.” Finally, friends got them together over dinner in 1996, although not with the intention of setting them up. “By that time my impression of him was being tall, Germanic-looking, pretty arrogant,” says Amanda. “He wasn’t like I imagined at all. He was a lot quieter and more humble than I expected, and had a wicked sense of humour. That was my strong first impression of him – that he was full of joy, and fun to be around.” For Clive, he says it was a “feeling of shock. The moment I met Amanda I realised I would spend the rest of my life with her.” It wasn’t any one thing, he says, just that: “I’d never experienced anything like that.” Was it as definitive for Amanda? “Oh no, not at all,” she says. “I think he’s probably a bit more romantic than me. It took me about a year to decide that it was quite a serious relationship.” They got together that night – she dropped him at the tube station and they kissed – and when Amanda lost her job and had to rent out her flat she moved in with Clive. They had been together for about a year, so cohabiting happened sooner than they might have liked but, says Amanda, “it turned out to be quite a good thing”. She continues: “The other strange thing that happened was that Clive got nominated for an Oscar. Which was a complete shock. We were living in this semi-derelict flat in Islington. He was signing on; I had just lost my job.” It was for the short film Holiday Romance, which Clive had written, and unbeknown to him, the director had submitted. “I was so thrown by it that I forgot to sign on. So I had to go to the office the next day and say: ‘Sorry I forgot – but I’d been nominated for an Oscar,” he says. Their lives became quite glamorous for a few weeks. “I think Amanda thought the rest of our lives was going to be like that,” says Clive and they laugh. Around the same time, they had, says Amanda, “a crucial conversation in a coffee bar”. Amanda was in her mid-30s and wanted children, and wanted to make sure Clive felt the same. If he didn’t, she told him, they would probably have to break up. “I think I went a bit pale and quiet,” says Clive. Amanda says: “But to his credit he said that’s what he wanted, too. For me, that was the turning point.” They now have two children, aged 16 and 18, and the family moved to Sydney in 2006 after Amanda was offered a job there. Their relationship works, says Amanda, mainly because “we have the same sense of humour; we don’t let things fester. I’ve never met anyone who I admire as much as Clive. He’s a true egalitarian, and he lives his life along those values. I find that very unusual and admirable, and valuable for our children.” How was Amanda different from all of Clive’s previous girlfriends? “Whether it’s having children, travelling the world or just being at home together,” he says, “everything I do with Amanda feels like a funky adventure. It feels like we’re a team pulling in the same direction, rather than two people negotiating terms and conditions.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about you, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.