Dillian Whyte said after another tough win on his treacherous climb to the top that he will not be tempted to put his feet up and wait for his overdue world-title shot. The 31-year-old from south London recovered from a ninth‑round knockdown at the O2 Arena to claim a unanimous points decision against Oscar Rivas in London on Saturday night and the interim WBC heavyweight title. It has taken more than 600 days since Whyte rose to the top of the WBC’s rankings to reach this point but getting Deontay Wilder, the champion, in the ring is still not straightforward. The WBC has ruled Whyte must get his shot by the end of next May. Eddie Hearn, the promoter, has suggested he may have to wait a couple of months longer. But Whyte knows how things work in boxing and, whatever the WBC says, the heavyweight champion will have the final say whether he gets his shot or not. “It’s boxing, a lot of things get said and not a lot happens,” Whyte said. “Being mandatory may mean it could be another 600 days.” Wilder has a rematch with Luis Ortiz next in a bout that may not happen until late November – a date that makes it unlikely that Wilder will box Tyson Fury again in February, as has been suggested. Fury has even suggested he has agreed a two-fight deal with the American, which would seemingly tie the pair up for most of next year. “I don’t care,” Whyte said when asked about which of Wilder and Fury he would prefer to face. “I really don’t care. It’s a while away. I have to see what is next. “I want to be busy and fight at this level, I want to fight four to five times a year but that is too much. I’m not getting any younger, so don’t want to waste time. Hopefully Wilder sees some vulnerabilities in me that encourage him to take the fight.” Rivas, 32, showed plenty of ambition but was controlled by Whyte’s solid jab in the main. Whyte’s best moment came in the second round when he rocked the Colombian with a hard right cross. When Rivas rode out the storm Whyte did not get greedy, he did not take risks and, when he had to get off the floor, he was happy to settle for a unanimous points win. Whether he has what it takes to mix it at the very highest level is a matter of some doubt. But nothing inspires Whyte like being doubted. “Eddie was worried I would have a shock defeat like [Anthony] Joshua,” Whyte said. “I am glad he says things like that because I think: ‘Fuck this guy, I am going to show him what I am made of.’ I like being the underdog.”