There will be no miracle for George Russell at Silverstone on Sunday. Once more he will set off with almost the entire field in front of him, knowing they will swiftly leave his recalcitrant Williams behind, but it will not mar this young man’s enjoyment of his first British Grand Prix one bit. “I am massively looking forward to it,” he says. “It is the best track on the calendar.” For the drivers Silverstone will always be special, while for Russell it represents another vital step in helping lead his team out of the Formula One wilderness. As part of a testing season it is another race forging the young driver who may yet find himself alongside Lewis Hamilton at Mercedes in the future. Silverstone hosted the first championship race in 1950 and Russell watched his first grand prix here in 2009, when he was 11 years old. Now 21, he returns behind the wheel at a track where 10 British drivers have triumphed since that inaugural race. He fervently hopes one day to join that exalted company. That Williams are languishing at the back of field with an uncompetitive car does not dampen Russell’s enthusiasm a jot. “It wouldn’t matter if I was British or not, all the drivers say the same: there is a special atmosphere at Silverstone that is different to a number of the other grands prix. Silverstone gives you a special feeling, it gives you goosebumps.” Williams have long enjoyed their own special relationship with the British Grand Prix. Sir Frank Williams entered his first F1 race 50 years ago and a decade later his team claimed their first win, with Clay Regazzoni at the wheel, at Silverstone in 1979. They have gained nine more victories since; only Ferrari and McLaren have more. Despite their current travails, for Russell the chance to perform at his home race is an experience he will relish but not one he will allow to faze him. “It will be an amazing feeling being there in front of a home crowd and friends and family and that’s what’s going to make it really, really special,” he says. “But in terms of driving I am going to treat every session the same. I am not going to put any more pressure on myself because it is Silverstone.” It is a remarkably mature attitude. He has faced perhaps the hardest challenge any rookie has had to endure at the struggling Williams. Yet he wears it well, perhaps unsurprisingly as it seems he has been building to this moment almost all his life. Ten years younger than his brother, Russell followed him into karting. “I was brought up on a race track,” he says with a smile. “I used to pedal around the paddock on a little pedal tractor with a water tank on the back. I used to fill it up to collect water for the radiator and for the team. I was known by everyone around the paddock from when I was about three.” What followed has culminated in an F1 drive with Williams, pursued with skill, diligence and not a little innovation. Taken on as a Mercedes junior driver in 2017, the year he won the GP3 series, he followed it by claiming the F2 title last year. His first contact with Mercedes had been an unsolicited email to the principal, Toto Wolff, in 2014. Now on their books, he has a realistic chance of a seat with the team in the future. In 2017, he had pitched for a drive at Williams by using a powerpoint presentation. It worked but the car he landed was far from the ideal. The Williams is not only way off the pace but a real handful to drive. Wrestling the best from difficult machinery is a challenge Russell has embraced. His teammate, Robert Kubica, an F1 race winner before the accident that curtailed his career, has not been able to match him. Russell has out-qualified the Pole for every race and finished in front of him in all but one. Perhaps Russell’s finest demonstration of his talent this season was not even caught on camera. At the French GP, he went round the outside of Kubica at just under 200mph through the fearsome Signes corner, a moment of breathtaking skill and courage. He is de facto team leader as a rookie. “The car is difficult to drive, it is broadening my racing experience and knowledge because I don’t know exactly what is going to happen corner after corner, lap after lap,” he says. “Mentally, it’s probably more fatiguing than in a car that is perfect. We have to drive it as quickly as possible but also keep it on the track. I am really understanding what it takes to become a leader in the team and direct the team in the direction they need to go.” He rightly believes all this will stand him in good stead. “I have shown in junior formulas what I can do on track but if I am to become an F1 champion I also need to show what I can behind the scenes. In F1 it’s not just about driving, it’s about the whole package.” Williams have a long way to go but while Russell will be up against it on Sunday it may yet be a race to remember fondly. The first time is always special, after all. “My first win in F4 and the first time I drove an F1 car was at Silverstone,” he says. “I’ve been really successful every year I have been there. It has great memories for me. An amazing atmosphere and vibe. Vibe is not a word I often use but the vibe at Silverstone is incredible.”