The MoonTo mark the 50th anniversary of Apollo 11, this exhibition surveys our fascination with the alien world closest to us.• National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, 19 July to 5 January. Helene SchjerfbeckA Finnish national treasure, little known in Britain, gets a show that may change our minds.• Royal Academy of Arts, London, 20 July to 27 October. Sweet Harmony: Rave | TodayA cultural history of rave music and its impact, from the 1980s to now.• Saatchi Gallery, London, until 14 September. Paolo Scheggi: In DepthSurvey of a short-lived 1960s artist whose pierced canvases are full of experimental mayhem.• Estorick Collection, London, until 15 September. The Real: Three PropositionsGerman artists Konrad Klapheck and Peter Dreher and Britain’s Des Lawrence all paint everyday things with disconcerting clarity.• White Cube Bermondsey, London, until 25 August. An Astronomer, 1652, by Ferdinand Bol This astronomer looks a bit bookish. Why isn’t he outside stargazing through a telescope? Galileo used a telescope to do astronomy for the first time in 1609, but more than 40 years later this guy is posed like a Renaissance sage, poring over a dense tome while a celestial and a planetary globe inform his mystical ruminations. For this is a portrait of the inner life, an emotional study of the scholar’s solitude. With his chin resting on his hand, the astronomer adopts a gesture of melancholy that dates from the early middle ages when the queen in the Lewis chess set expressed her sadness in the same way. With its soft browns and reds and the rich costume of the scientist, this painting is visibly influenced by Rembrandt, who taught Bols – but couldn’t teach him true genius.• National Gallery, London. Melania Trump statue, Sevnica, Slovenia The US first lady’s home town now has a commemorative statue of its most famous former resident. Carved in wood with a chainsaw by Slovenian artist Ales Zupevc, the monument is the brainchild of American conceptual artist Brad Downey. Read our report to find out the locals’ reaction. The Tide is no High Line David Chipperfield unveiled Berlin’s new temple to culture Ireland is giving artists a year’s financial support The World illustration awards drew from a colourful field Olafur Eliasson filled Tate Modern with moss and fog Sydney’s Bondi could lose its flagship Sculpture by the Sea event in a row over accessibility Assemble’s Liverpool garden has bloomed … … while Peter Carney paints the town red with his football banners Helene Schjerfbeck is to Finland what Munch is to Norway … … and Félix Vallotton flies the flag for Switzerland Britain’s Twentieth Century Society published its latest survey of buildings at risk Egypt is building new cities in the sand … … and future architects can learn from past visions The gig economy may be behind the resignation of the National Gallery chair … … while the V&A’s Tristram Hunt defended sponsorship from the Sackler family The BP boss says protests against its sponsorship are odd Turner’s Walton Bridges will remain in the UK Wong Ping’s outrageous animations are a subversive delight … and fellow Hong Kongers are putting their writing on the wall Adrian Steirn took the last portrait of Nelson Mandela Zackary Drucker examines everyday trans life Terence Donovan made 60s photography sharp Church architecture in the past 100 years has been eclectic The Rijksmuseum began an epic restoration of Rembrandt’s The Night Watch A new film inspired by the early life of Gerhard Richter is an artistic journey Latin American photography covers a lot of ground One of Stubbs’s favourite horses is racing to Milton Keynes We remembered the photographer Tony Prime To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign If you’d like to receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here.