Lord’s: West Indies, 286-9, beat England, 194, by 92 runs Viv Richards (138) and Collis King (86) help West Indies rebuild from 99-4. Geoff Boycott and Mike Brearley put on 129 for the first wicket but too slowly and Joel Garner’s 5-38 leads a rout. “At 22 and having played a year of international cricket I’d faced nothing as unique as a World Cup final because, let’s face it, they don’t come around that often as we’ve noticed. At that age it was a very special day. You’re not thinking: ‘This could be my only one,’ you’re thinking: ‘This is great,’ because with that youth comes a certain naivety and the truth is with West Indies everyone was aware it needed to be a very special performance if we were going to come out with the World Cup in our hands. “I learned to have great respect for the West Indies pace attack pretty early on and I still have it now more than 40 years later. I still think on their day they were as good as any attack in history. That Lord’s pitch was a good one – flat, low bounce, it wasn’t frightening – but when you get to the stage where you need to accelerate rapidly by the standards of the day and they stick Joel Garner on you’re thinking: ‘That’s not fair.’ So that was tough. “It was a 60-over game but by the standards of the day 280-odd was a lot and the game was played very differently. The wickets-in-hand mantra was a big one in those days. There were conflicting reports of what was said or not said during that chase but the simple truth is we got off to a steady but too slow start. “This year is England’s best chance ever, we’ve got a brilliant team. On this occasion, they’ve got better and better the last three games they’ve played. So let’s hope that trend continues, in which case we’ll be having a very, very lovely day at Lord’s.” Eden Gardens, Kolkata: Australia, 253-5, beat England, 246-8, by seven runs With England 135 for two in the 32nd over of their chase, Allan Border brings himself on to bowl his part-time slow-left-arm spin. The decision by Mike Gatting to reverse-sweep Border’s first ball turns the game. “It was probably the best atmosphere I’d played in, the noise the crowd made was absolutely phenomenal. But after we had beaten India in the semi-final most of them were supporting Australia. Myself and Bill Athey got us somewhere close in the chase and then I played a shot that people are still talking about to this day. I had played it a lot during my career and with the field Allan Border had set, there was only one place he was going to bowl the ball and that was somewhere around leg stump. So I just set my sights on playing that whatever his first ball was going to be, because I was in, playing well and was just going to try and continue being positive. “Had I left it, it would certainly have been a leg-side wide. But I was seeing the ball well, feeling good and it was a shot I was quite happy playing. Unfortunately, it just clipped my shoulder and just lobbed up to the wicketkeeper. Had it missed my shoulder it would have been three or four runs, we’d have still been going and we might have won it. “It’s a shot batsmen nowadays play all the time but I suppose back then it was unusual – but not for me. I played it all the time – certainly all the way through our semi‑final against India and all the way through the competition. But my chairman of selectors [Peter May] didn’t like it and told me I shouldn’t play it. But it was a shot that got me runs and I continued to play it. That’s what I like about this England team – they are not afraid to be positive and play their own way. Don’t underestimate New Zealand but I’m feeling very positive about England’s chances.” Melbourne Cricket Ground: Pakistan, 249-6, beat England, 227, by 22 runs Javed Miandad survives two lbw appeals from Derek Pringle when England have Pakistan two wickets down early on but Graham Gooch’s side are unable to chase down a sizable total. “Back in the day there was no internet, so you were unaware of what was happening back home. We saw the odd English newspaper and the English journos were out there but you didn’t know if the whole country was behind you or anything like that because, one, you’re in Australia and, two, communication was nothing like it is now. For us it felt big – it was one of the biggest disappointments of my career not to have won that final. “It was the best one-day side I played in but we ran out of gas and Pakistan got stronger and sadly they outplayed us in the final along with [umpire] Steve Bucknor depriving Pring [Derek Pringle] of a couple of lbws which he still goes on about. “It was the very early days of the Barmy Army, it was a good atmosphere at the MCG, maybe 80-odd thousand there but the majority were Australians because they thought they’d get there but they didn’t even reach the knockout stage, which was good. “It was a massive occasion but when you’re out there you block out the crowd to do your job. There’s a couple of abiding memories – the Pring lbws and then the two balls Wasim Akram delivered to bowl Allan Lamb and Chris Lewis. “This England side have got to be true to themselves and just keep playing how they have been playing. It’s difficult to take the final out of the equation and treat it as just another game because it’s bigger than that. But I’d say try and control those nerves and don’t look too far ahead. Go out there and express yourselves, always take the positive option, don’t go into your shells and really embrace what a World Cup final is all about.”