The Red Bull team principal, Christian Horner, believes his driver Max Verstappen would beat Lewis Hamilton in a straight fight on track. Verstappen won at the last round in Austria but Red Bull are still unable to match Hamilton’s Mercedes team at the vast majority of tracks and the pair have yet to regularly compete wheel to wheel. Horner, however, is confident that Verstappen, who is 21, and his team will be winning world championships in the future. When asked who he believed would be on top if Verstappen and Hamilton were in the same machinery, he was unequivocal. “From what I see here and now I would absolutely back Max,” he said. “The sport is crying out for more drivers like Max Verstappen.” Hamilton goes into this weekend’s British Grand Prix as the five-times world champion and with a 31-point lead in the title race, and the strong favourite to make it six. Red Bull remain in pace terms behind Mercedes and Ferrari. Verstappen has six career wins and has yet to be in a title fight . Horner hopes the regulation changes set for 2021 would open up a real fight at the front of the grid. “I think it would be great to see all them fighting,” he said. “Verstappen versus Hamilton, with [Ferrari’s] Sebastian Vettel and Charles Leclerc thrown in as well, that would be phenomenal.” Red Bull won four drivers’ and constructors’ championship doubles with Vettel between 2010 and 2013 but have struggled with engine power since the turbo-hybrid era began in 2014, during which Mercedes have dominated. However, their switch to Honda power units this year has proved positive and Horner was sure his team had everything in place to return to the title fight. “I don’t see why we can’t be world champions again,” he said. “It feels like the elements are starting to come into place. We have the best driver in the world in my opinion, a fantastic design team and now an engine partner that is starting to deliver and close that gap, which has been our achilles heel.” Verstappen is in his fifth season in F1 and has faced criticism for making unforced errors and being too impetuous. However, since he crashed in final practice at Monaco last year, he has presented himself as an altogether more rounded and mature driver. In Austria he came back to win having dropped to seventh on the opening lap. “If you look at his performances this year he is giving everything, every single lap,” Horner said. “In his fifth year of F1 he has become complete. In the last 12 months he has got maturity as well. The way he handles pressure has been extremely impressive.” However, the Red Bull principal noted Verstappen retained the intensity that made him such an exciting prospect. “He’s passionate, That’s part of the reason people warm to him. He’s not afraid to say it as it is. Is that a bad thing? I’d rather have a driver like that, that has that passion, has fire in his belly – you can channel that.”