Rewind 10 years and fishcakes were flying. They were a gastropub staple, and supermarket sales of the readymade variety were soaring, with Waitrose reporting a 50% uptick. But then? The fishcake tanked. In the following decade, those piscine pucks faded from menus as quickly as mid-00s memories of dial-up modems, Labour governments and smoking in pubs. The past is another country, where they ate fishcakes. But surely these breadcrumbed bad boys are due a revival? Not only is potato and fish one of food’s most enduring partnerships – a combination far greater than the sum of its parts, like Jagger and Richards or Cannon & Ball – but, as a (potentially) protein-orientated outlet for leftovers such as stale bread or fish trimmings, fishcakes dovetail neatly with 2019’s focus on zero-waste, low-carb cooking. That fashionable moment will only occur if fishcakes are eaten in an edifying way. Often they have not been. In 1861, for example, Mrs Beeton’s Book of Household Management recommended fishcakes for a mid-week breakfast, while in Iris Murdoch’s 1978 novel The Sea, The Sea, protagonist Charles Arrowby describes enjoying (is that the right word?) fishcakes with an unspecified “hot Indian pickle” and a salad of “carrot, radishes, watercress and bean shoots”. Luckily, How to Eat – the series stipulating how best to eat Britain’s favourite dishes – is here to cut through this thicket of gastronomic idiocy, and usher the fishcake back into polite society. Minus the bean shoots. Like an inability to coexist peacefully or a love of Mr Bean, the fishcake is one of those few things that unites all peoples of the world. Except in Yorkshire, where, typically, the locals have chosen to sandwich a piece of fish between two slices of potato, batter it, deep fry it and call it a fishcake. Delicious, but maverick. Obstinate, even. For the sake of its own sanity, rather than take a deep dive into everything from Thai tod mun pla-krai to Danish fiskefrikadeller, How to Eat (HTE) will restrict itself here to what is broadly understood as the soft, potato-based, British-style fish cake. A patty ranging in diameter from an ice-hockey puck to a 7in single and no thicker than the average Le Carré paperback (the internationally recognised unit of fishcake measurement). Ideally prepared in a 45:55 potato-to-fish ratio (too much fish and it will lack a smooth, soothing texture), the fishcake should be shallow-fried. Oven baking is killing the fishcake as surely as home-taping was once killing music. As importantly, the fishcake must have a crisp breadcrumb coating. Merely flouring the cakes and, particularly, chilling the mixture and frying uncoated lumps of it in a pan, is scandalous. In many ways, the fishcake is all about the crumb: that moment when you take a knife and crack its carapace with an audible snap, the sight of steam gently venting from that new fissure sharpening the appetite and waking the senses with anticipation. In terms of the fishcake’s contents, its endless flexibility, its ability to harmoniously reconcile anything from naturally smoked haddock to tinned tuna, is its greatest strength. You would not fritter away pricy, delicately flavoured scallops or white crab meat in there (would you?), but otherwise, all bets are off. Or on. The differentiations in taste and texture between mashed potato and two or three types of (smoked) fish, are what make this dish sing. If you are using fillets of cod or such (get you!), then make larger cakes so that you can retain pieces of the flaked fish in the mix, rather than reducing it to a fibrous mush. In that way, smaller cakes are better suited to tinned fish and lesser, gelatinous cuts, the texture of which it is less important to retain. Do not stuff your cakes with dense, squidgy hot-smoked salmon, which tends to be a little dry if it is allowed to dominate. Beyond potato and fish, additions to the cake mix should be no more than seasoning. For instance, a few scattered capers or spring onions, a hint of grated horseradish or lemon zest. These should be a little tweak, a spritz, a vinegary tickle at the periphery. Ultimately and indeed, at times rather blandly, your fishcakes should taste most prominently of potato and fish. Other common additions are too assertive (boiled egg is too rich, gherkins too sharp), while adding grated vegetables to the fish cakes – salmon and courgette, mackerel and beetroot – is baffling. It ends up blurring and muffling the flavour of both fish and vegetable. Serve any vegetables on the side. You want their flavours to retain a clear, individual presence. The correct formula for perfect fishcakes is: fishcakes + sauce + one vegetable side = ultimate pleasure. The sauce (think: similar viscosity to hollandaise) is essential because, without it, your fishcake will often be too dry. You cannot pack your cake with butter or creme fraiche or it will not hold together in the pan. Frequently it needs saucing, liberally. Like the chosen vegetable – fresh and sweet, earthy, metallic, clean – the sauce should add a layer of flavour that is, at once, complementary and distinct. It is a supporting actor working diligently to elevate the star of the show, the fishcake. Within that triangle of taste there is endless possibility for variation: from a classic cod-salmon fish cake with steamed spinach and a silky, chive-flecked beurre blanc; via mackerel-forward cakes served with roasted beetroot and a warm horseradish cream; to tuna cakes with a loose and oily salsa verde and smoky, grilled courgettes. Indeed, it is probably easier to discuss what patently does not work with fishcakes: More carbs Chips, fries, mash, no. Too much of a good thing. This dish is already circa 50% potato (more if the pub kitchen is economising). See also, rice, couscous, bread. Mushy peas With a fishcake? That is a whole lot of clag. Parsley sauce From 1980s school canteens to the freezer aisle, an unholy pallid gunk. Lemon wedges If you feel your fishcake needs a splash of lemon, work it carefully into the mix as a seasoning, rather than leaving people to haphazardly jet-wash patches of their plate with citrus. Tartare sauce Yes, it makes sense, in its flavours. But the fish cake is a much drier beast than fish and chips, where the glossy batter lubricates each mouthful. Tartare is too thick a condiment to work here. Tomato-based sauces HTE fully concedes that in southern France or Campania, there are probably people who can combine fish, onions, fresh tomatoes, garlic and olive oil in ways that would blow its tiny mind. But sadly, HTE was born in Manchester not Marseille, and early experiences of tired, mealy frozen cod in awful, flatly under-seasoned tomato stews have left it with a deep mistrust of the fish-tomato interface. This is further compounded by the fact that, just as tartare is too thick for fishcakes, cooked tomato sauces are often too thin and watery. Sit your fishcake in a moat of tomato sauce, rather than beurre blanc or hollandaise, and its bottom will become unappetisingly soggy. See also: tomato salsas, anything with a red pepper base, in fact any (gloopy, ill-defined) cooked sauce on the whole ratatouille-piperade flavour axis. Pesto Again, too thick (unless deployed in a cream of some sort) and too, well, pesto-y. The dominant flavour of any food involving pesto is pesto – and fantastic as that often is, it feels reductive here. Baked beans Grow up. “Hot sauce” Not everything needs chilli heat. Fishcakes, least of all. Cold salads Not only does pairing a fishcake with a cold salad create a potentially jarring jumble of flavours, but it is one of British food’s great fallacies that eating a cold salad alongside a warm main component is a desirable situation. Much less a cold salad that, sat in a warm sauce, has wilted in the heat, collapsing into its depths. There are exceptions to that rule. The fishcake is not one of them. Garnish No. No pointless frills. No fronds. No crisscrossed chives or (making a comeback, HTE notes with dismay), ornamental pea shoots. Food writers will tell you that, cooked from scratch, this is a “casual supper”, displaying a level of pre-planning, free time and skill in the kitchen that may be beyond we mere mortals. You cannot throw fishcakes together in two minutes. With chilling time, you are talking an hour to 90 minutes of intermittent work. HTE has no problem with that, but let us not pretend that any of us are going to go the full Nigel Slater on a Tuesday lunchtime. No, despite it often being decried as a thrifty, homespun meal of offcuts, HTE would contend that making fishcakes for a midweek tea is making a relative effort to impress. Indeed, HTE would have no problem serving fishcakes at a dinner party*, as a starter. They can be as classy as you care to (and can afford to) make them. * HTE has never knowingly held a “dinner party” – a hideous concept. But that is a story for another time. Flat plate. Using vogueish wide, shallow bowls is misguided here. You need to be able to wield your knife and fork freely, rather than being impeded by any “lip”. Crisp white, cold beer, a strong cup of tea. So fish cakes, how do you eat yours?