There’s history behind this one. It was the first ever fluorescent outfield shirt (according to Umbro, at least) and kicked off a trend that has never really gone away (no surprise given it was said at the time that it was the best selling shirt, other than England kits, that Umbro had ever produced). But more importantly, to me at least, it was a) the first away shirt I ever owned and b) the shirt Sheffield United wore as they stormed to promotion to the old First Division in 1990, which was achieved via a 5-2 win against Leicester City at Filbert Street on the final day of that season. They also wore it the following season, their first campaign in the top flight since the mid-70s. A truly iconic shirt among Blades. JA Your first World Cup never really leaves you, especially when you have an increasingly tight-fitting reminder at the back of your wardrobe. I wasn’t exactly the fashionista of Borden Grammar School – my photo albums of those years should have ‘proceed with caution’ on the cover – but I do think this Italy shirt stands the test of time. It has an elegant simplicity that would work in any era and was the antidote to the wacky kits that were becoming the norm. There are three things I really love about it – the circular badge; the sheen (for reasons I don’t quite understand); and the smell, which is the closest I’ll get to time travel. RS Picture a player in a 1990s Fiorentina kit and chances are it’ll be Gabriel Batistuta. Batigol bagged 16 goals in 1992-93, sporting either the snazzy home shirt or the infamous away kit. On the home shirt at least, Lotto’s design choices only added to an iconic sense of swagger. The giant badge, bold print pattern (three shades of purple!), fussy collar and incongruous fizzy-pop logo ought to be too much – but just look at it in action. Batistuta, Francesco Baiano and Brian Laudrup helped themselves to goals in this strip, winning my support as a kid watching on a fuzzy portable TV. So imagine my despair when, despite scoring more than third-placed Parma, La Viola went down. This outrageously good shirt deserved better. NMc The anticipation of a new away kit is always far more exciting than waiting for the home version, which will forever be the same colour unless your club’s owner is a megalomaniac. Clubs were just starting to experiment with new colours at the start of the Premier League era and Manchester City’s was the first time a club had worn purple in the top flight, meaning it drew the eye – aided by white pinstripes and sponsors, Brother, being emblazoned in yellow on the front. Sadly the kit was rarely worn as it was unwearable at Chelsea and Everton due to a clash of colours, but that only added to its mystique and made travelling to Queens Park Rangers, as City did for a fourth-round FA Cup tie in 1993, a more exciting prospect. WU I was eight when the letter arrived, stating Arsenal needed my services as a mascot for the game away to Newcastle in February 1999. Cue wild celebrations in the Searles household. The kit also arrived in the post and just trying it on was incredible. Then came the day itself, as did tears prior to stepping into the dressing room, where Tony Adams and Lee Dixon took the time to calm me down (Patrick Vieira, less so). Adams and I eventually strolled on to the pitch and took it in turns to shake hands with Alan Shearer, and there and then my love for Arsenal, and that kit in particular, was locked. Two decades on, I’m happy to report the socks still fit. GS The Rossoneri have had more aesthetically pleasing shirts, namely the ones they wore during their era of dominance in the late 1980s and early 1990s, but this was still a beauty and one I have an affinity with given it was what I spent my birthday money on after turning 18 in March 1999. It’s all there – the classic red and black stripes, the classic badge, Opel across the front and material so thick and luxurious you could sleep in it forever. Pure Adidas gold. Paolo Maldini, Leonardo, Oliver Bierhoff and the rest of Alberto Zaccheroni’s squad, who went on to win the 1999 Serie A title, must have loved playing in this shirt. I certainly loved wearing it … up until I let my cousin borrow it and forgot to ever ask for it back. SN