When Vera Pauw returned to the Netherlands after the 2009 Women’s European Championship, she entered her office at the Royal Dutch Football Association expecting plaudits. The pioneering coach, a key force behind the establishment of the women’s Eredivisie, had just guided the national side to the semi-finals of their first major international tournament. Instead, in a nation long blind to the female game, she was met with silence. “Nobody in the association ever congratulated me,” Pauw recalled on Friday. Within six months the manager who laid the foundations for women’s football in the country had resigned, just as her hard work was bearing fruit. There is absolutely no risk that Sarina Wiegman will face the same reception. When the current Dutch manager and her 23 players travel home on Monday they will receive a heroines’ welcome from an infatuated nation. The Oranje have faltered at the last hurdle, beaten here by the USA on Sunday. But their history‑making run to the final has fanned the flames of the Netherlands’ newfound obsession with women’s football. “I hope this shows everyone in the Netherlands the potential of women’s football,” said Wiegman. It is a love affair that has been a long time in the making. Pauw and her ilk toiled in obscurity. Wiegman, as a player, had to leave home for the United States to find high-level opportunities. “We came out of the mud,” Pauw said with a laugh. Sparks began to fly as the Netherlands took England to extra time in the 2009 Euros semi‑finals. Then, six years later, the Dutch appeared at their first World Cup. The fire burned bright in 2017 when the Netherlands unexpectedly became European champions on home soil. On Sunday they almost – almost – won the World Cup. Even in defeat it was apparent from the swaths of orange in the stadium what this achievement meant to the Netherlands. For now the American hegemony continues. They have won half of all World Cup finals, never finishing below third at the tournament. But for the Netherlands the disappointment of defeat will, sooner rather than later, give rise to renewed optimism. The USA were the second-oldest team in France; the Americans’ reign cannot last forever. Watched by the nation’s king, Willem-Alexander, the Netherlands were more than mere pretenders to the World Cup crown. The Dutch refused to buckle under incessant American pressure, with Sari van Veenendaal – later awarded the golden glove – keeping her side in the match with successive world-class saves. Wiegman’s players combined defensive energy with rapid attacking movement, launching counterattacks to keep their colourful travelling supporters in full voice. It was apt that a tournament beset by VAR controversy was then decided by off-field intervention. Yet when the history of Dutch women’s football is written, Stefanie van der Gragt’s concession of a penalty will warrant no more than a line. While the questionable decision may have swung the momentum, the game was soon put out of reach in less interpretation-dependent circumstances by a stunning Rose Lavelle strike. The Dutch fought on valiantly but it proved in vain. There is no shame in losing against a USA side undefeated in 14 World Cup games but the crestfallen Dutch players were claiming no moral victory. Their raw emotions when the final whistle sounded were proof enough that the Netherlands had not come to Lyon to make up the numbers. Eventually, after an extended team huddle, the players regained their composure. They walked to the Dutch end and acknowledged their supporters. These were not waves of goodbyes but “see you again soon”. With a talented and youthful generation – only one member of the starting XI was born before 1990 – the Netherlands will be back. “There’s a lot of potential in the team – we still have an average age under 26,” added Wiegman. With attacking prowess, midfield mettle and an outstanding goalkeeper the Netherlands are an ascendant force in world football. The Dutch expressions full of longing from the side of the pitch as jubilant American players swam in confetti said it all. Their hunger for the trophy lifted before their eyes by the USA will not abate. Earlier in the tournament the Brazilian superstar Marta said: “Cry at the beginning so you can smile at the end.” Sunday was a day of teary heartbreak for the Dutch national team. But after the Netherlands exceeded all expectations to reach the final at only their second World Cup it would be no surprise to see them smiling in 2023.