After suffering the sling and arrows that followed the publication of our Serie A team of the 1990s article, the time felt right to be brave and take on the preceding decade. The 1980s was a defining time for Italian football. The early part of the decade was marked by the national team’s unforgettable triumph at the 1982 World Cup and the latter part saw the arrival of Arrigo Sacchi, who transformed the Italian game and ushered in a new era. It was a decade of defensive masterclasses, where only the sharpest strikers and most creative midfielders flourished. As before, we compiled a shortlist of four players for each position and then handed responsibility over to our followers on Twitter via a series of polls. As always, some big names had to be left out. So, here it is – our Serie A team of the 1980s. The image of a 40-year-old Dino Zoff lifting the World Cup in his grey Azzurri jersey in 1982 set a new benchmark for goalkeepers. Zoff was a pioneer of his craft. A serial title winner with Juventus, he turned goalkeeping from a trade to an art form and he did so in an era when so many talented strikers were drawn to Serie A. His legacy lives on as the likes of Gigi Buffon continue to strive for the standards he set years ago. Giuseppe Bergomi was something of a throwback. The man they called “lo zio” (the uncle) sported a very specific look: tall and athletic with a rather old-fashioned facial hair. He was tough but fair, pragmatic, disciplined, good in the air and tactically astute. His aim was to be a one-club man and he achieved that goal by making more than 750 appearances for Inter over 20 seasons. Such is his status at the club, even Javier Zanetti calls him “Mr Inter”. Quite simply, one of the greatest defenders Italy has ever produced. Few players achieve greatness across two eras, but Franco Baresi’s place in both our 1980s and 1990s dream teams is unquestionable. Throughout these decades he marshalled some of the most formidable backlines Italian football has ever witnessed. In our dream team, he lines up alongside Gaetano Scirea to create what many would consider the greatest defensive duo in Italian history. Even the great Maradona and Van Basten would struggle to score goals past these two. A classy, intelligent and technically gifted libero, Gaetano Scirea is one of the greatest defenders in football history. In addition to being a mainstay of the Juventus backline from 1974 until 1988, Scirea was a key player for the Italy side that won the World Cup in 1982. That he largely kept Franco Baresi out of the Azzurri team until his retirement in 1986 speaks volumes of Scirea’s talent and dependability. Scirea is Juve’s third-highest appearance holder and he won the lot while playing for the club: seven Serie A titles, two Coppa Italia titles, the European Cup, Uefa Cup and Cup Winners’ Cup – and he was never sent off in his career. Antonio Cabrini is the player against whom all Italian full-backs should be judged. His armoury of power, technique, intelligence, attacking flair, passing ability and shooting prowess redefined the full-back role and helped him win every Uefa club competition as well as the 1982 World Cup. The man they called Bell’Antonio sure was beautiful to watch. Described by Michel Platini as one of the “best Italian footballers of his generation”, Roberto Donadoni was the archetypal wide midfielder. Usually deployed on the right, he was fleet of foot, accurate, incisive, creative and tireless. He was perfectly suited to Sacchi’s high-octane Milan side and was a forward’s dream. “My greatest satisfaction,” Donadoni once said, “comes from making the pass that leads to the goal.” And playing with Marco Van Basten, he made plenty. Despite bold attempts to destroy his own legacy, Michel Platini did enough on the pitch to be remembered as a great. A graceful and creative artist with the ball, he was a master of the midfield craft. Platini was quick, precise and could read the game one page ahead of everyone else. He was magnificent; what the hell happened? When Milan were at their majestic best in the late 1980s, Frank Rijkaard was pulling the strings in midfield. Although he only joined Milan in 1988 – a year after compatriots Ruud Gullit and Marco van Basten – the powerful midfielder with an eye for an important goal was a popular choice among our readers. An extremely versatile player, Rijkaard originally played as a central defender before Sacchi decided his skills were best served in a holding-midfield role. During his five years with Milan, Rijkaard won two European Cups and two Serie A titles. The Danish winger’s time in Italy wasn’t all smooth sailing. When he arrived at Juventus, the limit on foreign players meant he was immediately loaned out to Lazio. Even so, he made his mark over two years in Rome before returning to Juventus for four seasons. He left Italy for Barcelona aged 24 with a Scudetto and Intercontinental Cup in his trophy cabinet – and with a reputation as one of the best young midfielders on the planet. Was a vote really required for the No 10 role? How do you put Diego Maradona’s spell in Italy into words? Explosive. Captivating. Genius. God (or Devil, as some Italian newspapers preferred to call). In the summer of 1984, much to the amazement of the football world, Napoli – who had never won Serie A – signed the greatest player in the world. By the end of the decade, the club had won their first Scudetto and the Uefa Cup. At the heart of it all was the Argentinian forward, who would whip the San Paolo stadium into a frenzy once a fortnight with his dazzling displays and lack of deference to Italian football’s big names. For most, he’s the first name on any all-time team sheet. There were no limits to what Marco van Basten could do with a football. Alongside Dutch compatriots Rijkaard and Gullit, he formed an integral part of Sacchi’s revolution at Milan during the late 1980s. It was a revolution that transcended the silverware sitting in the club’s ostentatious trophy room. Out with Nereo Rocco’s Catenaccio and in with a new era of Total Football, one spearheaded by the elegance and grace of Van Basten. The former shoe salesman (who started coaching his local team because he wasn’t good enough to play for them) remains one of the great managers thanks to his spell in charge of the mythical Milan side of the late 1980s. He laid the tactical blueprint for a golden era of Italian football. After bagging eight trophies with Milan, he went on to guide the Italy national team to the 1994 World Cup final, where a penalty shootout defeat to Brazil sparked a downturn in his fortunes. • This article appeared first in The Gentleman Ultra• Words by Luca Hodges-Ramon, Neil Morris, Richard Hall and Martin Dunlop