Prep 5 minCook 15 minMakes 6 200ml double cream1 pinch flaked sea salt200g 70% dark chocolate, broken into small pieces6 large marshmallows12 good-quality chocolate chip and hazelnut cookies First make the chocolate spread. Heat a saucepan on the fire (or hob), add the cream and salt, then bring to a boil. Put the broken chocolate into a bowl, pour in the hot cream, whisk until the chocolate is melted and smooth, then tip back into the pan and keep warm. Put the marshmallows on skewers (if you’re using wooden ones, soak them in water for at least half an hour first), and toast over an open fire, turning regularly, until golden brown all over. Lay all 12 cookies on a tray, and spread the side facing up with the chocolate mix. Put a marshmallow in the centre of six of the cookies, top with the remaining cookies sauce side down, and serve. Prep 20 minCook 20 minServes 4 6 ripe mixed stone fruit – peaches, nectarines, plums or apricots, say (or stick to one fruit), halved and stoned250g demerara sugar250g mascarpone 250ml double cream50g runny honey1 vanilla pod, split lengthways and seeds scraped out100g whole blanched hazelnuts200g caster sugar100ml amaretto6 bought-in meringues, gently crushed1 small bunch mint, leaves picked Dip the cut side of each fruit half in the demerara sugar, then lay them cut side up on a large plate or tray. In a medium bowl, whisk the mascarpone, cream, honey and vanilla seeds to soft peaks. Roast the hazelnuts in a pan over the barbecue until browned, tip into a mortar, leave to cool a little, then crush lightly. Now for the praline: tip the caster sugar into the same hot pan over the fire and wait until it starts to caramelise. When the sugar is dark brown and runny, return the crushed nuts to the pan and toss to coat. Pour out on to a tray lined with greaseproof paper – take care: it will be very hot and sticky – then leave to cool and harden. Heat a frying pan over the fire, then lay in the fruit cut side down and leave to cook for three to four minutes, until you start to see the sugar caramelise. Turn over the fruit, cook for three to four minutes more on the skin side, then pour over the amaretto and stand back because it will very likely catch light. Once the flames have subsided and the alcohol has burned off, transfer the fruit to a platter and leave to cool for five minutes. Put three pieces of fruit on each plate, spoon the soft-whipped cream over the top and scatter on the crushed meringues and mint leaves. Chop the praline into shards (use a big heavy knife), sprinkle on top and serve. Prep 10 minMacerate 10 minCook 10 minServes 4 For the pancakes360g plain flour¾ tsp bicarbonate of soda1 ½ tsp cream of tartar80g caster sugar3 medium eggs, beaten230ml whole milkButter, for frying For the strawberries400g strawberries, hulled and halved (use local ones, ideally)1 tbsp caster sugar1 splash elderflower syrup For the cream400ml double cream (I use Somerset cream, but again, use one local to you, if you can)1 vanilla pod, split lengthways and seeds scraped out2 tbsp runny honey To make the pancake batter, sift the flour, bicarb, cream of tartar and sugar into a bowl. Add the eggs and 200ml milk, then beat into a thick batter, adding the remaining 30ml milk only if needed to thin it out a bit. Mix the strawberries with the sugar and elderflower syrup, and leave to macerate for 10 minutes. Whisk the cream, vanilla seeds and honey to soft peaks. Melt a small knob of butter in a large, heavy-based frying pan set over embers until it sizzles, then wipe the butter around the pan with kitchen paper. Cooking them in batches, drop about two tablespoons of batter per pancake into the pan, and fry for two or three minutes. When air bubbles pop on the top, flip over and cook on the other side for another couple of minutes. Keep warm and repeat with the remaining batter – you should end up with 12 pancakes. When the pancakes are cooked, divide between four plates (ie, three per portion), and top with a big spoonful of cream and some of the macerated strawberries, making sure to get some of the juices, too. Prep 5 minSoak 20 minCook 15 minServes 4 1 pineapple80ml rum2 tbsp demerara sugar 100g flaked coconutJuice and zest of 1 lime1 red chilli, finely diced1 bunch mint, picked350ml Greek yoghurt Top and tail the pineapple, remove the skin and cut the flesh into eight wedges. Mix the rum and sugar in a large bowl, add the pineapple wedges and leave to soak for 20 minutes. Meanwhile, toast the coconut in a pan over the fire, then set aside. Once the pineapple is soaked, chargrill the wedges on all sides until soft, brushing them with their soaking liquid as you go. Once the pineapple wedges are softened and nicely charred all over, transfer to a large platter. Stir the lime juice into the leftover soaking liquid and drizzle over the pineapple. Scatter the chilli, lime zest and lots of mint leaves on top, and serve with yoghurt. • Recipes by Steve Horrell, executive chef, Roth Bar & Grill and Roth On The Road, Bruton, Somerset