The winner of the Conservative leadership contest will be the third prime minister in four years to take on Jeremy Corbyn, which is a measure of serial Tory dysfunction and the Labour leader’s tenacity. Corbyn has held his party’s top job for longer than Gordon Brown, John Smith, Michael Foot or James Callaghan. The man obviously has stamina, even if gossipy civil servants say it isn’t so. Other leadership qualities are more debatable. By conventional measures – election results and opinion polls – Labour’s recent record is poor. The party lost dozens of seats in May’s local council ballot and came third in the European poll three weeks later. Corbyn’s personal ratings mine depths of unpopularity from which, as a rule, opposition candidates do not recover. The defence used to be that normal rules do not apply; that conventional instruments did not detect the unique frequency of Corbyn’s appeal. Even stalwart supporters struggle to hold that line. Diane Abbott admits she is “beginning to worry” about Labour’s Brexit position. John McDonnell is reported to have compared the situation to a “slow-motion car crash”. Monolithic message discipline has been a consistent strength of the Corbyn project. Internal disputes never used to leak. A strict omertà prohibited it. Solidarity was sustained by fear that the tiniest fissure would be exploited by enemies, which meant anyone outside a narrow circle of true believers. Over time, even rebellious MPs learned obedience. Their 2016 coup failed miserably. They were further chastened by Labour’s robust performance in the 2017 election. Some of that surge was pure anti-Brexit protest, but the result was taken by Corbyn loyalists as a personal endorsement of the leader. Sceptics learned not to take his name in vain. It was safer to voice concern about bad advice from wicked aides. But the taboo is breaking down. Brexit is degrading the Corbyn brand at a rate that alarms ideological devotees. It has been disorienting for many Labour supporters that the leader, normally quick on the draw with a megaphone, refuses to broadcast pro-European resistance. He sounds tongue-tied on the subject and looks like a man hiding from battle, which undermines the image of a candid crusader. When the hero no longer embodies principles on which his movement was founded, the whole edifice wobbles. The attention of young idealists drifts; affection turns conditional; benefit of the doubt is withdrawn. It is getting notably harder, for example, to be loyal to Corbyn and determined to combat antisemitism at the same time. Those who try tie themselves in knots, seeking to insulate the leader from decisions that are clearly taken with the boss’s preferences in mind, such as the grimly farcical sequence of suspension, readmission and resuspension of Chris Williamson. There is not much point trying to decrypt what happens inside the Labour leader’s head on this subject. What matters is that an alarming number of people who think Jews are a sinister, conspiratorial clan also believe that Corbyn is their guy and Labour is their party. Their ideological cover is impeccably Corbynite too: it is the loose interpretation of “Zionism” as a keystone in structures of global, neocolonial oppression. From there it is a short step to seeing Jews as perpetrators of injustice, and so disqualified from sympathy as victims of racism. There is a suspicion that Corbyn is no longer such an asset to Corbynism The task of disentangling antisemitism from the package of hard-left, “anti-imperialist” doctrines is not simply a matter of kicking out individuals who are too stupid to express their prejudice in code. It means decontaminating Corbynism itself, which raises the question of what that word means beyond the assertion that Corbyn must be prime minister. There is a healthy ecosystem of ideas for domestic reform on the left, looking at ownership structures and ways to “democratise” the economy. But that can cover everything from Sovietisation to Scandinavian social democracy. Labour’s tortured Brexit position contains the same tension. Amid all the electoral fretting over leave-voting constituencies is an old doctrinal instinct that sees EU rules as inimical to red-blooded socialism. McDonnell, curator of Corbynism’s economic agenda, is coy on the question of whether the ultimate ambition is reform or abolition of capitalism. He also knows that winning power is the first step, regardless of the destination. To that end he is persuaded by the utility of jumping down on the remain side of the fence, and frustrated that his old friend won’t join him. Even if such differences are purely tactical, their visibility signals a problem. It reveals the suspicion that Corbyn is no longer such an asset to Corbynism. There was a time when the leader’s avuncular persona was more powerful than policy or slogan. Everyone in Corbyn’s 2015 campaign, including the candidate, was astonished by the effect. He once exuded a gentleness that made allegations of fanaticism sound preposterous. Now his peevish side cuts through. He once animated feelings of belonging and purpose in people who had felt starved of inspiration by soulless New Labour. Now he refuses to quench the thirst of his party’s parched remainers. He had Glastonbury singing his name in 2017. It wouldn’t happen now. He can still pack a town hall, but that is propping up a base, not enlarging it. Few Labour MPs, if any, relish the prospect of an election under their leader, although most pretend to want one. It is hard to present Corbyn as a man for the future, and May’s departure will date him even more. He will be a stale continuity figure from the time of stasis, irradiated through years of loitering ineffectually amid the referendum’s toxic fallout. His aura of specialness has dissipated, revealing the man in all his flawed mediocrity. The prospect of Britain having a radical Labour government is sliding into the gap that has opened up between an idea people once called “Jeremy Corbyn” and the actual Jeremy Corbyn. • Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnist