First came the Robert James Waller novel, and then the 1995 movie starring Meryl Streep and Clint Eastwood. Now we get the British premiere of the 2014 Broadway show with music and lyrics by Jason Robert Brown and book by Marsha Norman. The result is a sober, honest, well-staged study of late-flowering love that seeks to make up in passion what it lacks in tonal variety. The story is, by now, familiar. Francesca, the bored Italianate wife of an Iowa farmer, has a rhapsodic, four-day affair with a roving photographer, Kincaid, while her husband and kids are at the Illinois State Fair. The idea of the handsome stranger who awakes dormant sexual longings is a standard American trope used by William Inge in Picnic and Tennessee Williams in Orpheus Descending. Brown and Norman treat the story seriously and avoid the absurdities of the novel where the hero announces: “I am the highway and a peregrine and all the sails that ever went to sea.” But the prevailing note, aside from a Joni Mitchell-type number for Kincaid’s ex-wife and a hoedown at the fair, is one of string-filled romantic yearning. This is one of the few American musicals with minimal chance for dance. What saves it from monotony is the integrity of Trevor Nunn’s production, in which Tal Rosner’s video designs capture the vastness of the Iowa plains and Jon Bausor’s timbered sets convey the heroine’s domestic confinement. The two lead performers are also excellent. Jenna Russell lends Francesca a residual Italian accent, movingly breaks down when shown pictures of her native city – “See Naples and cry,” you might say – but above all regards her visitor with the hungry attentiveness of a woman long conditioned to neglect. Edward Baker-Duly also suggests that beneath the raffish charm of the itinerant snapper lurks a matching solitude. Dale Rapley as Francesca’s bewildered husband, Gillian Kirkpatrick as a nosy neighbour and Shanay Holmes as Kincaid’s melodic ex provide good support and, even if there are more exhilarating American musicals, this one has the merit of putting people before spectacle. • At the Menier Chocolate Factory, London, until 14 September.