Is it possible to be in love with two people at the same time? Perhaps. Certainly, time has done nothing to shake the conviction of the award-winning Austrian cartoonist Ulli Lust that she was once in precisely such a situation. In the 1990s, when she was still a struggling young artist, Lust was spoony for Georg, an actor 20 years her senior. Kind, clever and good with her parents, he was, she felt, her ideal companion. But there was a problem: sex. That part of their relationship had quickly died, something that bothered her more than him. Determined to stay together, they duly agreed that she should look elsewhere, and not too long after this – boom! went her heart all over again – she met Kimata, a mechanic recently arrived in Vienna from Lagos. In her new memoir, How I Tried to Be a Good Person, Lust looks back with utmost frankness at this menage a trois: a triangle that was at first ecstatically happy, and then desperately unhappy. She wants, I think, to make the point that its end had less to do with numbers – with the fact that she brought an extra person into her relationship – than with Kimata, who turned out to be possessive, jealous and, ultimately, violent. Had he been a different kind of man, one less hidebound by his culture and upbringing, the three of them could, she believes, have gone on together indefinitely, and she would have thought herself the luckiest woman alive. But while she underlines all this with great care – in an epilogue, she also describes how, much later, her relationship with Georg only came to an end because he met a woman who was unwilling to share him with her – the overwhelming impression for the reader is of a youthful experiment gone monstrously wrong. Georg is so decent, and Kimata so despicable, you can’t help but wonder why she returns to him again and again. But this is unfair. How powerful is desire. We need it so badly – without it, life is sludgy and grey – and yet, it can induce us to make such bad decisions, particularly when we are young. Lust’s drawings of her encounters with Kimata are highly explicit – this isn’t, I must warn you, a book to be breezily flipped open on the bus or the train – without ever being gratuitous. She uses these extended scenes, unbridled and unabashed, to help us grasp the uncommonly powerful hold this man has over her; the way he can reduce her in a matter of moments to the sum of her physical body, her thinking brain put to one side as swiftly as her clothes. Other instincts and motivations are also in play, of course. As a leftist anarchist who disapproves of the Austrian state, our heroine is determined to do right by this new immigrant even when he does wrong by her. But in the end, Lust’s energetic, searching book has at its heart the question, still not fully answered, of why fulfilling their needs so often leaves women feeling so abject, so utterly undone. • How I Tried to Be a Good Person by Ulli Lust is published by Fantagraphics (£30.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99