The UK baked in another record-breaking heatwave last weekend, which was made at least five times more likely by climate change (Report, 3 July). Weather bulletins are naturally the first point of information for events like these. They provide us with the information we need to act, whether that’s keeping our children indoors on extremely hot days or taking our umbrella to work when it’s expected to rain. As climate change gathers pace, dangerous weather is expected to rise in frequency. We once chose only how to respond to the weather. We now face profound choices that will define how the weather responds to us. Given that, and what is at stake, it surely makes sense that broadcasters communicate the best understanding of how climate change is disrupting our weather – and is expected to disrupt it further still if left unchecked. With that understanding we can make the collective choices needed to preserve the fragile ecological balance that sustains us. It’s time for the regular weather bulletins to start including climate science communication. Broadcasters must use the tools, expertise and trust they enjoy to provide the information we need to protect ourselves from harm.Sarah Barfield Marks10:10 Climate Action • In her conversation with Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Greta Thunberg says: “We aren’t destroying the biosphere because we are selfish. We are doing it simply because we are unaware. I think that is very hopeful, because once we know, once we realise, then we change, then we act” (Show up. Stand up. Act., Weekend, 29 June). Oh dear. Who’s going to tell her? Most of us do know – and care – but we don’t act. We’re deterred by the enduring success of powerful and corrupt global short-termism. Ocasio-Cortez was keen to tell Thunberg about the immense lobbying power of vested interests. Perhaps Thunberg should set her formidable sights on those corporate obstructionists.Chris HughesLeicester • Your article on tourism (The briefing, Journal, 1 July) quotes Claudio Milano from Ostelea School of Tourism saying “we need new indicators and a new set of measures of tourism”. Perhaps we could start with the effect that flying has on climate catastrophe. The CO2 is emitted above the trophosphere, and stays in the atmosphere longer than CO2 emitted at ground level because it takes longer to percolate down to the level of vegetation which will consume some of it. So perhaps we could tax the airlines for the oil consumed, which at present is untaxed. As your map indicated, it is the rich minority world that goes touring the poorer majority world where the ecological damage is done. The new indicators and set of measures of tourism should make this clear to make people aware of the atmospheric damage flying causes.Ann BlissLondon • Re the letters on flying (Aviation industry must get real about emissions, 2 July). We planned a camping trip to Sweden this summer but changed our minds when we realised that all car ferries crossing from the UK to Scandinavia have recently been discontinued and transporting the camping gear in our car to a port in Holland or Belgium would have necessitated driving hundreds of extra miles through Holland, Germany and Denmark. But we decided to persevere with our trip, and to go by train. We spent at least two bad-tempered days planning the train journeys from London to Stockholm and estimated they would take two-and-a-half-days and cost, one way, including overnight stops in cheap hotels in Hamburg and Copenhagen, at least £350 per person. Compare that with about £50 for a two-and-a-half-hour flight from London to Stockholm, as advertised on the net. Does this perverse incentive to fly exist in the whole world? Can anyone explain the disconnect between the worldwide scientific consensus about the climate emergency and our political paralysis?Jackie FarleyAylesbury, Buckinghamshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition