Andrew Solomon, in his beautiful book The Noonday Demon, described depression as “the aloneness within us made manifest”. Love, he wrote, though it is no prophylactic against depression, “cushions the mind and protects it from itself”. Solomon has spoken of his husband John as having been, in some ways, the “cure” for his depression. I thought of these ideas while reading Starling Days, Rowan Hisayo Buchanan’s second novel, which explores the relationship between depression and love. Can love save us from our unhappiest selves? Is that something we can ask of another person? How do we even pose the question? Mina is a young classicist and associate professor in New York: “bisexual, vegetarian and on meds”. She is working, sort of, on a book about female survivors in Greco-Roman myths and legends (Penelope, Psyche, Leda), an obvious parallel to her own struggles for survival. When the novel opens, Mina is standing on the George Washington Bridge, trying to will herself to jump. A police officer gets to her first, and her dutiful husband Oscar comes to retrieve her. Oscar has been here before. On their wedding night six months ago, she tried to kill herself. Mina has struggled for years with depression, her arms tattooed with peonies to hide the “fine trellis of scars”. She was an infant when her mother died, supposedly by slipping in the bath, though Mina has her doubts. Left alone with a baby in a small apartment “with cockroaches that crawled up through the toilet”, her mother may well have chosen to drown herself. Shortly after the incident on the bridge, Oscar and Mina decide to get out of New York for a while. His Japanese father, who imports sake and beer to the US, owns some old council flats in London that need sprucing up and has asked him to oversee their renovation. This is the first Oscar has heard of the flats. He and his father aren’t close; Oscar was the result of a one-night stand, and family secrets come to light as the novel unfolds. Once in London, he obsesses over Mina’s whereabouts and moods, insisting they download the “stalking app” so he can see where she is in the city. Despite her recent suicide attempt, Mina has come off her meds – “she wanted to learn the floor plan of this sadness” – and there are countless conversations about whether Oscar can leave her alone in the flat. But they have hardly unpacked their suitcases when, for no good reason other than that it advances the plot, Oscar heads back to the US to do a job for his father, leaving his suicidal wife alone in a dreary flat in a strange city. Mina knows one person in London – Phoebe, the sister of Oscar’s oldest friend. Phoebe is sleeping on her brother’s sofa and writing an “art as lifestyle” blog: “Like, for example, everyone knows Georgia O’Keeffe was big on flowers and deer. So, for the post about her I found this flowery shower curtain, and an enamel pin of this cute deer skull.” In Oscar’s absence, Mina and Phoebe grow close, though it’s not clear how seriously we are meant to take Mina’s feelings for Phoebe. Is it really about Phoebe (apart from kisses that dissolve like marshmallows, she seems to have no attractive qualities), or is Phoebe merely a sign of Mina’s desperation? For readers looking for a 'relatable' tale of struggle and survival, this book offers consolation More broadly, it feels as if we are being directed to read the book through a feminist lens – Mina’s mother and her postpartum depression, the mythical women who did or didn’t survive, the female lover as restorative agent – but Mina’s problems don’t stem, in any immediate way, from the patriarchy. Oscar is more long-suffering than repressive. Building a novel around a depressed character places enormous pressure on the author to compellingly evoke bleak and repetitive mind states. The problem with Starling Days is that Mina’s inner life is fairly banal. She keeps a list of the reasons why her presence on Earth is pointless (“Can’t cope with jeans … ”). She compares her sorrows with those of children in war zones, and deems herself spoiled. She tells Oscar that life before meeting him had felt like wandering through a shopping mall: “You know, the kind which is so big it has more than one Starbucks … And then one day there you were, like a bench.” There are indications that Buchanan is a better writer than this work would suggest: “a bald man whose head gleamed like sucked candy”, a scene in the supermarket when the body parts of animals assume their full horror, a landline that rings “with the shrill importance of a baby crying”. But they are overshadowed by the novel’s weaker elements. For readers looking for a “relatable” tale of struggle and survival – the author includes an encouraging note at the end for those fighting their own darkness – the book offers consolation. For those wishing to derive more literary pleasures, Starling Days may disappoint. • In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org. You can contact the mental health charity Mind by calling 0300 123 3393 or visiting mind.org.uk Molly McCloskey’s When Light Is Like Water is available in paperback from Penguin. Starling Days by Rowan Hisayo Buchanan is published by Sceptre (RRP £14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.