At 4.30pm on Saturday afternoon, Halifax is likely to go into lockdown, for a couple of hours at least. Recently the town has been more famous as the backdrop for the TV drama Gentleman Jack than any sporting success but the rugby league team will take centre stage as they aim to achieve what many consider to be the impossible. “It’s been dubbed David versus Goliath but David will have to bring all his mates too,” the Halifax coach, Simon Grix,, when asked to spell out the task facing his side says. The part-time team from the second tier have made it to the Challenge Cup semi-final, only the second semi-professional team to do so this century. Grix’s team on Saturday will include joiners, electricians and roofers, even a cake-shop owner, too. But there is one small catch: standing between the Championship side and a return to the final for the first time in 31 years are the team they beat when they last won the cup in 1987, the runaway Super League leaders, St Helens. “I could scare my lads to death and show them everything they’re good at but they watch Super League,” Grix says. “If we approach this like they’re gods, we’re in big trouble. But at the same time, they’re hammering Super League teams every week, so let’s be realistic about what we’re facing.” Halifax train twice a week at a college, while St Helens, a team stacked with internationals, are arguably the best-run club in the country. The Saints spend around £2m on salaries each year; Halifax less than a fifth of that. “It doesn’t sound great when you spell it out like that,” says Grix who, as a boyhood Halifax fan, understands the significance of Saturday’s game for the town. “Geoff Horsfield playing here for Halifax Town was probably the pinnacle recently,” Grix says, laughing. “That was a long time ago, and we haven’t been in Super League since 2003. Our older fans get a bit of nostalgia this weekend and get to remember the good old days. But the most important thing is the club gets the financial benefits.” With a budget of less than £400,000, the fact this match is worth almost a third of that to the club – given a sellout crowd at Bolton and the prize money for getting this far – arguably makes what is happening off the field more important, even if the players do not see it that way. “This is one of the biggest games of my career,” says the captain, Scott Murrell, who, like many of his teammates, has spent most of his career outside Super League. “They’re the best team in England without a doubt but I’d never say never. Not with our guys. There’s always that outside chance.” If we get stuck into them and be proud of our effort, I'll be happy Stranger things have happened but Grix’s focus is already on making sure games between the sides are less of a rarity. “I remember coming here when the rugby team was the talk of the town. They’re distant memories but the challenge for us is to recreate them.” Grix began the season playing for Halifax before being thrust into the coaching role mid-season after their promotion push faltered. So what would represent success for him? “Look, it’s likely they’ll score some points. But if we get stuck into them and be proud of our effort, I’ll be happy.” When it is suggested to Grix that his part-timers facing the country’s best team is akin to a glamorous FA Cup tie, he jokes that one of his players is more likely to be Wayne Shaw, the Sutton goalkeeper who infamously ate a pie mid-game, than the match-winning hero. The size of the task is not lost on him and the thousands of Halifax fans travelling across the Pennines do so in hope, rather than expectation but in this game you never know.