Last year, Rupert Everett gave a heart-wrenching performance in The Happy Prince, a film about the elderly Oscar Wilde in which he played the writer not as a predictably witty dandy but a tragic figure stuttering towards the end of his life. Here, in his directorial stage debut, Everett approaches Uncle Vanya with a similarly counterintuitive touch. Chekhov wrote the play as a comedy, Everett told the Guardian recently, and while his production is not the first to draw out the absurdist elements of this fin-de-siècle masterpiece about mid-life malaise, fewer have gone as far as this daringly jaunty production, adapted by David Hare. Much of the comedy is delivered by Everett himself, who gives a flamboyant performance as a louche, growly Vanya, wandering around barefoot and eking out pained humour from lines as lugubrious as: “It’s a perfect day to hang yourself.” Not all, however, attest to the play’s outright success as a comedy. Richard Roxburgh, who played Vanya opposite Cate Blanchett in the Sydney Theatre Company’s acclaimed 2012 production, likened it to a Noël Coward play without the jokes, and it feels occasionally thus in this production. Some actors – particularly John Light as the defeated Dr Astrov and Clémence Poésy as Yelena, the beautiful, bored wife of the elderly professor – seem to be playing it straight, which grates against the comic elements. But the tonal inconsistencies are ironed out so that the depression and despair is balanced against the bursts of farce and bathos. Katherine Parkinson steers brilliantly between humour and torment as Vanya’s plain niece, Sonya, and is winningly dorky around Astrov, for whom she harbours a passion. Her shift to pathos, when her love is not returned, is done with pitch perfection. Meanwhile, the small part of the nursemaid, Marina, is made big with characterful humour in Ann Mitchell’s hands. Not everything works seamlessly: Yelena, who sparks much of the play’s emotional turbulence, is played with elegant restraint by Poésy but her relationship to the professor is neglected. Light is a likable misanthrope as Dr Astrov, and we feel his despair as a medic with disease and death rising in the peasant population around him. But his interest in trees and reforestation as an alternative way to save humanity is turned rather too heavy handedly into a climate-change message in Hare’s script. By the second half, the comedy begins to glitter and gleam against Chekhovian darkness. The pressure-cooker blend of boredom, disappointment and simmering anger builds to boiling point as the cast languishes in the Russian countryside, barricaded by their bourgeois privilege against the pestilence and poverty of the peasants who surround them. The scene of Dr Astrov’s stolen kiss with Yelena, when it comes, is a powerful one, set against the tragicomedy of Vanya’s own fast-wilting romantic hopes. When the final eruption of high passion comes in his murderous attempts at the professor’s life, there is a perfect meeting point between tragedy and comedy. Charles Quiggin’s set draws out and deepens the romantic strains of the script in subtle, visual ways, capturing the seasons with the sounds of birds, the swish of wind against foliage, the hues of autumnal or spring light. The cast, too, form melancholy stage tableaux at times, sitting in beautiful formations that hint at psychological states. The play might be set in turn-of-the-20th-century Russia, but in these moments they appear like figures from an Edward Hopper painting, bearing all the loneliness of the modern age. • At Theatre Royal, Bath, until 3 August.