Boris Johnson was forced to defend his ability to represent minority groups in the UK at a Conservative party hustings in Nottingham on Saturday. Johnson and his rival Jeremy Hunt were taking questions from local Conservative members who will be voting to choose the next leader of the party. Johnson was asked whether he could represent minority groups having made such “derogatory and arguably racist” comments, referring to his newspaper column comparing veiled Muslim women to letterboxes. He told the audience: “If you look at that article … it was a strong, liberal defence of the right of women to wear the burqa.” He said he had received letters from Muslim religious leaders after the article was published, supporting his stance on integration. Earlier that day, in an interview in the Daily Mail, Johnson called for a tougher approach on criminal justice issues, including removing restrictions on police stop-and-search powers and longer sentences for serious violent or sexual offenders. He said: “There are too many people … who have committed serious violence or sexual offences who are being let out … after they’ve served only half their sentence.” But lawyers criticised his comments, with the Secret Barrister, who writes about the law, saying on Twitter that the comments were “legally illiterate” and ignored the already severe indeterminate prison sentences that exist for serious violent offenders. Hunt came on second at the hustings to argue that despite his preference for getting a deal with the EU that removes the contentious backstop, Brexit must happen even if it is with no deal. Or the Conservative party “will be toast”, he said. As she announced on 24 May, Theresa May stepped down formally as Conservative leader on Friday 7 June, although she remains in place as prime minister until her successor is chosen. MPs hold a series of votes, in order to narrow down the initially crowded field to two leadership hopefuls. How does the voting work? MPs choose one candidate, in a secret ballot held in a committee room in the House of Commons. The votes are tallied and the results announced on the same day. In the first round any candidate who won the support of less than 17 MPs was eliminated. In the second round anybody reaching less than 33 votes was eliminated. In subsequent rounds the bottom placed contender drops out until there are only two left. The campaign will conclude on 20 June, with multiple rounds of voting during the day as necessary. When will the results be announced? Once MPs have whittled down the field to two, Conservative party HQ takes over the running of the next stage, the postal ballot of members. It says this will be completed in the week beginning Monday 22 July. “If that is the way we have to leave then we must leave [with no deal].” He said there would be preparation for the possibility of no deal, including £20bn of support for businesses currently dependent on trade with Europe. Hunt also acknowledged cuts had gone too far on social care and policing, saying: “I believe that we did the right thing because we had to put the economy back on its feet, we had the worst financial crisis since the second world war.” But he added that “in a couple of specific areas, the cuts went further than we anticipated. We do have some headroom … that would allow us to find extra funding for those public services.” But he acknowledged that a no-deal Brexit would put that at risk.“If we had a no-deal Brexit, then those resources initially will need to go to supporting businesses, but hopefully we can get a deal and then start to address some of those issues,” he said.