The US “has suspicions” that a Gulf oil tanker out of contact since it stopped transmitting its location on Saturday has been seized by Iran, a defence official has said. Tracking data from the MT Riah last placing it in the strait of Hormuz and heading towards Iranian waters has raised concerns about the status of the vessel amid heightened tensions between Iran and the US. “Could it have broken down or been towed for assistance? That’s a possibility. But the longer there is a period of no contact, it’s going to be a concern,” the US defence official told the Associated Press. The UAE-based and Panamanian-flagged oil tanker Riah typically made trips from Dubai and Sharjah on the UAE’s west coast before going through the strait of Hormuz and heading to Fujairah on the UAE’s east coast. However, something happened to the vessel after 11pm on Saturday, according to tracking data, when its last position showed it pointing towards Iran. Capt Ranjith Raja of the data firm Refinitiv said the tanker had not switched off its tracking in three months of trips around the UAE. “That is a red flag,” Raja said. The US defence official said the tanker was near Qeshm island, which has a Iranian Revolutionary Guard base on it. The official said it was yet to contact its owners or UAE authorities. Iranian officials have not said anything publicly about the ship, nor have officials in the UAE. The strait of Hormuz, which provides passage from the Gulf of Oman to the open sea, is the most important gateway for oil exports in the world. With Iran on its northern shore, and the UAE and Oman on its southern shore, the US Energy Information Administration (EIA) calls it the world’s worst 'chokepoint' In 2016, 18.5m barrels of crude oil were transported each day through the strait of Hormuz, compared with 16m through the strait of Malacca, which runs between the Indonesian island of Sumatra, Malaysia and Thailand, connecting the Indian Ocean with the South China Sea. 5m barrels of crude oil are transported annually through the next largest chokepoint, the Suez canal. Phillip Inman Iran’s unravelling nuclear deal with world powers has led to increased tensions in the Gulf region after the US pulled out last year and reimposed economic sanctions. The US has sent advanced fighter jets and thousands of extra troops into the Middle East while mysterious attacks on oil tankers and the shooting down of a US military surveillance drone by Iran have added to the fears of an armed conflict breaking out. Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, said on Tuesday his country would retaliate over the seizure off Gibraltar of an Iranian supertanker carrying 2.1m barrels of light crude oil. The vessel was seized with the help of British Royal Marines. “God willing, the Islamic Republic and its committed forces will not leave this evil without a response,” he said. The UK foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, said on Saturday that Britain would facilitate the release the ship if Iran could provide guarantees the vessel will not breach European sanctions on oil shipments to Syria. Iran’s foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, meanwhile suggested for the first time that the Islamic Republic’s ballistic missile programme could be up for negotiations with the US, a possible opening for talks. Zarif offered an initially high price for such negotiations – the halt of US arms sales to both Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates – but his comments marked the first time an Iranian official has mentioned even the possibility of talks on the Iranian missiles. “These are American weaponry that is going into our region, making our region ready to explode,” Zarif said in an interview with NBC. “So if they want to talk about our missiles, they need first to stop selling all these weapons, including missiles, to our region.” Economic sanctions imposed on Iran since the 1979 Islamic Revolution have cut into its ability to buy advanced weaponry abroad. It relies on pre-1979 US fighter jets and ageing Soviet MiGs and has instead invested heavily into its ballistic missile programme. Khamenei reportedly has restricted the range of ballistic missiles manufactured in Iran to 1,240 miles. While that keeps Europe out of range, it means the Iranian missiles can hit much of the Middle East, including Israel and American military bases in the region. In pulling out of the deal, Trump in part blamed the accord not touching on Iran’s ballistic missile programme. The US fears Iran could use its technology to build nuclear-capable intercontinental ballistic missiles, something Tehran denies it wants to do.