Caledonian Sleeper staff have voted for strike action, claiming “intolerable” and “appalling” working conditions after the botched rollout of its £150m fleet of sleek trains. The new generation of overnight sleeper trains, billed as a hotel on wheels, have been plagued by problems since being unveiled in April. The RMT union said morale has sunk to an “all-time low”, with staff suffering from workplace stress and mental health issues. Issues raised in the dispute with Serco, which has run the Caledonian Sleeper franchise between London and Scotland since 2015, include insufficient staffing levels, lack of training and an “unresponsive” management regime. The union said members voted by more than 10 to one for strike action, with a turnout of more than 80%, following the breakdown of talks with the company. “Our members on the Caledonian Sleeper are sick and tired of paying the personal price for the botched introduction of the new fleet,” said Mick Cash, the general secretary at the RMT. “That is why they have delivered this overwhelming vote for action.” The vote also includes the option of taking industrial action short of a strike. The upgraded trains, which were partly funded by the Scottish government, feature double beds and en suite bathrooms and were heralded as giving a luxury overnight journey for passengers, with a double en suite priced from £400. However, on a disastrous first night in April, north and southbound trains rolled in hours late, beset with problems including signalling glitches, a delayed driver and onboard calamity spanning accommodation mix-ups and catering blunders to leaking cabins. Since then, technical faults with the trains have led to a number of overnight services being cancelled or curtailed, leaving passengers stranded until morning. The Caledonian Sleeper’s punctuality is the worst of any UK train operator. “It is time for Serco to wake up and take note of the appalling working conditions their mismanagement has lumped on their staff and to take action to resolve this dispute,” Cash said. “The [ballot] result will now be considered by the union’s executive and we remain available for genuine and meaningful talks.” The company has delayed new trains that were set to be rolled out on the scenic Highlands routes to Fort William and Inverness until after summer. Ryan Flaherty, Serco’s managing director for Caledonian Sleeper, said: “We’re deeply disappointed by the result of the ballot. I believe we have shown a real commitment to dealing with the issues the RMT has raised and indeed there was an acceptance on all sides that progress was being made. “We remain open and willing to engage in further talks to avoid industrial action and are fully committed to delivering the best possible service to guests.”