Gavin Woodhouse has lost control of another company after a court ordered temporary administrators to take control of the embattled entrepreneur’s main property group. The move comes five days after a high court judge ruled that Woodhouse’s business model appeared to be “thoroughly dishonest” and a “shameful abuse of the privileges of limited liability trading”, as she appointed interim managers to run three of the developer’s firms. Philip Duffy and Sarah Bell, both of Duff & Phelps, were appointed interim managers of Northern Powerhouse Developments Ltd on Sunday, the insolvency firm said. After a similar court ruling last week, the pair hold identical roles at two Woodhouse care home businesses – MBI Clifton Moor Ltd and MBI Hawthorn Care Ltd – along with the entrepreneur’s planned £200m adventure resort, Afan Valley Ltd. The crisis in Woodhouse’s business affairs has developed following publication of an undercover investigation by the Guardian and ITV News last month, which posed questions about the business interests of the entrepreneur, who has raised more than £80m from private investors but whose firms have a multimillion-pound “black hole”. Despite Woodhouse raising about £16m five years ago to build four new care homes, none are operational and three have not been built. The businessman was also in the process of raising £40m from private investors to start work on his Afan Valley adventure resort in south Wales, which he launched with the support of celebrity adventurer Bear Grylls who had signed a deal to offer survival courses at the site. However, in court last week, Judge Sally Barber stated: “Ordinary members of the public have collectively invested millions of pounds into three companies. They have been led to believe that their investment monies were ringfenced and used only for particular projects. This was untrue. “Instead their monies were paid out, often by so-called intercompany loans to other companies under the same ownership, with little or no prospect of recovery. In a number of cases such loans, running into millions, have been written off as irrecoverable already.” On Tuesday, interim manager Duffy said: “Our appointment by the court over a weekend illustrates the seriousness of this case. It was absolutely essential we were appointed to act as interim managers on one of the main companies, Northern Powerhouse Developments Ltd, so that we could gain access to its financial history.” Woodhouse did not respond to invitations to comment. He has previously denied any wrongdoing, says that investor monies are held in bank accounts, and that he plans to build the yet-to-be completed care homes.