“As an actor, I should be allowed to play any person, or any tree, or any animal because that is my job and the requirements of my job,” the actress Scarlett Johansson told As If magazine in an interview obtained by the Daily Mail that has since gone viral (she later said her comments had been taken out of context and used as “clickbait”). Not exactly surprising, coming from a woman who has played a cyborg (Ghost in the Shell), an alien (Under the Skin) and the disembodied voice of an artificially intelligent virtual assistant (Her), but it’s offensive nevertheless to hear a cisgender white woman assert her unassailable right to play whomever (or whatever) she pleases. Or as Vanity Fair’s film critic K Austin Collins put it in a tweet: “you cant just go around likening ‘playing a tree’ to ‘playing an asian woman’ lmao come on”. Johansson’s remarks are taken from a conversation with the visual artist David Salle in which the pair discussed the relationship between political correctness and art. Though she doesn’t mention it directly, Johansson seems to be referring to the scrutiny she received in 2016 for her role as Major Motoko Kusanagi in Rupert Sanders’ Ghost in the Shell, based on the Japanese character from Masamune Shirow’s cult manga series of the same name. The actress was accused of whitewashing but seemed to shrug it off. Johansson was slated to reunite with Sanders on Rub & Tug, in which she was to play the trans man and massage parlour kingpin Dante “Tex” Gill; following the online backlash that surfaced in 2018, she pulled out of the project. “I feel like [political correctness is] a trend in my business and it needs to happen for various social reasons, yet there are times it does get uncomfortable when it affects the art because I feel art should be free of restrictions,” Johansson told As If. Her subsequent statement attempts to do some much-needed damage control, clarifying that she was making a point that “in an ideal world, any actor should be able to play anybody and art, in all forms, should be immune to political correctness”. (One has to ask why the Rub & Tug director Sanders hasn’t been called on to release a statement, too?) “I recognise that in reality, there is a widespread discrepancy amongst my industry that favours Caucasian, cisgendered actors and that not every actor has been given the same opportunities that I have been privileged to,” she insisted, pleading allyship. These kind of “hypothetical” comments are not only pointless, they’re actively harmful. We don’t live in a hypothetical world: we exist in a real one, with limited opportunities for actors with marginalised identities trying to make it in mainstream movies. When straight, cisgender stars such as Johansson, or Victor Polster in Lukhas Dhont’s Caméra d’Or-winning Girl, or Eddie Redmayne, who was nominated for an Oscar for his role in The Danish Girl, hoover up parts that could have been played by trans actors, it’s a middle finger to those with an actual stake in the material. The academic and film journalist Charlie Oughton, a trans man, told Sky News that “realistically, it’s more important to get those stories out there so more people understand what it is to be trans, than it is to just find somebody from exactly the right background to represent that, because at the moment there aren’t people”, voicing concern that a backlash might discourage studios from making films about marginalised identities at all. Indeed, Johansson’s statement cites a statistic from Glaad claiming that LGBTQ+ characters dropped 40% in 2017 from the previous year, with no representation of trans characters in any major studio release. Yet the argument that some representation is better than none suggests that mere awareness is sufficient political work. Or worse, that straight, white, cisgender Hollywood actors should be celebrated for aligning themselves with films that profit from identity politics without embodying them. When Johansson says she feels art should be free of restrictions, what it sounds like is that she should be free of restrictions. Such entitlement is galling and predictable, but it’s also gauche, showing a lack of self-awareness and media savvy. Celebrities don’t need to be woke to make good art, but it’s embarrassing to see them so comfortable taking up space that isn’t theirs. • Simran Hans is a film critic for the Observer