Theresa May has criticised Donald Trump’s “completely unacceptable” language towards four Democratic congresswomen, which has been condemned as racist, putting pressure on her likely successor, Boris Johnson, to speak out as well. May took the unusual step of commenting on US domestic politics after Trump made reference to the outspoken women, only one of whom is foreign-born, saying on Twitter that they should “go back and help fix” their “broken and crime-infested” countries. The president’s remarks were attacked as explicitly racist towards Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Ayanna Pressley, Rashida Tlaib and Ilhan Omar, who was born in Somalia. The speaker of the US House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi, denounced Trump’s “xenophobic comments meant to divide our nation”, while the four congresswomen accused him of trying to appeal to white nationalists. On 14 July Trump sent a series of tweets saying: "So interesting to see 'Progressive' Democrat Congresswomen, who originally came from countries whose governments are a complete and total catastrophe, the worst, most corrupt and inept anywhere in the world (if they even have a functioning government at all), now loudly and viciously telling the people of the United States, the greatest and most powerful Nation on earth, how our government is to be run. Why don’t they go back and help fix the totally broken and crime infested places from which they came. Then come back and show us how it is done. These places need your help badly, you can’t leave fast enough. I’m sure that Nancy Pelosi would be very happy to quickly work out free travel arrangements!" The US president did not name his targets, but the attack was directed at congresswomen Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York; Ayanna Pressley of Massachusetts; Rashida Tlaib of Michigan; and Ilhan Omar of Minnesota. Only Omar, who is from Somalia, was not born in America. Downing Street criticised Trump’s comments but stopped short of branding him a racist. “Her view is that the language which was used to refer to the women was completely unacceptable,” the prime minister’s official spokesman said. Trump was highly critical of May last week, saying she had made a “mess” of Brexit, following leaked diplomatic cables from the UK ambassador to Washington that described him as inept and insecure. Johnson, who Conservative members are expected to choose to succeed May, is keen to rebuild the relationship with the US after the serious diplomatic row. But Johnson and the foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt – his leadership rival – are facing calls to explicitly criticise Trump for racism and back up May’s comments. By late morning on Monday, each campaign remained silent on the issue, despite the outcry on both sides of the Atlantic, including claims that Trump had revealed himself to be a racist. Hunt was at a high-level meeting in Brussels to discuss the Iran crisis. He warned time was running out to save the nuclear deal, remarks that will be welcomed in the White House. Johnson’s team said nothing, but had briefed the day before that one of his first acts as prime minister would be to go to Washington to try to secure an outline free-trade deal with Trump. Johnson has already drawn criticism for failing to defend Sir Kim Darroch, the UK ambassador to Washington who resigned last week. Johnson has claimed he said nothing that should have been a factor in the ambassador’s decision to quit, but that is not an assessment shared in Whitehall or by Darroch. In the cables allegedly leaked to the Mail on Sunday, the UK’s outgoing ambassador to Washington, Sir Kim Darroch told his bosses in London that: Trump had condemned Darroch and sought to ostracise him in an attempt to punish the envoy and apparently to drive him from his job. The latest row about Trump’s remarks is a test case of how far the next prime minister will put what they regard as the national economic interest and the pursuit of the special relationship ahead of defending essential British values and principles. There is a fear that with Brexit imminent, an increasingly isolated UK will have to turn more towards a Trump-led administration in its search for key allies. May’s condemnation of Trump is a further sign the prime minister is willing to loosen the shackles in the final days of her premiership and say what she thinks. It is likely both leadership candidates will be forced to express a view on Trump’s remarks when they speak at a leadership hustings on Monday night. The Scottish Conservative leader, Ruth Davidson, said May was right and “both men vying to be her successor should say so”. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said the president’s comments were “not OK and diplomatic politeness should not stop us saying so, loudly and clearly”. Nadhim Zahawi, the MP for Stratford-on-Avon and a supporter of Johnson, said the UK should not interject into American politics, but described the language used as inappropriate. “It is not language I would use. I am condemning it,” he told the BBC. “It is domestic US policy. Ultimately, if we do this [interject], we will give Donald Trump the right to intervene in our politics any time he wants. That is not where we want to be. This is our greatest ally. The president of the US has to be someone with whom the prime minister can work, and if we are going to start behaving in this way and attack them all the time then they have every right to do the same back to us.”