Nick Kyrgios remains in line for a second-round blockbuster meeting with Rafael Nadal at Wimbledon, but only after coming through a volatile five-set battle with Jordan Thompson. It was a typically lively, dramatically inconsistent display from Kyrgios against his fellow Australian and former junior doubles partner. Kyrgios lost the fourth set to love, but rallied to win 7-6 (4), 3-6, 7-6 (10), 0-6, 6-1. Kyrgios fired down 23 aces, took a medical time-out and audibly swore countless times in three hours and 26 minutes of ebb and flow, eventually finding a way past Thompson in a match he had treated like an exhibition until tensions rose in the third set. Both players received code violations during the game, and both repeatedly complained of an overly talkative female fan courtside. Kyrgios then erupted after a line judge incorrectly called one of his serves as a fault. “Is he going to be fined? Why not? I’m playing for hundreds of thousands of dollars and he’s making mistakes like that,” Kyrgios fumed at the chair umpire. Turning to his coaches in the crowd, he said “they are idiots, fucking idiots”. The outburst seemed to spark Kyrgios into action. He won the game with successive aces, then took the third-set tie-break 10-8 on his eighth set point. The current world No 43 appeared to have wrestled back control after losing the second set, but he then won just five points in the fourth, gifting Thompson the set to love in 18 minutes – Kyrgios’s first “bagel” at a grand slam. “This was always going five,” Kyrgios muttered, slumped in his chair at a changeover. The former quarter-finalist regrouped to break Thompson in the fourth game of the deciding set before racing clear to win it 6-1. The result was perhaps harsh on Thompson, who won more points overall (160-151) and broke Kyrgios seven times while dropping serve on just three occasions. The 25-year-old remains winless in four visits to Wimbledon. Kyrgios is now set for a grudge match with Rafael Nadal, providing that the Spaniard defeats Japanese qualifier Yuichi Sugita later on Tuesday. Kyrgios infuriated Nadal with his underarm antics during a win over the 18-time grand slam champion in Acapulco earlier this year. The Australian then hit back at Nadal’s claims that he lacked respect for his rivals, branding Nadal “super salty” and his uncle Toni Nadal “an idiot”, while also attacking “cringeworthy” Novak Djokovic during an explosive podcast in May. No 25 seed Alex de Minaur has charged into the second round, brushing aside former French Open semi-finalist Marco Cecchinato in straight sets. In a rematch of last year’s opening round clash, de Minaur once again prevailed against the Italian to set up a second-round clash with USA’s Steve Johnson. But unlike the four-set tussle of 12 months ago, this was a largely dominant display from the Australian No 1. The 20-year-old won the first nine games of the match on his way to a 6-0 6-4 7-6 (7-5) triumph.