Jalil Dabit At the age of 12 I started my mornings with a strong coffee at my father’s restaurant. It was decided that if I was old enough to open the place up at 5am, I was old enough to drink with him. And so I did. Back in 1942, my grandfather founded our traditional Arabic eatery in Ramla, the small town we call home, nestled between Tel Aviv and Jerusalem. As he grew old, my father took over. I helped him for four years before finally being invited into the kitchen at 16. I spent my adolescence cleaning, carrying water and prepping. One day my dad said: “Jalil, come here, I will teach you how to make hummus.” Food wasn’t just our livelihood, though, it was a way of bringing people together. Every year we’d hold a party for Arabs and Israelis at a nearby kibbutz called Gezer. Muslims, Christians, Jews were all invited to talk, to eat and to dance. We’d bring trays of salads, meats and stuffed vegetables. My father was a man of food and a man of peace – the two most precious gifts that he gave to me. We have shown that we can work together. There's no better way to do that than through food My parents had sent me to a Jewish public school – it was better than the Arab one and they wanted the best for me. I was the only Arab pupil. I remained proud of my identity. I never changed my name, or hid my connection to my community. I didn’t agree with their politics, but they were still people. I moved to Berlin four years ago and wanted to open a restaurant. I eat a lot of hummus, and everywhere I tried it I thought I could do it so much better. Sadly, it just wasn’t quite coming together. And then I met Oz. We had a shared vision, even though his background is so different to mine. We began importing tahini to sell to retailers and at markets, the same product my father sold in Israel and Palestine. When we told people that I was Palestinian and Oz was Israeli, their eyes lit up: “Yes,” they’d say, “let’s do it.” Then I knew we could open a restaurant. Israelis and Palestinians in Germany have more in common than what divides them. We have coffee, hospitality, hummus – we can both be treated as foreign or the “other”. At home, division defines our relationships, but here? It’s about what we share. At our restaurant Kanaan, we have showed Berliners that Oz and I could work together – a gay Israeli and a straight Palestinian, with a staff of migrants, LGBTQ+ people and locals. If we can do it, why can’t everyone else? There’s no better way to do that than through food. Oz Ben DavidThe food I bring to Kanaan is the food I grew up with; flavours that bring back memories of my childhood in Israel. My teenage years were spent in Ariel, an Israeli settlement 20km into the West Bank, at the heart of the Israeli occupation. At night we patrolled the village, then in its chaotic early years. Stones were thrown as we passed Palestinians who’d lit fires in protest. I remember being on a bus aged 16 and demanding a Palestinian man show me – a child – his ID, and starting a fight with him because he wouldn’t. You’ve no idea how much I regret it now. I joined the army at 18. The life I built up didn’t feel like my own – it was just what my parents wanted. After my first gay experience in Ibiza I realised I didn’t want to spend my life armed, traversing the tunnels around Gaza. Food is a history book and we want to write a joint one Today I can’t connect to my early life much through politics or shared values, so I’m doing it through food. My father’s family are Romanian, my mother’s Moroccan – it made for an interesting combination of couscous and stuffed cabbages at Shabbat meals. That’s the magic of the cuisine I know – it’s the coming together of the unexpected. We are proud to have such a mix of people working here: Syrian, Kurdish, Turkish, Iranian, Iraqi and Israeli, Germans, Italians, and others from Sudan, Eritrea and Chad. And our customers seem to like it, too – business is good. People come for good food, but they stay for the open atmosphere and the welcoming experience. Jalil and I talk politics, although it very rarely gets heated. We agree on the fundamentals: Israel has a right to be a country, Palestine should be an independent state afforded the chance to build its own future and legacy, too. We believe that women should be leading the pursuit of peace in the region. Our place is called Kanaan because that’s what the land was called before it became Israel and Palestine. In those days we were all under one tent: one family. That approach informs all we do here. When we started out, I wanted to design dishes the Israeli way; for Jalil it was Palestinian. But we began to share our secrets: how my grandmother made hummus, his shakshuka. We realised it wasn’t right for us to make a dish which would make the Israeli or Palestinian side happy. Instead, we had to find a way that could keep both his and my parents pleased if they sat down to eat. Food is a history book, and we want to write a joint one.kanaan-berlin.de Maria Loucaidou My mother was 15 when she became a refugee. War forced her parents to leave their home in the north of the island. It was 1974 when Turkey invaded Cyprus, and they’ve occupied the north ever since. I was born in the south, so grew up hearing stories of the life she had before displacement. My mother would cry as she told us about her early years: her village, the smell of the orange trees as they bloomed, how the family all cooked together. At home, what we ate became a physical connection to a time before the conflict. I had nightmares about Turkish Cypriots – that they would come and take over the island. I was traumatised. Then the border opened in 2003. My mother and I travelled north together for the first time. When we found my grandmother’s old house, strangers opened the door. We sat with them. It was the first time I met a Turkish Cypriot – they drank the same coffee, had similar complexions and similarly shaped noses. I couldn’t believe they were just like us. We first bonded over a love of food Five years ago I quit my job as an architect and came to work at the Home Café in the United Nations-controlled buffer zone in Nicosia, which separates north and south. I started out as a barista, but now I run the kitchen. I got to know Feray quickly when we began working together – our café is small, and the kitchen smaller. We now manage the café as a team and we often cook together. She is the first Turkish Cypriot I have got to know well and it turns out our cultures have so much in common, although it was a mutual love of food we first bonded over. We cook traditional food – dolma, souvla, kolokasi – but I always get Feray’s opinion on flavours. Both Turkish and Greek Cypriots come into the café, so I try to satisfy both tastes. She’ll tell me when to put more sumac into a dish, because us Greeks don’t use it, or more chilli. Not long ago Feray’s grandmother sent my parents a traditional Turkish dish to try across the border. There were tears when our families spoke on the phone as they reminisced about a more peaceful time. Sometimes customers come in and ask for a Turkish coffee, others ask for the Greek version. Feray and I always laugh and tell them they’re exactly the same thing, and we call it Cypriot coffee here. Feray Yalcuk You could say my daily commute to work is quite out of the ordinary. I used to have to show my ID to the police to be allowed across the border and into the buffer zone, but they know me now and just wave me through. There’s not much here, beside the small hotel opposite, now home to United Nations peacekeepers. And then there’s our café – being in no man’s land sort of makes it a place for everybody. Both my parents were born in the south of the island, but left during the war, aged four and six, to head north. Just like Maria, once the border opened our family went to see their old home. We, too, sat and drank coffee with the strangers who’d replaced us. It was less traumatic for me and for my parents. They were too young to remember much. Before Maria I’d never had a close relationship with a Greek Cypriot. We might speak a different language, but our experiences are almost identical. It’s the same with food – it’s important for all Cypriots. We plan our day according to our meals – we never go for drinks with friends, but to eat. Being in no man’s land makes our café a place for everyone When we were children, Greek Cypriots were presented to us as monsters. Even if I’d wanted to meet young people from their side it would have been impossible – we spoke different languages and the border may have been open, but children needed special permission to go over alone. Maria is the first Greek Cypriot I’ve come to know well. We’ve proved to ourselves that the tensions we may have once felt do not need to exist. From time to time we speak about politics, although that can feel awkward. We’ve discussed the occupation and how it impacted Maria’s family, but we’re looking to the future. Cyprus will unite one day, but not because leaders signed a piece of paper. It’ll be communities who build those bridges – that’s our focus. Turkish, Greek and English are all spoken in the café – it means anyone who steps in can know they’ll be understood and, where possible, we use names for dishes that all three languages have in common, like mujaddara, a staple of lentils and rice. Maria and I are a team – she’s taught me what that really means. When she’s making chicken souvlaki I make the cacik (a dish of yogurt, cucumber, dry mint, garlic and olive oil) to go alongside. Sometimes, visitors walking by ask whether they’re in Turkey or Greece. “We’re in Cyprus,” I’ll tell them, “in the buffer zone – neither south nor north.” It’s funny, people still think this island belongs to Greece or Turkey. But it doesn’t. It belongs to us.home4cooperation.info Ruben Dario Romero Diaz Dulce Maria was nervous and shy when she first walked into the kitchen, now almost five years ago. She knew that I knew about her time as a member of the Farc militia, a communist guerilla. She knew that I had once served as a Colombian soldier, with the scars to prove it. She and I had been at war. On that first day I told her everything was forgiven, that I was ready for a new start for us both, one where cooking together was our future, and the past was left in the past. She wanted the same. The conflict in Colombia had been raging since the 1960s, between the government, paramilitaries, criminal gangs and guerrillas. The story is complicated. The Farc and other revolutionary groups claimed to be fighting for the rights of ordinary citizens; the government said it was upholding the rule of law. Millions were displaced. If you were fighting there were no friendships across enemy lines. That went without saying. My mother died giving birth to my brother at home when I was four years old. There were guerrillas outside the house, so she couldn’t get to the hospital. We lived in fear all the time. Colombians have this in common: you can reach us through our stomachs My grandmother fed us with love – that’s the part of cooking I learned from her. At 18 I joined the Colombian army for my own safety. Two years later an explosion in a minefield planted by a guerrilla group left me without a leg, and gravely injured. It forced me to change my path. From a young age, I wanted to be a cook. That was my dream, but I never had the opportunity. I started here at El Cielo in Medellín, Colombia, under the leadership of our head chef and founder, Juan Manuel Barrientos Valencia. Our restaurant is true fine dining – one of the best in Latin America. In our kitchen, ex-military personnel are trained and helped to readjust to civilian life. I had to learn to stand for nine hours on my prosthetic leg. After a while it was decided that ex-Farc members would be invited to train, too, in a reconciliation effort. Some colleagues thought I might find that uncomfortable, but I was ready to make a contribution to peace in Colombia. That’s what I needed to show Dulce Maria on her first day and it formed the basis of our strong relationship, which mostly centres on the kitchen, but you come to know someone’s vulnerabilities. I respect her, she has both a strong heart and strong mind. She’s away training in Spain at the moment, and I miss her presence. When we were young we both had dreams and goals, then war came and stole them from us. This war was a conflict where we all are the victims. There’s something else we Colombians all have in common though: you can reach us via our stomachs. Dulce Maria When I arrived for my first day of work I was petrified. I knew I’d be working in the kitchen alongside people from different sides of the conflict. Romero had been mentioned to me in advance – his injury would be obvious, because he’d lost his leg at the hands of the paramilitaries I fought with. I felt a chill across my body when we were introduced. I didn’t know if I was capable of leaving everything behind. We spoke that day. I told him I was scared, and that I used to be part of the Farc, the people responsible for his disability. There have been more than 10,000 victims of mines since the fighting started. I told him I was sorry. He explained that I should not worry, that he had forgiven from his heart a long time ago and I could count on him as a colleague. I was five years old when the guerrillas killed my dad, even though one of my uncles was a guerrilla chief. I was orphaned and moved to live at a finca – a ranch full of people who worked in the guerrilla army. I was only a kid, and it was drilled into me that I should fight for them – that the Colombian military and state was the enemy. Food is healing our old divisions It’s hard to acknowledge this, but I was raped at 14 at the finca. My sister was, too; she was only seven. Soon afterwards I moved away, found a boyfriend and had three children. We separated when I was 27, and so I joined the guerrillas full time. I was active for four-and-a-half years When I first left the Farc, finding work was impossible. I couldn’t afford to feed my children. I arrived for my interview at El Cielo with no experience in a professional kitchen. I was hired the same day – and my life changed forever. Five years have passed, and now I’m training in Spain. It can sometimes be lonely here. Two of my children are living with my sister, the older three with their father. When I feel I can’t go on because I miss my kids I call Romero; he reminds me why I’m doing it – for them – and gives me courage and hope. Even now, talking about Romero and what happened to him pains me. He made me understand the conflict on a human level. Now he is like a brother to me: we share a blood bond. He’s also very tidy and I’m very strict when it comes to cleanliness in the kitchen, so we make a good team. Before I left for Spain we worked night shifts together. After service we’d clean, get changed, and walk to the Metro station to head home. I became his walking stick – he held my shoulder for balance – and I would tear up, it felt like such a powerful symbol. Once, I had a gun in my hand; now I have food, which can heal our divisions. Romero and I together show how that can be done.elcielorestaurant.com