Sanditon, abandoned unfinished in March 1817, four months before Jane Austen died, is set in a fictional fishing village on the Sussex coast. Here the property speculators Mr Parker and Lady Denham plan an ambitious modern development to rival its longer established neighbours at Brighton, Eastbourne and Worthing. This was not the first time Austen had imagined characters by the sea. Persuasion, finished only months before Sanditon was begun, is set in part in Lyme Regis on the Dorset coast. And in her fourth novel, Emma, fretful Mr Woodhouse disputes with his elder daughter Isabella the pros and cons of two resorts for health and sea bathing – South End, on the Thames estuary, and Cromer, in Norfolk – their conversation only serving to make Emma, who has never seen the sea, “envious and miserable”. In the same novel, the seaside, in the shape of Weymouth, provides the clues (overlooked by the landlocked Emma) to the relationship between Jane Fairfax and Frank Churchill. But Sanditon was Austen’s only truly seaside novel, her only novel to absorb into its structure something of what the seaside has come to represent in later modern fiction – in, for example, Kate Chopin’s The Awakening (1899), Virginia Woolf’s To the Lighthouse (1927), Penelope Fitzgerald’s The Bookshop (1978), John Banville’s The Sea (2005), Ian McEwan’s On Chesil Beach (2007) and Sarah Perry’s The Essex Serpent (2016). Seaside novels are not a single type; nor are they necessarily beach reading. What they share is an understanding of the sea and shore as a place of flux. Where land dissolves into sea, where romantic scenery is the consequence of landslips and cataclysm, the seaside is a space between, a place of transformation and transcendence — especially of human reality in the face of nature’s great unaccountability. Here the mind responds to limitless views of sea and sky, intimating new beginnings or something darker: dissolution and death. Either way, as the term “sea change” suggests, the effect is powerful and mysterious. Throughout the 18th century, seaside resorts had sprung up along England’s coastline, from Blackpool and Scarborough to Brighton, to take advantage of the fashion for salt-water bathing. As William Cowper, Austen’s favourite poet, put it in “Retirement” (1782): “All impatient of dry land, agree / With one consent to rush into the sea”. England’s south coast resorts remained fashionable throughout the long years of the Napoleonic war. Their attractions (and dangers) for giddy teenagers such as Pride and Prejudice’s Lydia Bennet, who follows the militia to Brighton, were only enhanced by the presence of army garrisons and scarlet-coated officers. From Brighton, Lydia elopes with George Wickham, who not long before, on a summer visit to Ramsgate, had almost succeeded in seducing 15-year-old Georgiana Darcy. In Persuasion, the seaside again proves dangerous when Louisa Musgrove’s foolish leap from the Cobb at Lyme Regis leaves her badly concussed. Not only perilous but exhilarating, the seaside elicits rare moments of sensuous delight from a writer who does not easily let down her guard. A tourist-brochure tribute to Lyme and its neighbour Charmouth intrudes strangely into Persuasion: Its sweet retired bay, backed by dark cliffs, where fragments of low rock among the sands make it the happiest spot for watching the flow of the tide, for sitting in unwearied contemplation … its green chasms between romantic rocks, where the scattered forest trees and orchards of luxuriant growth declare that many a generation must have passed away since the first partial falling of the cliff prepared the ground for such a state. At Lyme in September 1804, Austen declared the “Bathing … so delightful … I believe I staid in rather too long”; she also enjoyed holidays at nearby Dawlish and Sidmouth. She may even have experienced her own seaside romance, according to a family rumour – in one version of events, this was with a nameless young man she met in the summer of 1801; in another, he was a clergyman who promised to return but soon died. In Persuasion the geological upheavals of Dorset’s Jurassic coast echo Anne Elliot’s emotional reawakening after eight empty years. But the seaside world of Sanditon is different from that depicted in Austen’s earlier fiction. Reviewing the novel on its publication in 1925, EM Forster noted its “queer taste … which is not easily defined: a double-flavoured taste – half topography, half romance”. This is not a bad description of the uncertain ground of seaside novels, where the sea scours the land, identity is challenged, relationships falter, houses decay and narrative crumbles. In these stories, the conventions of realism are strained. “Hitherto,” Forster commented, “the face of the earth” was for Austen merely “a site for shrubberies and strawberry beds”; but now “another configuration has been given to the earth … Sanditon gives out an atmosphere.” Austen’s typical country village implied some-thing permanent and known, its families with their regular routines thrown into temporary excitement by the appearance of strangers: the cynical urbanite Crawfords in Mansfield Park; the metrosexual Frank Churchill in Emma. Sanditon turns everything inside out; visitors, drifting there for one reason or another, outnumber residents. Mr Parker has abandoned his old house and “the real village of Sanditon”, in pursuit of a vision. On a hilltop looking out to sea, the narrator tells us, “the Modern began”. In her final work Austen just as decisively sets the traditional village behind her for the half-built development with its empty amenities marching close to the cliff edge. The social scene has widened, dominated by a range of idiosyncratic fantasists: Mr Parker’s sisters, Susan and Diana, meddlesome do-gooders who self-medicate for non-existent illnesses; Sir Edward Denham, a would-be seducer who turns for lifestyle advice to the antiheroes of pulp fiction. Sir Edward has amassed a whole lexicon of hard words in his “literary alembic” – “anti-puerile”, “indomptible”, “coruscations of talent” – which he lobs into conversation to the confusion of his listeners. Diana’s officious acts of charity inspire stylistic insurgency in a narrator striving to keep pace with her creation: she “was now regaling in the delight of opening the first trenches of an acquaintance”. Trapped inside their new-built schemes and bizarre idiolects, they are incapable of normal communication. This is a society that has lost its social glue. It is, after all, the town built on sand. Sanditon is a study in fragments of a society in fragments Sanditon is a study in fragments of a society in fragments. Does it represent Austen’s verdict on England in 1817? After decades of war, has England lost its moorings? Speculation is the watchword for the resort’s visitors and inhabitants alike: they gamble on land, investments, health, love. Charlotte Heywood, the reader’s eyes and ears, is also a speculator, struggling to process a world she witnesses but never really enters. A young Miss Marple, her detachment, along with the oblique angle of vision that persists through the novel, deepens its air of mystery. After 12 chapters, characters and events have assumed no predictive shape: no obvious heroine, no hero, no marriage plot. The wide panoramas across the South Downs, the seascapes and the sudden mist that descends, obscuring people and things, conspire to make us doubt what is real, what matters. Attempting (and failing) to continue the novel many years after her aunt’s death, Austen’s niece, Anna Lefroy, created sinister backstories for its characters. More recently, in A Cure for All Diseases (2008), Reginald Hill relocated characters and events to Sandytown, Yorkshire, “Home of the Healthy Holiday”. His title, a quotation from Sir Thomas Browne’s Religio Medici (1643) – “We all labour against our own cure, for death is the cure of all diseases” – aptly captures the defiant energy that sparks from Austen’s last pages. Looking out to sea in 1817, Austen, the great realist, appears to question the central impulse of her fiction-making. In Sanditon, the pattern of everyday life is distorted and rearranged. With its cliffs and downs and immense skies, its company of misfits and idlers, and its air of restless anxiety, Sanditon might just be the first English seaside novel Kathryn Sutherland is editor of the Oxford World’s Classics edition of Sanditon (OUP, £4.99). ITV’s adaptation of Sanditon airs this autumn.