‘The perception of the far right in this country is outdated,” says Alan Harris, the writer of a provocative new drama, The Left Behind. “We think of skinheads and National Front marches. But things have changed – especially in terms of the online influence.” The phrase “far right” tends to conjure up visions of organised groups: Britain First in the UK, the marchers on Charlottesville in the US. Yet the reality can be far more diffuse. Think of the terrorist attack by Darren Osborne on the Finsbury Park mosque, or the shootings in Christchurch. They were committed by people whose relationship with the far right was forged almost exclusively online. Indeed, Osborne was said to have been radicalised in just three weeks, before he rammed a van into the London mosque, killing one and injuring at least nine more. It is this subset of the far right that is explored in The Left Behind, which launches today on the BBC. Created by the team behind the Bafta-winning dramas Murdered by My Father and Killed by My Debt, The Left Behind follows the descent of a young working-class man into extremist ideology. Gethin (played by rising Welsh actor Sion Daniel Young) isn’t marching around town squares in crusader garb, but becomes sympathetic to the same worldview – a situation that culminates in him carrying out a horrifying hate crime. The rise of far-right activity in the UK is staggering, with a 36% increase in the number of extremists referred to the government’s counter-terrorism programme Prevent in 2018. With this surge has come increased public awareness, yet for all the column inches and documentaries dedicated to the issue, the team behind The Left Behind felt little was being done to understand what is actually causing it. “As a country, we tend to either demonise this problem or ignore it,” Harris says. They sought to create a drama that dug into the roots of far-right extremism, using literature from Hope Not Hate and speaking to Prevent consultants and academics. They soon found that much of the far-right activity was concentrated in the “left-behind” areas – post-industrial towns and cities suffering the sting of austerity and income inequality. “There aren’t that many English Defence League or Football Lads Alliance groups or far-right sympathisers in general in Hampstead or Kingston upon Thames,” the film’s director, Joseph Bullman, notes. One stat, taken from Loud and Proud, the social scientist Hilary Pilkington’s book about the EDL, stood out: three-quarters of the members she spoke to were either out of work or working in the gig economy. Gethin is very much in that mould. He works at a chicken shop in an unnamed south Wales town on a zero-hours contract, and lives with his sister, her partner and their child. (His mother is dead and his father is homeless.) Affordable accommodation is at a premium, and Gethin and his sister bristle when a Muslim family is housed ahead of them. Gethin gets close to their daughter, yet as his situation worsens his anti-immigrant sentiment grows, fuelled by social media posts full of spurious “facts” and violent language. Things come to a head when Gethin and his friends, wearing pig masks, carry out an Islamophobic attack on his new neighbour’s halal butcher shop. Then things get darker still … “This is a historical narrative about working-class people – that when top-down pressure comes at them, they have nowhere to turn but each other,” says Lisa McKenzie, a sociologist focusing on class inequality. To McKenzie, the film conveys the “absolute hopelessness” of life at the sharp end of austerity Britain, but she is concerned that its somewhat sympathetic outlook towards Gethin’s situation will anger some. “We’ve lost context and nuance. People will pick sides,” she says. Are the creators similarly concerned? Certainly Gethin is at times almost a likeable figure, compassionate towards his family and quietly charismatic. Yet when he does turn fully towards extremism it feels unequivocal: there is a desensitised look in his eyes when he commits his final, fateful act. “You’ve got to write characters you don’t agree with sometimes but you do care about,” Harris says. “And to get an effective drama across, these can’t be two-dimensional, easily dismissed characters. If we dismiss it, we’re not heading towards any kind of understanding.” While the creators are clear that Gethin’s actions cannot be excused, they believe the backdrop of poverty and joblessness should not be treated as incidental. (A government spokesperson told BBC News that there is “no single socio-demographic profile of a terrorist in the UK”, and that a number of pathways could lead to involvement in extremism.) “Not everyone [struggling with poverty] goes out and does something extremist,” says Harris. “Many people have been affected by what might be called globalisation, but when you break it down relates to issues around housing and job insecurity. I think people want answers – and at the moment, the status quo isn’t providing answers. So people with those problems look for answers elsewhere.” “It’s really clear they have grievances they’ve misinterpreted the causes of, but the grievances are real,” adds Bullman, who says the situation is exacerbated by the exclusion of working-class voices from the political conversation. “I don’t think it’s possible for nice liberal people to go on saying they don’t want to hear about these people because they don’t share their values. Because if we go on doing that, the cleavages and divides in our society are going to deepen.” A scene at the centre of the film pointedly gets at this sense of political alienation. At a residents’ meeting, a local councillor proudly announces a new development with a 30% target for social housing. It soon becomes clear, though, that the commitment might not be as cast-iron as it first seemed. As the councillor spins and blurts out soundbites, her constituents get angrier and angrier. The scene was largely cast with actors from backgrounds similar to the characters on screen and whose indignation Bullman says was authentic. “You saw the anger that hasn’t found an expression enough on our screens,” Bullman says. Bullman believes TV has to help quell this anger and bridge these divides. “Working-class people are still about half the population and don’t get represented on our screens,” he says. “There are some incredibly honourable and brilliant exceptions to that, but by and large they’re not.” One “beacon” in this regard, he says, has been BBC Three, which “keeps commissioning films about what’s happening in the country that don’t make it on to other channels”. He hopes The Left Behind continues that trend. “There isn’t a scene in it that doesn’t reflect what’s happening to people in the country.” • The Left Behind is on BBC Three now and on BBC One on Wednesday at 10.35pm.