It’s Saturday morning at Nikki Hunter-Pike’s home. While she prepares breakfast, and her husband Daniel plays with their daughters Brooke and Harper, her son Chase is engrossed in sending an email to his beloved stepgrandfather, “Pops”, his face a study in intense concentration. Nine-year-old Chase, who has the neurological condition cerebral palsy, cannot walk, talk, feed himself or pick up a pen. Yet, thanks to technology that’s widely available, he can communicate, learn and explore the online world from his family’s home in Northfleet, Kent. On his computer, “Chase uses the on-screen keyboard (OSK) tool, because he doesn’t have the fine motor skills to type on a keyboard,” says Nikki. Running on Windows 10, “it displays a visual keyboard with all the standard keys. Using a joystick that he can control with just his thumb, once he switches on the OSK, he can do everything from browse the internet to search for videos on YouTube and write emails. We introduced him to it when he was six and it really has been life-changing for him. “Because he can’t speak or type messages on a phone, being able to write emails to his friends and close family is so important to him – it helps him feel connected. “The keyboard also has a text prediction function, which suggests words for him as he types. It makes it quicker for him, and, because he has learning difficulties too, it helps him with his spelling. “When I see him on his computer, and how its technology empowers him, it fills me with confidence that as he grows up he’ll be able to lead a fulfilling, independent life. That is all I’ve ever wanted for him.” Nikki’s hopes for her son are mirrored by Microsoft’s mission to empower every person through building inclusivity into technology, such as the Windows 10 operating system, which supports the OSK and its Office 365 suite. After a normal, healthy pregnancy, Nikki says she was devastated when Chase was born with brain damage, having been deprived of oxygen during her labour. “The hardest part was the uncertainty. No one knew how severe his level of disability would be, and for the first few years of his life it felt like I was living in limbo watching and waiting to see what milestones he would reach, or not,” says Nikki. “He was diagnosed with cerebral palsy when he was nine months old, but it wasn’t until he was around three that the full extent of his disability was clear. He’s never spoken, he can’t stand unaided, and he suffers from almost constant involuntary movements of his limbs. His reading ability is closer to that of a five-year-old. He’s also incredibly loving, with a wonderful sense of humour and a very determined personality.” While Chase uses an electric wheelchair and requires round-the-clock care, Nikki says technology gives him the independence he craves. “He’s well aware his siblings and other children don’t need the same help he does. But when he’s on his computer, he feels like any other nine-year-old, because he’s in control and he doesn’t need any assistance,” says Nikki. “That means so much to him and it’s vital for his self-confidence. “I see how he puffs up with pride when he shows his little sisters, who are five and three, something he’s discovered online – his current obsession is looking at locations around the world on Google Maps. It gives him the chance to be the big brother and take the lead.” A keen gamer too, Chase uses his Microsoft adaptive controller to access his Xbox console. ‘Sometimes it’s just nice to stay at home and have a relaxed afternoon gaming and cuddling up on the sofa’; (above) Chase uses the OSK, powered by Windows 10, on his HP 14” Silver laptop “We all game together as a family. It can be stressful going out because of the challenges Chase can face with poor disability access and toilet facilities. Sometimes it’s just nice to stay at home and have a relaxed afternoon gaming and cuddling up on the sofa.” Summing up how much the technology means to her son, Nikki says: “It’s no exaggeration to say Chase’s computer is his window to the world. I can’t imagine his life without it and I’m thankful he was born at a time when technology like this exists. “It’s so important to him and, thanks to its emphasis on inclusivity, it’s the one part of his life in which he can be completely independent.” Whether you’re looking to upgrade your current device, or investing for the first time, John Lewis & Partners have the latest range of Windows laptops whatever your need. Speak to a partner in-store to find out more