Andy Murray has confirmed he will play mixed doubles at Wimbledon with Serena Williams. Entries for the draw close at 11am on Wednesday and after their teams spoke again Tuesday evening, they agreed to put together what will be the most interesting partnership at the tournament: the two-time Wimbledon champion and the woman he regards as “the greatest player of all time”. Earlier, Williams had kept the door open, telling reporters: “If you guys really want it, then maybe I’ll do it.” Murray, who is back playing doubles six months after hip resurfacing surgery, is playing with Pierre-Hugues Herbert of France in the men’s doubles. The two-time Wimbledon champion said on Monday that he planned to play mixed doubles and that he was 90% sure of who his partner will be. Williams, herself recovering from an injury to her right knee, said she would see how it reacts, having won her first-round match in the singles on Tues. “I’m just going to see how I feel today, then go from there.” Williams said there was no question that Murray would be a good partner. “We’re a lot alike on the court, I’ve always liked that about him,” she said. “His work ethic is honestly off the charts. To do what he’s done in an era where there’s so many other great male tennis players, so much competition, to rise above it, not many people have done it. He’s actually one of the few. “There’s so many things to be admired. Above all, he really stands out, he really speaks up about women’s issues no matter what. You can tell he has a really strong woman in his life. I think above all that is just fantastic.” Williams had to work harder than expected before advancing to the second round, eventually seeing off the world No 161 Giulia Gatto-Monticone from Italy 6-2, 7-5. The seven-times champion, who last won the title here in 2016, led 5-3 in the second set but had to fight more in the second to get the better of the Italian qualifier. “Honestly, it’s the best I’ve felt since February. I’m feeling good that I can actually walk,” Williams said. “I haven’t played many matches this year.” She will play either Czech Kristyna Pliskova or Kaja Juvan of Slovakia in the second round.