Downing Street has indicated it could order an inquiry into anonymous warnings leaked to the media that claimed Jeremy Corbyn could be too mentally and physically frail to function as prime minister. Labour has already demanded an independent investigation into claims made in the Times on Saturday, which said senior civil servants had discussed their worries about what might happen if the Labour leader became prime minister. The report cited anonymous senior civil servants who warned that they were concerned about Corbyn being put into Downing Street after an election as he seemed to lack a firm grasp of issues and was being “propped up” by his advisers. On Sunday, Labour’s Jon Trickett, the shadow minister for the Cabinet Office, wrote to Mark Sedwill, the cabinet secretary and head of the civil service, saying that the comments amounted to a “totally unwarranted and indeed unconstitutional political intervention, with disturbing implications for our democratic system”. Asked about the issue, Theresa May’s spokesman said: “Impartiality is one of the fundamental values of the civil service, and underpins its ability to effectively serve the government of the day. “It would clearly be inappropriate and unacceptable for comments of this sort to have been made or briefed to the press. The cabinet secretary will be writing to the leader of the opposition shortly.” Asked if this meant there would be an inquiry, he added: “I don’t think you’d expect me to divulge the contents of that letter in advance of it being sent.” Any news on an inquiry would come “shortly”, he said. Corbyn has also called for an investigation, saying it was “very concerning” for officials to brief against an elected politician. One of the unnamed senior civil servants was quoted as telling the Times: “There is a real worry that the Labour leader isn’t up to the job physically or mentally but is being propped up by those around him. There’s growing concern that he’s too frail and is losing his memory. He’s not in charge of his own party.” In his letter to Sedwill, Trickett wrote: “Discussion of these matters, based on false assumptions, should not be taking place. Worse, it is without precedent in my experience that any high-level discussion about senior politicians, let alone the leader of the opposition, should be shared with a newspaper. Sir Mark Sedwill became Britain’s most powerful civil servant in autumn 2018, after it became clear that predecessor Sir Jeremy Heywood was terminally ill. He took the job without having to go through a formal interview process. Already the country’s national security adviser, he had been deputising for Heywood and, having worked with Theresa May for several years, the 54-year-old was someone May felt she could trust. Unlike all but one of his predecessors, Sedwill had never worked at the Treasury, although he holds a masters in economics from Oxford. “Mine is an unusual background for cabinet secretary, having spent much of my career overseas in security and international roles,” he said recently.Sedwill rose up through the Diplomatic Service, becoming Britain’s ambassador to Afghanistan in 2009 and Nato’s representative in the conflict-ridden country a year later. There were also spells in the Home Office before he became permanent secretary there at what was May’s department in 2013. Ministerial advisers say his background means he has little patience for leaks, currently running at epidemic rates amid the constant rowing about Brexit. “He just doesn’t understand why anybody would leak, whereas Heywood would see it as an occasional occupational hazard,” one said.Some even believe Sedwill has been looking for the opportunity to prosecute a leaker, with regular cabinet papers marked secret so they would be covered under the Official Secrets Act, meaning that any leaks could potentially be a criminal offence.The sharply worded letter he sent to the senior ministers who sit on the National Security Council on 25 April 2019 made clear that immediate cooperation with the forthcoming inquiry was expected. As a result of his investigations, Gavin Williamson was sacked as defence secretary. Dan Sabbagh, Defence and security editor “I must now formally say to you that it is hard to avoid the conclusion that this has been a totally unwarranted and indeed unconstitutional political intervention with disturbing implications for our democratic system. “There clearly needs to be an investigation into what appears to have been a breach of civil service neutrality, independent of the Cabinet Office, in order to avoid any real or apparent conflicts of interest.”