Now that the election has been won, suddenly employer groups and the government are talking up the need for industrial relations “reform”. It is a push that, inevitably, is for more flexibility. But as the latest annual data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics on labour force participation, mobility and job search reveals, this increased flexibility is a major driver of the current historically high levels of underemployment and the associated low wages growth. One of the things that is often forgotten amid the monthly unemployment rates is that, for the most part, people who are in work stay in work, and also mostly stay working at the same place. In the 12 months to February this year, fewer than 10% of all people employed changed employers – well below the record highs of the late 1980s, early 1990s: Not only are more of us staying with our current employers, we are staying with them for longer. In the past 12 months, 45% of employees had been with the same employer for more than five years. While that is a slight fall from 2016, it remains well above the levels of 20 or 30 years ago: A big reason for this is that, since the 1980s and 1990s, industrial relations laws have become more “flexible” – with a much greater ability for employers to cut back on hours rather than lay off workers. So even when times are tough, people are more likely to stay employed but on fewer hours; compared with in the past when they would have been more likely to be retrenched. But with this flexibility has also come a much greater incidence of part-time work and underemployment. The increase in underemployment, however, is not because full-time workers are having their hours cut back but that part-time work as a whole has become more common. Work that was once done full-time is now on a part-time basis – and creates a much more “flexible” situation. But one that leaves workers desperate for more hours. A common misconception is that the rise in underemployment since the GFC has been due to full-time worker hours being cut. In reality fewer than 1% of full-time workers are underemployed – roughly around where it has been since 1980. The big driver of underemployment is the growth of part-time work. In 1993 a record 28.1% of all part-time workers were underemployed compared with 25.5% in 2019. But in 1993 those underemployed workers made up just 6.6% of all employed, whereas now they account for 8%: The reason is, in 1993 23% of all employed worked part-time, compared with 32% now. More part-time workers equals more underemployed. But this does not mean it is a meaningless issue, because since the GFC not only has part-time work been growing, so too has the underemployment of part-time workers: In 2007, 20% of men and 14% of women part-time workers were underemployed – now it is 31% and 23% respectively. Surprisingly fewer underemployed part-time workers than in the past are now hoping to go full-time, however they still remain a sizeable proportion of workers. Just under two-thirds of underemployed men were after full-time work and 49% of women: This suggests that the real remedy to underemployment is full-time work, and yet we are today in an industrial relations environment where the push from employers remains for ever-greater flexibility which inevitably leads to more part-time work. It is, however, not the only issue of labour force participation. The data shows that while there are around 1.1 million underemployed workers, there are 1.05 million people who are marginally attached to the workforce – people who are not actively looking for work but who would be able to work in the next four weeks. And yet, the reasons why they are not actively looking for work very much depend on their gender. Over a third of marginally attached men were attending some form of education; whereas the biggest activity for women was caring for children – something done by 30% of them. The activity of childcare, home duties and caring for another person with an illness or disability accounted for 56% of the work done by women marginally attached to the labour force, compared with just 16% of men: There has been actually little change in the percentage of women and men not in the labour force due to caring for children over the past 15 years: It highlights the difficulties of industrial relations policy. Greater flexibility, combined with more affordable childcare, enables more women to enter the workforce, but with greater flexibility and the incidence of part-time work comes the increase in underemployment. The issue of course is that policy designed to encourage more women into the workforce through greater flexibility inevitably is used by employers to create more part-time work and underemployment for all workers. The past decade has been a decade of underemployment; greater flexibility will not cure it. Greg Jericho writes on economics for Guardian Australia