It might just be the case that England are peaking at the right time. At balmy Chester-le-Street they defeated New Zealand by a massive margin, thereby securing their semi-final slot at Edgbaston next Thursday against either India or Australia. England won by 119 runs in a match remarkably devoid of tension. It was not a perfect performance. There was the reassuring bonus of another brilliant start via the bats of Jason Roy and Jonny Bairstow, who struck another hundred, just as fluent as the one against India in their other “quarter-final”. But then England lost their way in the last 20 overs of their innings. In that time they mustered only 111 runs for the loss of seven wickets, chicken feed by modern standards. Nonetheless their total of 305 for eight proved more than adequate. Yet beyond that batting blip there were those moments that trigger thoughts that England’s ultimate goal is within reach, some of brilliance, some of outrageous good fortune, the sort that so often seem to accompany a side on a roll. Most of them happened in the field, where England benefited from two obvious strokes of luck. Henry Nicholls was given lbw to his first ball from Chris Woakes but, after consultation with his partner, he declined to review. The replay demonstrated that the ball would have sailed over Nicholls’s stumps. More significant was the dismissal of Kane Williamson, who never fails. Ross Taylor drove straight and hard; the ball flicked the outstretched fingers of Mark Wood and hit the stumps with the Kiwi captain stranded – and out for 27. This is the equivalent of dismissing Virat Kohli cheaply. Without him at the helm the New Zealand side was neutered. But there was brilliance, too. Jos Buttler, diving to his left, held a superb one-handed catch down the leg-side to dismiss Martin Guptill, who has often troubled England. Only a curmudgeon could mumble, “Well, he’s got gloves on, hasn’t he?” after that. Bob Taylor, Alan Knott and Jack Russell would have been proud of that one. Soon afterwards Taylor was run out when attempting a second run. It was a misjudgment on his part but maybe he had bargained that the fielder was only Adil Rashid. Maybe he forgot that England’s weakest fielder is also their most improved as Rashid gathered and sent the perfect throw back to Buttler. With the Kiwis 69 for four and anxious not to do immeasurable damage to their net run rate the contest was just about over. Tom Latham played his first significant innings of the tournament but this brought only minor respectability to the total. However, it was sufficient to make Pakistan’s prospects of overtaking New Zealand in the table remote. Apart from Latham only an obstinate streaker delayed England’s stroll to the semis. So it did not matter that from 30 overs onwards the England innings had stuttered badly. It resembled the managerial career of Ole Gunnar Solskjær at Old Trafford last season, starting absolutely brilliantly, ending in grim decline, yet producing a reasonably satisfying outcome, one that would have been acceptable before a ball had been bowled – or kicked. At one point when England were 194 for one after 30 overs, they seemed destined for 350 or more, so well did the old firm of Roy and Bairstow go about their business. They posted their 10th century stand in their 31st innings together as opening partners. The boffins can demonstrate that their average opening partnership together [over 40] and their strike rate [over 100] is the best ever in ODI cricket. Roy looked most vulnerable against the first delivery of the match from the left-arm spinner, Mitchell Santner, which somehow squeezed past his leg stump for four byes. Then he began to time the ball exquisitely, as did Bairstow. Williamson shuffled his bowlers rapidly but this did not make much difference. After 10 overs England had 67 on the board with Bairstow’s cover drives skimming over the fielders in the circle and Roy’s pull shots finding distant boundaries. Roy reached his half-century in 55 balls, Bairstow in 46. In the 19th over Roy departed amid much self-disgust after driving straight to Santner at extra cover, but this did not cause much deceleration; Joe Root stole his singles while Bairstow effortlessly purred to another century. But after Root’s dismissal batting suddenly became a trial, with frustrated batsmen staring at the surface as if it was some kind of treacherous chameleon. Root had gloved a hook shot against Trent Boult and curiously requested a review. This type of dismissal is often disparaged as “a strangle”, which is a mistake. The leg-side catch has been a regular occurrence in this tournament against fast bowlers who can conjure surprising bounce. Mature batsmen recognise that this type of dismissal is not a consequence of bad luck, but bad judgment. No doubt that will eventually be the analysis of Root. Bairstow followed in the next over, bowled off the inside edge and the slide had started. The promoted Buttler holed out to mid-off; Ben Stokes kept mistiming the ball to fielders; he summoned a new bat, which made no difference, before being caught at long-on for 11 off 27 balls, an aberration on his home ground against some of the cricketers he knew as a youngster. Until yesterday Stokes’ batting in this tournament had been exemplary. England were grateful for a canny innings from Morgan and a little late flurry from Liam Plunkett and Rashid which dragged the score past 300. In the end this was more than enough.