June 1975. On Monday the 2nd it snowed: a full inch at Buxton, wreaking havoc with Derbyshire v Lancashire; flurries outside my bedroom in Northamptonshire; the odd flake at Lord’s. By the Thursday the weather had perked up and the people of Britain felt cheery enough to vote Yes to staying in the Common Market. On the Saturday cricket’s first World Cup began. The June sun shone, the crowds poured in and the nation was transfixed until West Indies beat Australia in a gloriously theatrical final at Lord’s a fortnight later. No one knew the old game had so much blood in it. England did not reach that final, though had Mike Denness won the toss in the semi-final they probably would have done. No matter: the event was bound to be repeated and we’d win it soon enough. Surely? Cricket’s a small enough world to conquer. Before the 20th century was done, five of the eight teams in the inaugural tournament had become World Cup winners. All of those have been seen off in 2019 and there will be a sixth winner this weekend. (The eighth team was East Africa – apartheid-ridden South Africa were not invited.) England did reach three of the next four finals after 1975: overmatched in 1979, fingertip-close in 1987 and 1992. Since then, not a sniff. Now England are going into a final as very hot favourites. Are we excited? Ish. Given the tiny number of serious contenders, it is embarrassing, if not humiliating, that England have never won the World Cup: 44 years of hurt, and never really started believing, actually. So victory on Sunday, as overwhelming favourites, will be half “Yippee!” and half “About time too”. This World Cup has not been a fiasco, like the last English-based one in 1999, but it has not been a triumph either And we do have to come back, yet again, to the 14-year-old Sky monopoly and the collapse of interest that has engendered. True, Sky has given way and will allow one-off free-to-air live TV on Channel 4 this Sunday. Why, God bless you, sirs! You’re real toffs! Or at least your PR department knows when to advise a tactical retreat. It remains, however, the busiest sporting Sunday of the summer, as was bleeding obvious when the World Cup was scheduled. BBC One will be showing the Wimbledon men’s final; Channel 4 has the British Grand Prix, so it will be shuffling cricket between its main channel and More4. (As I write, my on-screen guide still insists More4 is showing episodes of Four In A Bed, whatever that might be. “Try everything once,” Sir Thomas Beecham once said, “except incest and folk dancing.”) This is a helpful development but not very helpful. A sports tournament on TV is like a soap opera: it’s about the characters – Coco Gauff, Serena’n’Andy, Roj and Rafa – and the tension and interest build a head of steam. The 2019 World Cup has not been a fiasco, like the last English-based one in 1999, but it has not been a triumph either. And that’s not going to change simply because a few Sky-refusenik cricket lovers are brought back for once, along with some baffled Four In A Bedders. The countries most engrossed by the tournament have been knocked out. And we are left with New Zealand, where cricket has always been a secondary sport and the match starts at bedtime, and England, where the audiences for the games thus far have been marginally larger than the membership of the Conservative party – with considerable overlap quite likely. Which is not a happy ending for an event whose overriding purpose was simply to maximise TV revenue – not showcase and spread the sport, enthuse the young, leave a legacy or any of that rot. That’s why it has lasted 46 days. Head of steam? The kettle went cold long ago. But there is much to like about the way England’s current team go about their business. They stayed positive and did not flinch or falter even when results turned against them. My favourite moment on Thursday was one of Jason Roy’s sixes when Sky showed Steve Smith staring upwards with an expression akin to a small boy on the White Cliffs circa 1940, half awestruck, half panic-stricken. Roy seems like the very epitome of modern English cricket: magnificent in command, petulant when thwarted, hardly known beyond his increasingly enclosed working environment. It’s like being a legend in medieval poetry circles. There were no helmets in 1975, so batsmen were instantly recognisable. There was no media training, so when players spoke in public they did so as humans not automata. And even the biggest stars remained rooted in their counties, so they were local heroes before they were national ones. Reports indicate that if England win they won’t be having a victory parade to match the one that followed the 2005 Ashes. Not enough time before the Ashes, it is said. As with Sky’s grand gesture, I suspect a hidden subtext: the fear the people in Trafalgar Square would have no idea who the hell the top-deck wavers might be, and would simply be hoping the bus would take them somewhere useful. A lot of buses in the vicinity give you a brief ride then come to a halt just down the road at Aldwych. There’s a metaphor for English cricket’s most optimistic moments in that. Let’s hope this one is different.