MPs opposed to a no-deal Brexit may try to force a vote on a Northern Ireland bill to stop the next prime minister proroguing parliament in the autumn, Dominic Grieve has confirmed. Grieve, a former attorney general who has played a leading role in limiting what Brexit policy ministers can implement without parliamentary approval, said the Northern Ireland (Executive Formation) bill could be the next opportunity for a Conservative rebellion. He was speaking as another former minister said there were “30-plus” Conservatives willing to defy the whip to prevent the UK leaving the EU without a deal later this year. Theresa May ultimately baulked at the prospect of trying to implement no deal, but both her two potential successors, Boris Johnson and Jeremy Hunt, have said they would if necessary pursue this option, with Johnson committed to deliver Brexit by 31 October ”do or die”. On Monday, MPs will debate the second reading of the Northern Ireland bill, which will extend until October, and potentially January 2020, the deadline set for the resumption of the power-sharing executive in Northern Ireland. All remaining stages of the bill are due to be debated in the Commons on another day. Speaking on Radio 5 Live, Grieve said: “Northern Ireland and Brexit go rather closely together. The chances are, if Brexit goes through, a nodeal Brexit, it is going to be the end of Northern Ireland’s union with the United Kingdom, with serious political consequences flowing from it.” Grieve said that was why it was “perfectly legitimate” to use the bill to ensure MPs got the chance to debate the consequences of a no-deal Brexit. In a ‘no deal’ scenario, the UK would leave the single market and the customs union immediately with no ‘divorce’ arrangement in place. The European court of justice would cease to have jurisdiction over the UK, and the country would also leave various other institutions including Euratom and Europol. The UK would no longer be paying into the EU budget, nor would it hand over the £39bn divorce payment. There would be no transition period. Free movement of people into the UK from the EU27 would stop. Trade between the UK and the EU would be governed by basic WTO rules. The UK government has already indicated that it will set low or no tariffs on goods coming into the country. This would lower the price of imports - making it harder for British manufacturers to compete with foreign goods. If the UK sets the tariffs to zero on goods coming in from the EU, under WTO ‘most favoured nation’ rules it must also offer the same zero tariffs to other countries. WTO rules only cover goods - they do not apply to financial services, a significant part of the UK’s economy. Trading under WTO rules will also require border checks, which could cause delays at ports, and a severe challenge to the peace process in Ireland without alternative arrangements in place to avoid a hard border. Some ‘no deal’ supporters have claimed that the UK can use article 24 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) to force the EU to accept a period of up to ten years where there are no tariffs while a free trade agreement (FTA) is negotiated. However, the UK cannot invoke article 24 unilaterally - the EU would have to agree to it. In previous cases where the article has been used, the two sides had a deal in place, and it has never been used to replicate something of the scale and complexity of the EU and the UK’s trading relationship. Until some agreements are in place, a ‘no deal’ scenario will place extra overheads on UK businesses - for example the current government advice is that all drivers, including lorries and commercial vehicles, will require extra documentation to be able to drive in Europe after 31 October if there is no deal. Those arguing for a ‘managed’ no deal envisage that a range of smaller sector-by-sector bilateral agreements could be quickly put into place as mutual self-interest between the UK and EU to avoid introducing or rapidly remove this kind of bureaucracy. Martin Belam The backbencher did not give details of his proposed amendment, but it is understood it would force the government to make an oral statement to the Commons in October on progress towards restoring the power-sharing executive – a move that would stop the new prime minister proroguing parliament for September and October, to stop MPs blocking a no-deal Brexit. Hunt is opposed to use prorogation for this purpose, but Johnson has not ruled it out. In a separate interview, Sam Gyimah, another Conservative former minister, said there were about “30-plus” Tories willing to join him in defying the whip to vote against a no-deal Brexit. Gyimah said he did not intend to vote against his government on a no-confidence motion for this purpose – even though some commentators believe that this could end up being the only option available for Tories determined to scupper a no deal. He added he and his colleagues were considering “a number of legislative mechanisms” that might be available. David Gauke, the justice secretary and another Tory firmly opposed to a no-deal Brexit, told the BBC that, although the parliamentary options for MPs determined to block this option seemed limited, he thought the Speaker, John Bercow, would be willing to ignore precedent to help them out. “In a world where we have a Speaker who is perhaps prepared to be innovative, when there is a clear majority in parliament that is against no deal, you have to question whether [the 2016 referendum] provides a mandate for leaving without a deal – so with all those facts, I think parliament will find a way through,” Gauke said. One option for the rebel MPs might be to use an emergency debate, scheduled under standing order 24, to pass a business motion that would allow backbenchers to take control of the Commons business for a day to allow legislation blocking no deal to be passed. SO24 motions are not meant to be used for this purpose, but earlier this year Bercow hinted that a move of this kind might be allowed.