The list includes Horace Eaton, a 27-year-old from Bradford who believed war symbolised “the teaching of hatred and murder”, James Burchell, a gardener from Scarborough who regarded every life as sacred, and Norman Gaudie, a railway clerk, footballer for Sunderland reserves and committed pacifist. All three were among the 20,000 men who registered as conscientious objectors in the first world war for religious, moral or political reasons. Their stories are part of a heritage project, announced on Friday, which will recognise for the first time the names of 400 men who were barracked or imprisoned at Richmond Castle in North Yorkshire because they objected to conscription. Most of the men agreed to serve in the new non-combatant corps which had a base at the castle. A hardcore of absolutists refused and were incarcerated in the castle’s cold, dark and tiny cells. Richard Mason, a curator at English Heritage, said hundreds of conscientious objectors lived, against their will or otherwise, at the castle during the war. “But until now, there has been no comprehensive record of who they were, where they came from or what made them choose this difficult path.” Finding so many names had been a huge task, he said, using existing databases, military records, external archives and taking names from the copious graffiti in the cell block. The result is a poignant list of 400 names which will be on display in the castle’s new museum, opening next week. Mason said it was not intended as a celebrationor a war memorial. “I wouldn’t even say it is a commemoration. It is more about recognition … these people existed and we are telling their stories.” They are important stories because their actions brought about a more humane treatment of conscientious objectors. In the first world war more than 20,000 men registered as conscientious objectors. In the second world war, 61,000 men and women registered. A poll in 2016 revealed that 37% of potential conscripts in the UK would refuse to fight in a war on the scale of 1914-18, about 3.8 million people. The men at Richmond Castle helped “trigger the early development of human rights”, Mason said. “Their actions changed how future governments dealt with conscientious objectors.” The most famous names in the list are the men known as the Richmond 16, all absolutist objectors who refused even non-combatant duties. They include Bert Brocklesby, a teacher from Conisbrough, and Alfred Martlew, a clerk at the Rowntree’s factory in York. The authorities hatched a plan to send them to France, where they could be shot for refusing a military order. It was, in effect, a death sentence. At the last minute, there was a change of heart and their sentences were commuted to 10 years of hard labour. Most went to the Dyce work camp in Aberdeen, breaking up granite to produce stone for road building. Mason hopes the project will open eyes to the less well-known stories of men who were conscientious objectors but accepted service as non-combatants, willing to die for what they believed in. Men such as Horace Eaton, who objected to conscription on religious grounds. He tried to join the Friends’ Ambulance Unit but was refused and was barracked at the castle. His family faced isolation because of it, particularly his son at school. Eaton undertook military tasks but did not carry weapons and was not trained in combat. He left memoirs which detail life in the corps and the poor treatment of absolutists. One passage reads: “One fine looking fellow was brought in on Tuesday by two soldiers – handcuffed and a very heavy kit bag containing all his things and heavy boots were fastened about his neck nearly choking him. He was pushed about and finally put in the cold cells where he nearly collapsed.” Objects in the museum will include what is thought to be the only accurate representation of the uniform worn by members of the non-combatant corps, a white feather letter which reads “For a coward who will not defend his country. Shame on You, Enlist Now” and a ceramic propaganda sculpture of a conscientious objector with “conchie” written on his cap. Mason said the project was part of new interpretation across the site as well as the new museum, which would tell the much broader story of the castle, a history that stretches back to the Norman conquests. He said the project had been a “humbling experience” and thanked in particular Dawn Price, a volunteer at the castle. Mason also accepted there would be gaps in the list and said he hoped people with more information would come forward.