We often think of drug and alcohol misuse as a discrete problem: something to be solved on its own. But a new report, which found that one in 10 hospital inpatients are alcohol-dependent and one in five are doing themselves harm through drinking, puts paid to this myth entirely. In fact, comorbidity is significant. Chronic pain, cancer and heart disease have all been linked with substance misuse; there is also a strong crossover in those with mental illnesses. I know this first hand. Last year, during a particularly bad breakdown, I was enrolled in a harm reduction programme run by a local social enterprise. My keyworker there was amazing – empathetic, funny, kind, often stern. But nothing was joined up. At the time, I was also regularly seeing the crisis team at my local mental health trust, and although they knew about my problems with alcohol and my involvement with the social enterprise, there was very little effort to understand how they interacted with my mental health problems, or indeed an understanding that the root cause of both might be the same. I was even told that before I could be referred for further treatment within the NHS my alcohol problems had to be dealt with – understandable, considering how stretched services were and still are. But it seemed to miss the point entirely. The reasons I was drinking so much were the same reasons I had also self-harmed; in its own way it was self-harm. But in treatment it was separated off in a neat little box: even with a dual diagnosis that included alcohol use disorder, there was a complete failure to treat my problems holistically. In reality, there was no way my drinking could be separated from my mental health problems – they were one and the same thing. That’s without going into the inevitable and unsurprising cuts to services over the last few years – as with so many mental health and social care programmes, budgets for drug and alcohol services have been slashed. In 2018, the BBC found that 18% had been cut from addiction services, contributing to a 26% rise in drug-related deaths. How are we expected to tackle the harm caused by alcohol when services are being decimated like this? As Richard Piper, CEO of Alcohol Change UK, points out, this leads to further strain on hospitals – and with no specialist services or expertise available, problems remain untreated and people return to hospital again and again. Outside of the healthcare system there also needs to be a fundamental culture change around alcohol. I’d always been dimly aware of the fact that, on the whole, most of the people I knew were probably not drinking in a totally healthy way. But when I was sober, the scales truly fell from my eyes. Friends would go on constant benders, going into work hungover four or five times a week a seemingly normal part of their routine. Binge drinking at weekends was even more common, unit recommendations dissolving by 2pm in pint after endless pint. None of them would ever consider themselves to have a problematic relationship with alcohol – in some industries, in fact, their behaviour was actively encouraged. At my worst, I had been drinking far more than this, was far more physically and psychologically dependent and was doing far more damage to my health. The point of this story isn’t to shame anyone or to conflate full-blown substance misuse with a not-quite-balanced relationship to alcohol. But the fact is that alcohol abuse, either mild or severe, is far more prevalent than we’d like to admit. I now drink socially (and safely) in large part because my mental health is so much better. But with a joined-up service that acknowledged all of the social and psychological stressors which contributed to both my mental distress and my drinking, there’s a chance that recovery would have happened faster and better, and with more support. It’s a cliche now to say the NHS needs better funding; it’s also true. Like mental illnesses themselves, the causes of addiction are rarely simple – and our approach to tackling them shouldn’t be, either. Emily Reynolds is the author of A Beginner’s Guide to Losing Your Mind