Choux pastry and cream is always a winning combination. Add orange blossom, a crunchy craquelin topping and cats, and it’s somehow even better. And I love the perfumed, summery flavour of orange blossom. Makes: 5 rings Prep time: 20 mins for the choux, 10 mins for the craquelin, 5 mins for the filling, plus decoration Bake time: 30 mins For the craquelin:75g light muscovado sugar75g unsalted butter75g plain flour For the choux:85g unsalted butter225g waterPinch of salt50g plain flour50g strong white flour2-3 medium eggs For the filling:150g double cream50g icing sugar1 tsp orange blossom waterOrange food dye To decorate:Black gel food dyePink wafer paper Preheat the oven to 200C/180C fan/400F/gas mark 6. First make the craquelin. Cream together the sugar and butter until light and fluffy, then add the flour and stir until combined. Roll out to 3mm (⅛in) thick between two sheets of clingfilm, then place in the fridge until firm. For the choux pastry, chop the butter and put it in a small saucepan with the water and salt. Heat until the butter has melted and the mixture is starting to bubble. Meanwhile, weigh out the flours in a separate bowl. When the mixture is bubbling, remove it from the heat and add the flour all in one go. Stir with a wooden spoon until it forms a smooth ball that pulls away from the sides very easily. Transfer to a stand mixer bowl with a paddle attachment and leave to cool for five to 10 minutes. Add the eggs one at a time, mixing on slow speed after each addition until combined. Whisk the third egg in a separate bowl and add gradually, a tablespoon at a time, mixing well after each addition. You are looking for a glossy consistency, which leaves a V when a spoon is lifted out of the dough. Transfer to a piping bag and cut a medium tip. On a lined baking tray, pipe out five blobs in a circle, then repeat until you have five circles. Take the craquelin out of the freezer and stamp out small discs to place on to each blob of choux. Bake for 10 minutes, then turn the temperature down to 180C/160C fan/350F/gas mark 4 and bake for a further 20 minutes. Allow to cool on a wire rack. Meanwhile, make the filling: whip the cream with the rest of the listed ingredients. Cut each choux ring in half horizontally, then fill with the cream. Draw the facial features using a toothpick with black food dye on the end, then add ears cut from the wafer paper.