My gloved hands disappear from sight as soon as they enter water the colour of a just-poured Guinness. But I won’t be sipping it, or even letting any seep beneath my neoprene collar. I’m chest deep in the water, walking the 15 metres (49 feet) of Rochdale canal where it bisects Manchester city centre, flanked by police divers Steve and Jags, searching methodically for anything of significance. Today we find no more than a black Marks & Spencer stiletto, some fencing, a tyre, an umbrella, a cardigan and a couple of chairs that the canalside Rain Bar would probably like back. But the bread and butter for these divers from the north-west police underwater search and marine unit is finding bodies. There’s a reason why that person is in the water – we never assume it is just an accident This is the stretch of canal where, less than 18 months ago, 19-year old Charlie Pope fell to his death. The pathologist at the inquest said that on entering the icy water that March morning the student would probably have survived only a matter of minutes before cardiac arrest. It’s also where, three months later, the underwater search team recovered the body of 19-year-old student Orlando Nyero. Insp Dave Corcoran says his team have pulled 16 bodies from Manchester canals in the last four years. Since 2007, there have been 28 open-water drownings in the city centre, the majority in its canals, including 18 on the Rochdale, according to the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA). Officers carry out an exercise on Rochdale canal through Manchester – in which they recover a chair probably belonging to a canalside bar. Photographs: Christopher Thomond/The Guardian Most of these fatalities happened during the hours of darkness and involved young men, with alcohol a confirmed or probable factor in two-thirds of cases. Manchester has twice the proportion of alcohol-linked drownings than the national average. After 20 minutes, the squeeze inside my pressurised drysuit is becoming painful. I’m getting cold and I want to come out. But this is the day-to-day experience of the police diver, combing the canal by foot or fingertip search, crawling along the bed in zero visibility, hugging a weighted jackstay rope to ensure they miss nothing. Few things symbolise the way our cities have transformed more than canals. Around the world, cities have woken up to the power of their urban waterways: from Milan to Manchester, the former economic arteries of industry are being turned into corridors for walkers, boaters and wildlife. Cafes and restaurants are proliferating and canalside living is newly chic – and newly costly. As commercial interests muscle in on the last great undeveloped bit of Britain’s cities, Guardian Cities and the Observer wanted to take stock of a crucial moment in history, when we still have a choice: whether to turn canals into sanitised enclaves of wealth, or preserve them as a precious resource for all. Chris Michael, Cities editor For larger stretches, when the search parameter is miles not metres, divers will drag a side-scan sonar “fish” behind a rigid inflatable boat. “In most cases, our job is to recover the missing person, get them back to their loved ones, and then help move the investigation forward,” explains Corcoran. “There’s a reason why that person is in the water – we never assume it is just an accident.” Often that means returning beneath the canal surface to search for evidence, whether that is knives, guns or stolen property. Divers can be looking for anything from cars to a sim card. “We were asked to find a mobile phone in a canal recently – and we found more than 70. It was like Carphone Warehouse down there,” says Corcoran. “At another job in Liverpool, we recovered 10 firearms when we were looking for just one.” He lets me thrash around for a couple of minutes trying to climb out, or even find a toehold on the canal wall, before he extends an arm to pull me out. “Now imagine doing that in your skinny jeans and after a few pints,” he says. Officers use a weighted jackstay rope during canal searches. Photograph: Christopher Thomond/The Guardian City councils have no explicit duty to take preventive steps to address drowning risks. Unlike fire or road safety, there’s no specific regulation or code stating action must be taken to prevent drowning at the local authority level. But these latest deaths prompted an emergency meeting of the Manchester Water Safety Partnership, which includes the city’s police, fire service, council and the Canal and River Trust (CRT). The partnership commissioned RoSPA to come up with recommendations, and these included improved lighting, better provision of rescue equipment, training bar staff to use that equipment, and more towpath barriers. But banning people from using towpaths at night – a further measure demanded by some victims’ families – is not practical, says Julia Sharman, chief operating officer of the CRT. “We’re an open access network, and not like the National Trust which can put fences round its assets,” she says. In the year to April 2019, there were 40 deaths on the CRT’s network of canals – a statistic that changes little from one year to the next. “What we don’t get enough reporting of is the minor injuries and near-misses,” she says. “If we understood those more, then we’d have a better chance of dealing with any of the risks that might present themselves to the public.” The dangers inherent in canals are not the only factor to consider. Chris Morgan , a volunteer with the Inland Waterways Association (IWA) who organises an annual cleanup weekend with Birmingham Canal Navigations, says some of the hazardous and polluting materials dumped in waterways can be truly eye-opening. Safes, bikes, shotguns, swords, mattresses, asbestos, shopping trolleys and even a coffin (empty) are among the items he and colleagues have snagged with their grappling hooks. The worst canal for rubbish, says Morgan, is the Walsall, where volunteers removed 45 tonnes in just two days during the last cleanup. Litter floating in Walsall canal; and volunteers in Birmingham with their haul from canal cleanups, including a safe. Photographs: MH Canals/Alamy/Alison Smedley Stray coffins aside, water quality has improved dramatically since the 1970s when industrial effluent and sewage was routinely discharged into canals, says Peter Birch, CRT’s national environmental policy adviser. Today’s challenge, says Birch, is twofold: the urban diffuse pollution of nitrates and phosphates in “grey water” from showers and sinks that inadvertently or negligently flows into a canal; and “organised waste crime” where firms posing as legitimate waste-disposal services tip truckloads of construction rubbish, house clearances or used oil into the canal. “Every year we find a couple of hundred cases of these skip-sized deposits of waste,” says Birch. Back on Rochdale canal, Dr Maarja Kaaristo, a Manchester Metropolitan University researcher who studies canal tourism, is showing me the results of the monthly work parties she helps organise with the IWA and local voluntary group Friends of Rochdale 9. They pick litter, but plant bulbs and vegetables, too. Kaaristo is one of a dozen volunteers who, as part of a nationwide initiative called Incredible Edible, have created a lock garden of strawberries, beetroot, chives, onions, parsley and peas on Ashton canal, next to Manchester City’s Etihad stadium. “There are so many different users of this narrow, shared space, from boaters and walkers to commuters, cyclists and anglers, that it’s important that it’s kept nice and clean for everyone,” says Kaaristo. “There needs to be a greater sense of shared ownership of our canals.” The canal revolution series looks at what our changing waterways reveal about modern British cities. Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagramand use the hashtag #canalrevolution to join the discussion, or sign up for our weekly newsletter