If you can make a pavlova (or even if you haven’t made meringue before), you can definitely make this decorated version. Just follow the steps and make sure you are patient when whipping up the egg whites. You can’t go wrong with mallowy meringue, whipped cream and fresh fruit. Makes: one sharing-sized pavlova (serves 10-12) Prep time: 30 mins for the meringue, 10 mins for the coulis, 5 mins for the cream filling, plus decorating time Bake time: 1 hour For the meringue:120g egg whites (about 4)225g caster sugar1 tbsp vanilla bean paste1 tbsp cornflour For the blueberry coulis:100g fresh blueberries35g caster sugarSqueeze of lemon juice For the cream filling:200g double cream30g icing sugar1 tbsp vanilla bean pasteBlue gel food dye To decorate:200g blueberries, a few strawberries, orange gel food dye, edible ink pen (or a little black food dye and vodka or gin)Black royal icing (optional) Heat the oven to 120C/100C fan/250F/gas mark ½. Line a baking tray with greaseproof paper. Put the egg whites in a clean, dry bowl. Whisk on high speed until firm peaks form, then add the sugar a tablespoon at a time, whisking for 30-60 seconds between each addition. When all the sugar is incorporated and the meringue is glossy with firm peaks, transfer a few tablespoons to a separate bowl and set aside. Add the vanilla and cornflour to the main meringue mixture and whisk until incorporated. Spoon the mixture on to the centre of the baking paper and spread into a circle. Use a spoon to give the pavlova a raised edge. Transfer two thirds of the meringue that you set aside to a piping bag, and use this to pipe “clouds” on top of cocktail sticks laid on an empty corner of the baking paper (pipe three blobs in a row, then two alongside, using a finger dipped in water to press down the meringue tips). Add yellow food dye to the remaining meringue and use this to pipe meringue “ducks” (one blob for the body with a little flick up for the tail, then a smaller blob for the head). Bake for one hour. In the meantime, make the blueberry coulis. Put all the ingredients in a pan and simmer for 10 minutes or until all the sugar has dissolved. Leave to cool, then blend until smooth. When the pavlova has finished baking, leave to cool and then make the cream filling. Put all the ingredients except the food dye in a bowl, whip until you have soft peaks, set aside a few tablespoons to use later, then add the food dye to the bulk of the filling and whip just enough to spread the colour. Do not overdo it or it the filling will turn grainy. Spoon a layer of blueberries into the pavlova, then the cream filling on top. Swirl the coulis through the cream, and allow some drips down the side. Decorate with fresh fruit, the meringue ducks and clouds. Dye the filling that you set aside orange, and pipe this to give the ducks little beaks. Draw their eyes with the edible-ink pen (or black food dye mixed with with vodka or gin). Optional: use black royal icing to add faces to the strawberries.