A cross-party group of MPs is to make another attempt to extend equal marriage to Northern Ireland by adding an amendment to a bill that would automatically change the law within three months if the devolved government remains stalled. The amendment, led by the Labour MP Conor McGinn, seeks to evade objections that the change should be a matter for Northern Ireland by stating that if and when the region’s executive is revived, it can then approve or repeal the measure. Northern Ireland is the only part of the UK where same-sex marriage is not legal, despite polling which indicates a majority of Northern Irish people support it. Theresa May’s government has said it also supports it, but will not act without the approval of the Stormont assembly, which has been suspended amid political deadlock since January 2017. McGinn, who is from Northern Ireland but as an MP represents St Helens North in Merseyside, has been campaigning for a change of stance, often in alliance with the Conservative peer Robert Hayward. The amendment would be attached to a bill expected before the Commons next week connected to budgetary matters for the suspended executive and Northern Ireland assembly, and delays to future elections. It has been backed by the former education and equalities minister Justine Greening, her fellow Tory MP Nick Herbert, the Green MP Caroline Lucas, the Liberal Democrats’ Layla Moran and Labour’s Owen Smith. It states that within three months of the bill being passed, the Northern Ireland secretary must pass a decree extending same-sex marriage, assuming a new devolved executive is not formed in the interim. If the executive is revived after the law comes into force, it can then endorse or change it. McGinn said patience was running out over the issue: “There is currently no devolved assembly. There has been no executive in place since January 2017. How much longer are LGBT people in Northern Ireland supposed to wait? “The government can’t continue to invoke devolution or negotiations to re-establish Stormont in perpetuity. So what we’ve said is, we’ll give you three months to try and resolve this – if you can’t, Westminster will do what it arguably already should have done. “Then if devolution is re-established, the marriage law goes back to Stormont, and by all means they can change the law again if they so wish to do.” At a hustings event in Belfast earlier on Tuesday, both contenders to replace Theresa May as prime minister, Boris Johnson and Jeremy Hunt, said they supported the idea of equal marriage in Northern Ireland but believed it should be left to the devolved government. Pressure over the issue has been building in Northern Ireland. The partner of the murdered journalist Lyra McKee, who was shot dead by dissident republicans during rioting in Derry in April, has urged May to impose the change. Sara Canning said she made the request when she met the prime minister at McKee’s funeral in Belfast. In a statement released through Amnesty International, Canning said: “If the politicians won’t legislate for equal marriage at Stormont, then the prime minister should do it at Westminster. That’s what I told Theresa May at Lyra’s funeral. “I wanted her to know that Lyra and I had a right to be treated as equal citizens in our own country. Surely that’s not too much to ask?”