The Donmar is one of the engines of the London theatre. Josie Rourke showed what a difference one production there could make with the all-female (not all white, not all RP) Shakespeares. Little surprise, then, that when Michael Longhurst took over as artistic director earlier this year, the press conference to launch his first season was very full and very excited. It was also the only launch I have attended that had two babies in the audience. Longhurst’s programming looks promising: before the autumn is over we will have had the UK premiere of a Branden Jacobs-Jenkins play and a new drama from Alice Birch. For his first production Longhurst has gone back in time – and leapt forward. It is hard to believe that Europe was first staged (in Edinburgh) 25 years ago: it now looks like an act of prophecy. In a compact two hours, David Greig’s play steers into the heart of a fraying continent. Set in a defunct railway station on an unnamed border, the action is divided between those who go and those who stay. Some are pushed to move by trouble in their homelands – you can almost smell the fatigue on Natalia Tena and Kevork Malikyan, as daughter and father, sharing a blanket on the platform. Some feel themselves bound to stick it out in a stagnant town, where industry is failing and unemployment is zooming. Youth is on the boil and looking for people to blame and hurt. The only hope is for those who have a choice: to decide where their home is or decide not to have a home. This is a slow burn. It opens like a ballad, with characters half-singing about their lives to the accompaniment of an accordion, and moves in an unusual mixture of naturalism – with dogged, often inconsequential dialogue – and apocalypse. Chloe Lamford’s design and Tom Visser’s lighting are the most roaring ingredients: the evening begins with the stage shaken by bars of slatted light and the rumble of a train, and ends with incineration: in the small space of the Donmar the audience’s cheeks seem to glow with flame. There are plenty of sharp edges, but Europe is, in various, generous ways an anti-border, frontier-crumbling play, in which love and friendship come in the form of unexpected alliances. A freewheeling character, made up of unpredictable appetites, is played with an almost eerie delicacy by Faye Marsay. “God is a railwayman,” another declares. Longhurst’s production offers the rare satisfaction of a train arriving on time. The latest collaboration between dramatist Jack Thorne and director John Tiffany – who gave us Harry Potter and the Cursed Child and (the to my mind more marvellous) Let the Right One In – spends some time cowering under the weight of its title, taken from Francis Fukuyama’s treatise about the triumph of western liberal democracy. The End of History… is a good-hearted but stutteringly plotted look at the effect that politically ideological, lefty parents may have on their children when they treat them, however lovingly, as “a legacy project”. Tiffany draws on the resources of his longtime colleague, the movement director Steven Hoggett, to bring fluidity to the drama, which stretches from 1997 (and Tony Blair being switched off on the radio) to 2017; the cast flutter between scenes in dance-like episodes. There are extraordinary individual performances, though they don’t cohere as a family act. Kate O’Flynn is arresting as the corporate lawyer daughter, ensnared in the knowledge of her own intelligence. As the mother, Lesley Sharp quivers with political fervour and emotional anxiety, head up like a hare sniffing the wind; convinced of her principles and beset by the knowledge of the embarrassment she is causing her kids. David Morrissey, dogmatic but slower-moving, has the biggest moment of the evening, delivering a final speech of vindication and apology, an oration that advocates the Quaker principle of honouring people by description rather than encomium, and suggests a model for writing: one to do with delivering plain truths rather than embroidering opinions. He does it marvellously. But it’s too late to galvanise the play and Let the Left One Out. It is wonderful to see the huge, bell-like space of the Curve already packed out on a preview night for The Color Purple. I have some reservations about Tinuke Craig’s direction, a co-production with Birmingham Hippodrome. The hugely ambitious story, based on Alice Walker’s novel, is hard to follow in the early, entirely sung scenes, where not all the words are crisp enough to be heard. Alex Lowde’s clapboard design, bathed in golden light, with girls in very clean pinafore dresses, are a bit too Little House on the Prairie for this bleakest of beginnings – with the heroine raped by the man she thinks is her father. I am intrigued by news of a US production I didn’t see – by John Doyle – which stripped the bulging action down, making it simple and intense. Yet the ambitiousness of the material punches through unwieldiness. Not only in the horror – the beatings, incest, babies taken from mothers, burning villages on the African continent – but in the soaring joy. This is one of the few musicals that is keener on sex than on romance – and which (without any of the gasping that greeted a kiss between two men last week in Present Laughter at the Old Vic in London) welcomes a female embrace. It features a heroine who is insulted by being told she is “black, poor, ugly and a woman” and manages to embrace and remake all of these adjectives, bar “ugly”, which she rejects. It is buoyed up by boundless upward drive of gospel music, and sighs with blues and jazz. T’shan Williams soars as the central figure; Karen Mavundukure belts it out gloriously as a beacon of independence; a chorus of gossips with frills and parasols wiggle along, bending under the weight of their excitement. Star ratings (out of five)Europe ★★★★The End of History ★★★The Color Purple ★★★ • Europe is at the Donmar Warehouse, London, until 10 August• The End of History… is at the Royal Court, London, until 10 August•The Color Purple is at the Curve, Leicester, until 13 July