Nicola Barker is literary royalty. Her last novel, the visionary dystopiaH(a)ppy, won the Goldsmiths prize for innovative fiction. Her territories are large, fertile and expanding. She is Queen of the Hinterlands of Quirk but also Empress of the Quotidian. Time and again, while reading I Am Sovereign, I thought a detail or name had been invented by Barker because it seemed comically exaggerated. But Adam Wallwork really is the name of a ceramicist known for making wall tiles, and there is a self-help course called How to Silence the Inner Critic Fast by Richard Grannon. This is the particular prank that great comic writing pulls. The reader laughs along with a book but puts it down saying, “That’s just clowning around.” And the moment they walk out their front door, they get a custard pie right in the mush. Because life’s like that. Quirks are quotidian. “The overriding concept for I Am Sovereign is that it should take place, in its entirety, during a 20-minute house viewing in Llandudno,” we are instructed on page 206 of this 209-page self-proclaimed novella. By this point Barker’s intricate plot syncopations aren’t so much climaxing as going haywire. The quartet of characters involved in the viewing are brilliantly vivid. The vendor is Charles, who makes bespoke teddy bears that he then refuses to part with – even if they contain the ashes of the commissioner’s loved one. Charles is also the owner of the Adam Wallwork tiles, and the desperate seeker of reinforcement from Grannon’s self-help mantras. “I AM THE KING OF MY OWN SERENITY / I AM THE RULER OF MYSELF…” Of course, Charles is anything but. The estate agent is Avigail. Barker introduces her with the kind of heartbreaking precis perfected by Muriel Spark. “Avigail was raised in a Hasidic Jewish community. She didn’t prosper there … Her “out” was anorexia. Long spells in hospital, months in special units, distant referral, gradually – stealthily – establishing contacts and relationships in the REAL WORLD outside the Hasidic community.” The potential buyer is Wang Shu, who spends the entire book doing deals on her mobile. She is drawn in cruder lines. “Every follicle and mole and pore on Wang Shu’s body is Chinese. Wang Shu sweats green tea.” Lastly, there is Wang Shu’s daughter and translator, Ying Yue. “Nobody ever really notices her. Even that “special” teacher at school – who you see featured prominently in heartfelt documentaries about the gradual decline of the British educational system – even that special teacher never bothered to notice Yang Yue.” Of course, the reader notices – and we notice because Ying Yue, like most invisible people, spends all her time noticing the things other people ignore. The farcical action begins as these four characters cross the threshold into Charles’s house, and into Barker’s fictional territory. Whether they’ll stay in either is not a given. As the plot thickens, The Author too becomes increasingly substantial, and not a little salty. Barker gossips about her cast like a director might about her actors. In one way, little happens – a chunk of mouldy cheese is taken from the fridge, binned, retrieved, carefully trimmed, and returned to the fridge. In another way, everything changes: Charles and Ying Yue start to fall in love; Wang Shu detects the chemistry between them, and approves; Avigail has a religious epiphany. The main quartet enter the novella and stay to the end. But in I Am Sovereign’s most memorable episode, another character makes an appearance, causes too much fictional trouble, argues back at The Author (in italics), and is metatextually ejected. He is Gyasi “Chance” Ebo, “a fiercely intelligent, immaculately attired, 23-year-old Ethiopian professional carer” who has sneaked inside Charles’s house to retrieve a teddy bear he commissioned. Gyasi is referred to as “The Subject”. “At his inception, The Subject seemed not only a willing but an actively enthusiastic participant in the project, yet after several weeks of engagement became increasingly cynical and uncooperative, to the point of threatening to withdraw from the enterprise altogether if The Author deigned to encroach, unduly, upon his ‘interior life’.” One of Charles’s self-help mantras starts to bring out the book’s political theme: “To be Sovereign … To be present, positive and boundaried.” The Subject, it seems, can’t be permitted to exist within Barker’s narrative. He poses too many awkward questions. He doesn’t fit. The Author, however, is very present. She completes a few chapters of her novel in Normandy, then heads home to England. On the drive from the ferry terminal, through Calais, The Author sees “the entire area [that] had been inhabited by young … African men trying to find any means possible of crossing the Channel to Britain … Can it be any coincidence then, that only a couple of days later The Author began removing Gyasi ‘Chance’ Ebo from the narrative?” Barker makes the analogy between fictional inclusion and actual immigration very clear. Sovereignty of any sort requires a gesture of exclusion. You can’t come in. You don’t belong here. In this brave, funny and painfully timely novella, Barker questions her own – and thus our own – authority. By what right can we keep people out? There’s also the question of going dominantly in – of the subjection of the Subjects. Should a novelist be free to colonise other people’s heads? In one paragraph, Barker admits to “mixed feelings” about the novel form ever since completing H(a)ppy, “which – to all intents and purposes – destroyed the novel (as a form) for The Author”. Without Authority, if not Sovereignty, how can there be an Author? Barker isn’t sure of the answer. But it’s pretty clear that if she really were queen, she’d abdicate. • Toby Litt’s Patience is published by Galley Beggar in August. I Am Sovereign is published by Heinemann (RRP £12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.