Ah, the mall: that shiny, suburban cathedral to consumerism, that mecca for messing-about teens, which makes the UK equivalent, “the shopping centre”, sound utterly dingy. When Gwinnett Place mall in Duluth, Georgia opened in the mid-80s, it was just such a place. But like many similar spots, it has fallen into decline – and we’re not just talking about a few empty storefronts. In December 2017, a dead body was discovered in the food court where, according to police, it had lain undisturbed for several weeks. Gwinnett Place was your typical “zombie mall”, another undead victim of a phenomenon economists refer to as “the retail apocalypse”. That is, until Stranger Things rolled into town and brought it back to life. Gwinnett Place is now “Starcourt mall”, the main location for the 1985-set third season of the sci-fi horror show, complete with period interiors and signage for such now-defunct US outlets as Chess King, Waldenbooks, Time-Out Arcade and Wicks ‘n’ Sticks. “When I walked into that mall, I was with my wife who is the same age as me and we were both just cheek-to-cheek smiling,” says Shawn Levy, the show’s executive producer who shares directing duties with its creators, the Duffer Brothers. “The ones that brought it all back were the vintage Gap store, the Jazzercise studio and the hair salon decorated with these huge photographs of horrific 80s hairdos, several of which I’d had.” It is this gleaming temple of commerce that looms over Stranger Things’ latest season, which launches today. Starcourt mall is the pet project of Hawkins mayor Larry Kline, a sinister new character played by 80s hero Cary Elwes, with more than a hint of Donald Trump about him. Like the US president, Mayor Kline has taken a special interest in organising the Fourth of July celebrations, although, according to an interview Elwes gave, the Duffer Brothers deny any direct influence: “They go, ‘No, no, no, it’s not Trump, it’s just somebody that happens to be blond and full of himself and likes the sound of his own voice.’” Mayor Kline is pushing forward with Starcourt, heedless of how it is ruining the mom-and-pop stores on Main Street like the one Winona Ryder’s character, Joyce Byers, works in. Life in Hawkins is about to change, whether the locals like it or not. Starcourt is also where a transformation happens for the core gang of Mike, Will, Dustin, Lucas and Eleven. In classic 80s teen flick fashion, this involves coming-of-age, fledgling romance, demeaning summer jobs (Steve Harrington now works in the Starcourt ice-cream parlour) and a changing room montage scene set to – what else? – Madonna’s Material Girl. “We’re not gonna stop our actors from growing,” says Levy, “so we need to embrace their maturation and tell stories that reflect that.” Only Stranger Things isn’t an 80s teen flick, of course. It is a 2019 period piece with all the ironic insights into the rise and fall of the American mall that three decades of hindsight allows. The season finale is called The Battle of Starcourt, so Hawkins’ newest hang-spot clearly has a creepier side. “This mall is a juicy one,” says Levy. “It gives the potential for fun and escapism … and that makes it even more delicious when the season turns darker.” Stranger Things didn’t invent the idea of the mall as a horror trope. Zombies, killer robots and the like have been marauding up escalators and across terrazzo mezzanines since George A Romero’s Dawn of The Dead (1979), Night of The Comet (1984) and Chopping Mall (1986), all of which hinted at the cultural link between greedy materialism and an unseen evil. Yet Netflix’s raft of commercial tie-ins, with brands including Baskin Robbins, Coca-Cola and Nike, is new. These all make total sense in the context of an all-American 80s adolescence, but in giving season three the most product-placement-friendly setting imaginable, has Stranger Things signed its own deal with the devil? Levy objects: “We’ve never ever, not once, put a brand or storefront in Stranger Things because of a partnership deal, ever … Every single store you see in the mall is there because it felt right to the Duffers and to our team. The content always comes first and the deals evolve or they don’t.” Netflix has left town now but Starcourt still stands, like an enormous time capsule, reminding us of a time when shopping was a leisure activity that involved getting dressed and leaving the house. Somehow, the climate-controlled, amiably artificial environment of the mall is nostalgic and unnerving in equal measure. “There is a sense that you’re in a bubble,” explains Levy. “The real world fades away and, yes, you get swept up in this kind of alternate world … what’s the word …?” The “Upside Down”, perhaps? Stranger Things 3 is on Netflix now.