There are no sure-fire bets in the currency markets but, in retrospect, selling sterling has been a ridiculously easy trade for two months. The direction for sterling has been downwards from the moment Theresa May lost her third attempt to force through the EU withdrawal bill in early May. The Tory leadership contest, in which both contenders have issued hard Brexit statements, has merely continued the losing run. We have now arrived at a two-year low for the pound against the dollar. Where next? Well, don’t expect the Bank of England to arrest the falls by raising interest rates. There is no recent example of the Bank raising rates when the economy is flat, which is the picture suggested by the data for the April-June quarter. Tuesday’s perky income figures, showing annual average earnings growth at 3.6% in the three months to May, won’t change the thinking one jot. Scratch the surface and the picture for employment is not as bright. Like everybody else, the Bank is waiting to see what form of Brexit, or not, emerges in October. The foreign exchange markets, then, will be obliged in coming months to hunt for nuances in every Brexit statement by the new prime minister. Will “do or die” and “come what may” be uttered so regularly, or so casually, by Boris Johnson in office? Impossible to say, but we can say this: there is no incentive for him to try to talk up the pound. First, Johnson has a couple of months in which he can blame Theresa May for inherited ills. Second, any expression of concern about sterling will be read as compromising his commitment to a no-deal Brexit if agreement can’t be reached with the European Union. Third, since Johnson is wedded to the idea that Brexit, in whatever form, will be eventually good for the economy, he’s semi-obliged to brush off any sterling crisis as a temporary jolt that will quickly pass; he’s fooling nobody, but that’s the logic of his position. Does it mean sterling has further to fall before the crunch arrives in October? To repeat: trying to predict short-term currency movements is a mug’s game. But it’s currently hard to see what’s supposed to stop sterling’s slide. When he was hired as chief executive of Standard Chartered in 2015, Bill Winters was hailed as an ex-JP Morgan superstar who would quickly knock the Asian-focused FTSE 100 bank into shape. It hasn’t quite worked out that way. Standard Chartered has avoided the wild risk-taking in lending of former years, but the share price is becalmed. In fact, it’s lower than when he arrived. There’s a lot of economic growth happening in Asia, sceptics observe, but not much at Standard Chartered. The position, you might think, would prompt Winters to be humble about his large pay packet. But, no, he’s grumbling in the FT about how his blasted shareholders made a fuss about the £460,000 he received as a pension payment last year. There was a 40% protest against Standard Chartered’s pay report in May and it clearly annoyed Winters. “Picking on individual pension arrangements ... and suggesting that there is some big issue there is immature and unhelpful,” he told the paper. What have these immature investors done? It’s simply that they take the view that a cash pension payment worth 40% of a basic salary of £1.15m is a bit steep. The ratio is far higher than the bank’s regular toilers receive and is even fatter than the one enjoyed by António “two pensions” Horta-Osório at Lloyds. Standard Chartered would prefer the outside world to believe 40% is 20% since Winters is also entitled to £1.15m in shares every year on top of his salary. But, come on, arguing that your fixed pay is really £2.3m, instead of half that amount, is a bizarre basis from which to claim pension modesty. Unhelpful shareholders should carry on being unhelpful. The immature party here is the one having a tantrum about a reasonable rebuke. Fashion label Burberry is clearly doing something right because the share price improved 14% with the first-quarter trading update. But what? The statement told a baffling tale about how “brand heat” had helped “B-Series drops” and “our monogram capsule” to pass through “luxury doors”. One assumes this means new designs proved popular and allowed Burberry to charge higher prices. But, if a company can’t explain its business in plain language, why should anyone trust the success to continue?