Alex Morgan has said that criticism of her goal celebration during USA’s defeat of England in the Women’s World Cup semi-final is an example of double standards. Morgan mimed sipping a cup of tea after she scored what proved to be the winning goal against England, provoking a backlash with some claiming she was guilty of gloating. Former England international Lianne Sanderson, who played alongside Morgan at Orlando Pride, called the celebration “distasteful”. On Friday Morgan said that the celebration was inspired by English Game of Thrones actor Sophie Turner who often signs off her Instagram stories with the phrase “and that’s the tea” before taking a sip from a cup. “I feel that there is some sort of double standard for females in sports,” Morgan said, “to feel like we have to be humble in our successes and have to celebrate, but not too much or in a limited fashion. You see men celebrating all over the world in big tournaments, grabbing their sacks or whatever it is. And when I look at sipping a cup of tea, I am a little taken aback by the criticism.” She added that she was disappointed Sanderson was among her critics. Morgan said that the team has not yet made a decision on whether it will meet with Donald Trump at the White House after the World Cup. The team met Barack Obama in Washington DC after they won the World Cup in 2015, but Megan Rapinoe said before the tournament that she would not do the same with Trump. “I think we will make that decision after we finish [Sunday’s final],” Morgan said. “I think there has been a lot of talk, prematurely, about the White House and about Trump but first we have to do business and then I think you guys know the answer to the question anyways.” Morgan’s teammate Lindsey Horan also came under fire for celebrating loudly in front of England captain Steph Houghton while she gave an interview after the semi-final. Horan could be heard congratulating Alyssa Naeher, who had saved Houghton’s penalty late in the game. “I had no intention of it,” Horan said on Friday. “Obviously, emotions arise after a game, and I was so excited for Alyssa. It was the biggest save of her life, and I saw [Naeher] doing an interview, and I wanted to rile her up again. I had no idea what was around me, so hopefully Steph knows that.” The US play the Netherlands in Sunday’s final. If the Americans win, it will be their fourth World Cup title.