There is a sense of erotic anticipation. Two gondolas drift towards each other languorously. A woman and man eye each other in a knowing, sexually charged way. Ribbons on the gondoliers’ hats flutter out of focus, bouquets adorn the boats. “You’re meant to think you’re watching an art film set in Venice,” recalls director Jeff Stark. But you weren’t. You were watching a beer ad filmed under leaden skies on Manchester’s grimiest waterway. “We shot really tight at first so that the bridges looked Venetian – or just about.” A scratchy recording of O Sole Mio completes the mood. Purists will complain that the 19th-century song was Neopolitan rather than Venetian, but that misses the point. “We used it to spoof the Cornetto ad that was popular at the time,” Stark explains. In Stark’s 1993 ad for Boddingtons, he cuts to an aerial shot and we see that the young man is holding something that looks like ice cream. “As the gondolas pass by each other, she leans over as if for a kiss and ... nicks his pint!” The beer thief was played by Anna Chancellor. “She was a nobody at the time.” She got the role after taking part in what used to be known as a “cattle call”: “Two minutes of audition and ‘Next!’” I told Anna to drink the beer like a man and then wipe the froth from her mouth as she sat in the gondola. When she did, the lipstick smeared up her cheek. The makeup woman rushed over and said: ‘You can’t do that!’ But I said: ‘Hang on! That’s really funny.’” And so it happened that, wide-eyed and lipstick-smeared, Chancellor uttered the immortal line: “By ’eck, it’s gorgeous!” Thanks to the help of a dialect coach, Somerset-raised, boarding school-educated Chancellor sounded more Noel Gallagher than Noel Coward. Few things symbolise the way our cities have transformed more than canals. Around the world, cities have woken up to the power of their urban waterways: from Milan to Manchester, the former economic arteries of industry are being turned into corridors for walkers, boaters and wildlife. Cafes and restaurants are proliferating and canalside living is newly chic – and newly costly. As commercial interests muscle in on the last great undeveloped bit of Britain’s cities, Guardian Cities and the Observer wanted to take stock of a crucial moment in history, when we still have a choice: whether to turn canals into sanitised enclaves of wealth, or preserve them as a precious resource for all. Chris Michael, Cities editor “I wouldn’t say I made Anna’s career, but she did go on to star in Four Weddings and a Funeral the following year,” says Stark. “More importantly, she married my B camera operator Nigel Willoughby, who she met on set when he wasn’t shooting close-ups with a massive telephoto lens. So at least someone found romance.” The ad ends with the spurned man heading off in his gondola. He produces a can of Boddingtons from inside his jacket and says to the camera: “That Gladys Althorpe – she never buys her own.” Stark filmed the ad on the River Irwell near Granada studios. “It wasn’t sunny, so we had to use lots of lights to make it look like Venice. When we pull back in the ad to reveal it’s not Venice but Manchester, you see factories and smoke stacks and there’s some bloke fishing and a couple walking along the towpath, one pushing a shopping trolley, which is something that you won’t see in La Serenissima. Of course, Manchester’s very different now.” It certainly is. There is a possibility that ad agency Bartle Bogle Hegarty’s Cream of Manchester ad campaign, which ran from 1991 until 1999 and is credited with revitalising the city’s image, is responsible for that transformation. According to the Manchester Evening News, Stark’s ad “told the world something about the reinvention of the murky old city, that its once-filthy waterway could almost pass for Venice”. Since then, stretches of canal and rivers flowing through Manchester have undergone huge makeovers, with developments including Salford Quays transforming the city’s waterfronts. The Irwell now is used for rowing and pleasure cruises while parts of it have become wildlife havens. As yet, though, there is no regular gondola service. But there is a bitter end to the story. Boddingtons’ Strangeways brewery in the heart of Manchester closed in 2005, with the loss of 60 jobs. Now, after more than a decade as a car park, it is set for a £175m housing, retail and commercial development called Old Brewery Gardens. As for Boddingtons bitter, the one-time cream of Manchester is today brewed in south Wales. The canal revolution series looks at what our changing waterways reveal about modern British cities. Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram and use the hashtag #canalrevolution to join the discussion or sign up for our weekly newsletter