Tom Morris was born in 1964. He ran Battersea Arts Centre, London, from 1995 to 2004 before moving to the National Theatre where he co-directed the worldwide hit War Horse. In 2009 he became artistic director of Bristol Old Vic. This summer he directs Breaking the Waves – Missy Mazzoli’s opera of Lars von Trier’s 1996 film – at the Edinburgh international festival, followed by Cyrano at the Bristol Old Vic. He has written the lyrics for English National Opera’s new version of Orpheus in the Underworld, and his stage version of Touching the Void arrives in the West End in November. Tell me about Breaking the Waves…The film is like a bullet lodged in the minds of a whole generation because it’s so brutal. But it’s loved by many. What Missy Mazzoli has done with her adaptation is to articulate, through her extraordinary gifts – she’s rightly celebrated as a rising star of modern American classical music – what she thinks is going on in the head of Bess, the central character. And it’s about love, really. How different is directing opera to theatre?I use music a lot anyway – I think of music as an emotional runway from which the project takes off (or doesn’t). But in opera the emotions unfold at a different rate: it’s very hard to have an emotional flashpoint because the music is often giving the subtext. Increasingly people are saying, 'I’ve had it with London, there’s no space to live or work in.' And in Bristol, there is Then you’re directing Cyrano at Bristol Old Vic…Lots of theatre-makers love the play because it’s so theatrical: it’s about the imagination, both in how it’s staged and in terms of its subject, which, again, is love. It is absurdly romantic. The great thing for me is being able to pull together a dream team of actors who have worked in this very, very precious, incredibly intimate theatre: Felix Hayes, Tristan Sturrock, people who know how to play that space. You’ve also worked with Emma Rice on the lyrics for Orpheus in the Underworld for ENO.There’s no way I could make the theatre I try to make, which is inescapably playful, without the apprenticeship I served with Emma Rice at Kneehigh. Whenever I get the chance to work with her, I just say yes, because she’s an extraordinary inspiration for me – and for the whole contemporary theatre scene, really. How did the stage version of Touching the Void come about?I saw the film and immediately thought this would be really interesting to do in a theatre, because even though it’s set on a mountain, which is incredibly challenging, the heart of it is a relationship between two people. And then I was talking to David Greig [playwright and artistic director of the Lyceum in Edinburgh], and he said “if you do that I’m writing it”. He’s also completely obsessed with the story. We hear a lot about how hard it is for regional theatres, but also how people are leaving London for places like Bristol. How does it feel on the ground?It’s incredibly hard financially in a regional theatre because there have been ongoing cuts in budgets. At a time of, let’s just say political jaggedness, we need to grasp the potential of the extraordinary creativity of this country. But at the same time, in Bristol, there is this ongoing, very resilient creative churn, with people who grow up in the city, and increasingly people saying: “I’ve had it with London, there’s no space to live or work in.” And in Bristol, there is. You’ve programmed work that faces Bristol’s historic involvement in the slave trade. Is the city addressing that more widely – or is there resistance?Yeah, for sure, there is [resistance] – but there’s also more movement. There was a report by the Runnymede trust, which said Bristol was the most divided and unequal city outside London. That really stung. And that meant lots of old farts like me started thinking quite radically about the connection between the city’s failure to engage with its historical involvement in the transatlantic slave trade, and the fact that lots of communities, and especially black communities, still feel disconnected from the opportunities the city is offering. Do you think the arts have a duty to consider where their money comes from today?I do, actually. I was involved in The Death of Klinghoffer in New York [John Adams’s controversial opera about the Palestinian Liberation Front’s hijacking of a cruise liner in 1985], and backers removed their support. I thought: we need to write a protocol which says the company or individual does not endorse anything that is expressed politically on stage. Events have caught up with me: now it’s arts organisations who are worried about the politics of their supporters. • The European premiere of Breaking the Waves is at the King’s theatre, Edinburgh, 21-24 August