What does a musician need to become a proper, established pop star with a decades-long career? Talent, yes, obviously, and some banging songs. But is it possible that “hanging around until everyone just accepts you as part of the musical landscape” and “tricking the public into thinking you’re cool by getting some famous mates on your songs” is also a factor? Take Calvin Harris, for instance. He has been around for 12 years, and he’s gone from “tall Scottish bloke waving his arms around on T4 on the Beach” to “reliable summer anthem generator”. Forget three days of sunshine and wasps in your pint, the real start of a British summer is a Calvin Harris track you can guarantee you’ll be hearing every single second of your life until September. Plus, now that he’s proper famous, he can draft in mates such as Schoolboy Q, Khalid, Travis Scott and Future for his albums, making it easier to ignore the more uncool aspects of the artist formerly known as Adam Wiles (such as the fact his Vegas pool parties are the number one basic bro stag-party destination and he’s quite serious about his vegetable patch on Instagram). Or Sam Smith, AKA the lad your mum got into after picking up his CD at the checkout in Tesco, and, of course, the “first gay man to win an Oscar”. But in 2019? All signs point to him going Full Pop Star: the Normani collaboration on Dancing With a Stranger; the dance lessons with Parris Goebal (choreographer behind Justin Bieber’s Sorry video); the secret big-name collaborations for his upcoming album. Is Sam Smith finally going to be cool after seven years in pop? Weirder things have happened. Ed Sheeran is the best example of a pop star who has worn us all down, badgered us into acceptance, into sighing: “Yes, fine, you’re all right.” (There are no female pop stars who fit this theory, interestingly. It’s almost like the music industry favours men, hmm?) He has tried everything: the cursed early 00s Nizlopi/Just Jack thing, grime, rap, folky pop, tropical house, being mates with Taylor Swift, appearing in Game of Thrones, being in an actual film (Yesterday). Yet, despite selling millions and breaking streaming records, eight years after he was first signed, he has still got the whiff of work experience. So, there is only one thing for it: roll out his much cooler mates for his new album No 6 Collaborations Project. First up was Justin Bieber on I Don’t Care (Bieber being another example of the “persistence and cool mates” strategy). Then the actually very good Cross Me featuring Chance the Rapper and PnB Rock. The album features Stormzy, HER, Cardi B, Meek Mill, J Hus, Travis Scott (yes, him again), Eminem … basically there’s something for everyone. And if that doesn’t work? Well, look: he’s worn us down now. He might as well stay.