While Daniel Craig is set to reprise his role as James Bond in the next film, the franchise is set for a shake-up, with reports claiming that black British actor Lashana Lynch has been cast as 007 – taking over Bond’s secret agent number after his character leaves M16. The Mail has quoted from an anonymous “movie insider”, who says that the 25th film opens with Bond (Craig), retired in Jamaica, being called back to action to fight a new villain. “There is a pivotal scene at the start of the film where M says, “Come in 007”, and in walks Lashana who is black, beautiful and a woman,” the source said. “It’s a popcorn-dropping moment. Bond is still Bond but he’s been replaced as 007.” Originally from West London, Lynch, 31, made her film debut in 2011’s Fast Girls, but her breakthrough role came earlier this year, as fighter pilot Maria Rambeau in Captain Marvel. The news of her being given Bond’s famous code name has been widely praised on social media, coming weeks after US singer Halle Bailey was cast as Ariel in Disney’s live action remake of the Little Mermaid. Wow. Lashana Lynch is the next 007. She’s not playing Bond, but will take over the code name. Brava, Phoebe Waller-Bridge for ushering in a new era where WoC can lead a spy series, like Sandra Oh in #KillingEve. H/t @iamlaurenp https://t.co/qcSpMHF2zR MJ IS A BLACK WOMANASGARD'S NEW LEADER IS A BLACK WOMANSTARFIRE IS A BLACK WOMANARIEL IS A BLACK WOMANTHE NEW 007 IS A BLACK WOMANI LOVE THIS SONG KEEP IT GOING The 25th Bond film – which is being shot in Italy and the UK – has been plagued by difficulties, beginning in October 2015 when Craig said he would “rather slash my wrists” than play Bond again. Despite once saying he would rather take his own life than reprise his role as 007, Daniel Craig confirms he will return as James Bond for the franchise's 25th movie. Danny Boyle confirms he is working on a script for the next Bond film alongside his Trainspotting collaborator John Hodge. EON Productions’ Michael G Wilson and Barbara Broccoli, the custodians of the Bond movies, confirm production will begin at the start of December 2018, with the film released in the UK on 25 October 2019 and in the US a fortnight later. Boyle quits the movie over 'creative differences'. Sources close to the production confirm that the next 007 movie will miss its scheduled release date, after disputes between the director, producers and star Craig Writers Neal Purvis and Robert Wade return to James Bond for a seventh time, following Boyle’s late-hour departure from the project. True Detective's Cary Fukunaga is named as the new director. Another new writer arrives as Bourne Ultimatum writer Scott Z Burns is hired to rewrite the screenplay. The working title of the film - Shatterhand - is released to widespread derision. At the risk of being labelled 'too PC' about the cliamte emergency, it emerges that Bond will be behind the wheel of an electric Aston Martin Rapide E in the new film. Riding high on the back of the success of Fleabag, Phoebe Waller-Bridge is reported to have been brought in to liven up new Bond script. The production enjoys a glitzy launch in Jamaica, officially adding Rami Malek to the cast, but failing to reveal the movie's new name. Daniel Craig requires surgery on an ankle injured during the filming, putting him out of action for at least two weeks. The official James Bond social media account announced the news, saying production would continue while Craig 'rehabilitates'. An explosion on the set injures a crew member and damages the outside of the famous 007 Stage at Pinewood Studios, Buckinghamshire. In 2017, he confirmed he had relented, but, the same year, director Danny Boyle – who had been brought in to replace Sam Mendes, after Mendes refused to direct any more Bond films – also left, citing a dispute over the script. American Cary Fukunaga was hired to replace them, and the film cycled through a series of script writers before Craig requested Fleabag’s Phoebe Waller-Bridge – only the second female writer in the history of the franchise – be brought in to polish it up. Waller-Bridge is quoted in the Daily Mail as saying, “There’s been a lot of talk about whether or not Bond is relevant now because of who he is and the way he treats women. I think that’s bollocks. I think he’s absolutely relevant now. “[The franchise] has just got to grow. It has just got to evolve, and the important thing is that the film treats the women properly. He doesn’t have to. He needs to be true to his character.” Bond producer Barbara Broccoli told the Guardian last year that there would “never” be a female Bond.