Not long ago I dreamed I was a child travelling from Rome to Naples for the first time with my parents. I saw the vivid blue colour of the sea from the train and felt the excitement pulsing inside me as we walked from the station to the harbour. Then I was woken by a phone call, from one of my best friends in Rome. She was on her way to Termini, the capital’s central station. I was late. I only had one hour left to meet her there and jump on a train to Naples – this time for real. She’d encouraged me to make the trip because these days Naples is more dynamic, open and cleaner than Rome, and it’s not as dangerous as it once was. We wanted to see two beautiful art exhibitions: one of Caravaggio, the magician of light, the other of Canova, including, for the first time, his masterpiece Bust of Peace, which had been specially transported from Ukraine. Pino Daniele is the soul of Naples. Crazy, unpredictable, fun, powerful, loving and melancholic, like the city itself My last visit to Naples had been an impossible rush – a day trip, travelling with a Japanese journalist on his way to Pompeii for a shoot. We’d just had time to interview someone about the eruption of Vesuvius, before we dashed back to Rome. What a horrible shame it was to whizz through Naples, and without even eating my favourite food: fried anchovies. This time would be different. We arrived at midday. First we stopped for coffee and a sfogliatella (pastry) with ricotta cheese. The coffee was so strong it made me dizzy. “E’ buono?” (It is good?) “Si, si …” I remembered the singer Pino Daniele and his song Na tazzulella ’e cafè (a tiny cup of coffee). Daniele is the soul of Naples. Crazy, unpredictable, fun, powerful, loving and melancholic, just like the city itself. Naples is a blast of emotions, vivid colours and shadows, beauty and decadence. You can smell perfumes, the sea and the dirt. Coming back after so many years was as much a dream as a journey. At the Capodimonte museum, a stunning view stretches out across the Gulf of Naples to the island of Capri. Inside, we paused in front of Caravaggio’s Flagellation of Christ (1607-1608). The painting has two versions, one kept in Naples, the other in France’s Musée des Beaux-Arts in Rouen, and it had travelled to Naples for the exhibit. Two other paintings by Caravaggio both depict Salome holding the head of John the Baptist: one from Madrid’s Palacio Real, the other from London’s National Gallery. Art coming together from different parts of the continent makes you reflect on Europe: how interesting that the same subject can have such different colours and points of light. With images of Salome in my head, I took a small rickety bus downtown. The man working at the hotel reception, who went by the name of Mateo, was a 28-year-old former banker from Buenos Aires. He had quit his job to travel across South America, and now he was studying tourism management in Naples. He had met his wife, Maria – a young Italian physics engineer – in Medellín, Colombia. Mateo described how Naples’ tourism industry is dominated by the mafia. His wife couldn’t find a job in her field, and has ended up teaching maths. But they say their “destiny is to travel”. They plan to move to Barcelona next year, on a scholarship. I was struck by the optimism of this couple. Europe gives them the opportunity to move from one place to another. Migration should be seen as a natural opportunity for improvement. Leaving the enchantment of Naples behind, I felt something peaceful in the air. For all the havoc of politics, Europe has its dreamers, and its art. • Raffaela Scaglietta is a photographer based in Rome