One of the first things you notice as you enter Swiss-born interior designer Ana Engelhorn’s elegant London period home is the original wooden staircase painted dark green. It’s set against the cheery brightness of the hallway, painted in Papers and Paints’ Soane Yellow – an homage to Ana’s mother. She told her: “When you open a door you want to be happy to go inside.” There are flashes of colour everywhere in the stucco-fronted Belgravia rental property she and her husband Carlos moved into last year, with their two young children, their nanny and Persian cat Duke. Not able to change anything structurally, Ana’s solution was to give the house a makeover with colour and reinvent the space. “The owner agreed I could change the style, which was mainly beige carpets and walls,” she explains. “So I painted most of the rooms, uncovered all the fireplaces and pulled up the carpets to reveal the wooden floors underneath. I like seeing the uneven textures, the perfectly imperfect,” she explains. The colours intensify as you progress through the house. Vivid fuchsia pink curtains in Varese velvet from Designers Guild are striking against the ruling emerald green walls of the dining room. They also frame a cosy reading nook in the window where the lower panes are tinted. “I created this area. It’s perfect, because during the day nobody can see you sitting there,” Ana says. Looming over the Conran round marble table is an impressive chandelier made from recycled glass bottles from Luzio in Barcelona, while the original Georgian inbuilt cupboards provide display spots for glassware and ceramics. The dining area opens on to the kitchen with Victorian-era copper pots hanging on the walls, and to eke out the space, the adjoining garage now moonlights as a storage area. “The kitchen was big, but it had no prepping space and I’m someone who loves to cook a lot,” says Ana. “So I painted the cupboards in a pale pink and added colourful door knobs, and then took out the breakfast table and made a bar area. Now I have more space for my coffee machines and bread makers and a place to bake!” On the first floor, the living room’s striking Highland-green paint works perfectly with the modern blush pink and midnight blue velvet sofas. They are complemented by a mid-century brass terrace coffee table and large-scale art on the walls. A creaky-floored reading room in ruby red, which Ana designed like “one of the small sitting rooms you’d find in a hotel,” entices you in with its art deco chairs and shimmering 1900s crystal Venini sconces from Gallery 25. Ana is an avid collector – of art, antiques, furniture. Maybe a little bit of a hoarder too. “I’ve moved a lot so I have things in storage, and I like to keep things as you never know if you’re going to find those things again,” she laughs. She cites her suppliers as inspiration to her evolving style. “Especially those who are a little more out there,” she says. She was also inspired by her parents. “They’ve always had an eccentric flair for interiors and they love travelling and buying and placing antiques.” Memories are collected, too: a colourful patchwork crochet blanket was made by her husband’s 90-year-old grandmother over 50 years ago. “I like mixing contemporary pieces with those that have a history,” Ana says. The uncluttered assemblage of antique curiosities and contemporary design set against a considered mix of reclaimed materials creates contrasting moods in the house, as do the atmospheric and surreal paintings and sculptures by Spanish artists Alicia Martín, Miguel Macaya and Samuel Salcedo. “Art is important to me and I like to bring it into clients’ homes,” explains Ana. “Especially when they might not have been brave enough to experiment with colour, it can really add something. Walls are so big, they need to tell a story.” A framed photograph of the sea, printed large and given solitary prominence on the gentian blue walls, offers a calming narrative in the master bedroom. Through the adjoining dressing room where the floor is lined with decorative high heels there is a large en suite bathroom with marble-topped fittings. Here the immersive blue theme continues, as does Ana’s love of reclaimed rustic mirrors and mind-bending wall art. A fairy tale unfolds in her daughter’s bedroom on the top floor with its painted cloudscape on the ceiling, Alpine wooden bed and neoclassical-style doll’s house (crammed with books). Her son’s bedroom is still in the original style of the house. There is a guest loo, its original patterned wallpaper also untouched. There are two offices: Ana’s is painted dove grey and overlooks a mews of houses with picture-pretty facades, while Carlos’s is decorated in sky blue with framed prints of the mechanical workings of classic sports cars on the walls. The large garden terrace is intentionally a little overgrown and wild, with an original sandstone fountain. A lively, inspiring place, at its heart this is a hard-working family home where living with a combination of antiques, modern design, art and small people is possible. “I’m definitely not someone who would say, ‘Don’t touch that!’ to my children, or anyone else,” she laughs. “Whatever you have in your home, you have to be able to use it and enjoy it”. anaengelhorn.com