The Edinburgh festival does not look as if it is in crisis. When tens of thousands of visitors pour into the Scottish capital in August, more than doubling its population, it will appear to be booming. And to the television producers who arrive on the lookout for fresh talent, it will seem in rude health. After all, top names in entertainment, such as Phoebe Waller-Bridge, Tim Minchin, Sara Pascoe, Romesh Ranganathan and Sarah Millican, all earned their chance to reach a mass audience following hit shows on the fringe. Yet fears are building about the festival’s future as a test-bed and showcase for creative talent. “We’re in dire straits now,” said veteran comedy promoter Mel Brown. Her worry? The recent decision of leading Scottish newspapers and magazines to slash their coverage of the festival in half. Coupled with the dwindling size of the annual contingent of London critics, the threat to the ecology of the festival is real. “The falling away of the number of critics who can afford to come up to the festival has a cumulative effect,” Brown added. “It is hard for us to get the word out about shows during the festival without the help of the star ratings given out. These sell the shows to the crowds when there are so many to choose from when we put them on the posters and leaflets. The word of proper, quality reviewers really matters.” Every year the festival (which is really two festivals, an official, international arts one and a vast fringe of amateur and professional shows) gets bigger. This time there will be around 59,000 performances in its 330 or so fringe venues, making it, taken together, the third biggest ticketed gathering in the world, after the World Cup and the Olympics. For some time the fringe festival has been dominated by cabaret and comedy. It provides a conveyor belt of virtuoso creativity, including daring, genre-busting productions like Jerry Springer: The Opera, to be revived in Manchester in August, and dating back beyond the early appearance of Stephen Fry, who shared the first-ever comedy award in 1981 with Emma Thompson and Hugh Laurie. Fry is back this year in the official festival with his show about Greek gods. “The festival is the place where extraordinary talent is found, year after year,” said theatrical impresario Nica Burns, the director of the festival’s prestigious comedy awards, renamed the Daves last week as a new sponsorship deal with the comedy channel was signed. “So it is absolutely vital these shows get the attention they deserve. One of the main reasons we have run the awards for almost 40 year now is to make sure that we have a network of experts seeing the shows and finding the good stuff.” According to one journalist on the Scotsman, the halving of professional critics and reviewers is simply the result of editorial budget cuts. But the economic basis of the festival is also now endangered by the high cost of accommodation in the city and by a political push to regulate the low pay and exploitative practices widespread among fringe venues. One performer who understands the high stakes at Edinburgh better than most is Timandra Harkness, the writer and radio presenter who is returning to live comedy this summer with a show all about risk. Her show, Take A Risk, playfully highlights five categories of human risk – social, financial, physical, emotional and to future health – and she candidly admits that taking her show to the fringe exposes her to all five. “We are all different, but I am most averse to financial risk, so it is strange I am doing this to myself,” Harkness said, adding that her ultimate reward would be having her show picked out for praise by both the critics and the crowds: “I felt my life was getting too safe really, so I wanted to go back to comedy.” Another performer preparing to step out on an empty stage this year is Izzy Mant, an experienced television comedy producer who already knows the value of critical success in Edinburgh. “The fringe has been a fixture on my calendar for decades because it is the best way to take the temperature of the work people are making: it gives you a panoramic view that helps you judge the work. As a producer, I know if someone can still make you laugh when you have a hangover and it is the sixth show of the day, then they must be good.” Mant said there is now greater coverage of music festivals than of arts festivals, so less work for specialist arts critics. “I don’t understand it,” she said. “Especially as comedy is so popular and Edinburgh is now largely associated with comedy, though there is still brilliant theatre as well.” Mant, whose show is called Polite Club, points out that many of the stars she has worked with in television got their start in Edinburgh. “It is Edinburgh that often does it for them, even if they have been working hard on the circuit,” Mant said. “Someone like Roisin Conaty, who I worked with on Channel 4’s GameFace, made a huge splash there first. And it is my experience of the importance of the festival that has made me choose it as the best place to start my move into writing and performing.” Several national newspapers have shed staff critics in the last few years. Comedy and theatre critic Veronica Lee has watched the shrinking band of professional critics who can afford to attend Edinburgh with regret. “Any cutback on covering the best arts festival in the world is a real shame,” Lee said. “There is no shortage of opinion out there, of course. Lots of people post online or review for free, but for two decades now the number of top-level critics has been falling. It seems people are forgetting how important this festival is: it makes around £90m for the city and feeds the beast of television. “Where would comedy shows be without Edinburgh to develop their new talents each year?” The newcomers critics found on the fringe: Aisling Bea (2012)Winner of the So You Think You’re Funny award, she was nominated the following year as best newcomer. “You won’t see many more assured newcomer sets than this,” the Guardian said. Reginald D Hunter (2002)The festival favourite was spotted for the laid-back storytelling that later took him on to Never Mind The Buzzcocks, QI and Have I Got News For You. The Mighty Boosh (1998) Surreal sketch humour from Julian Barratt and Noel Fielding, with Rich Fulcher, saw them soon established as a comedy brand still fondly remembered by fans around the world. Barratt now acts and Fielding is one of the hosts of The Great British Bake Off on Channel 4.Harry Hill (1992)Winner of the first newcomer award, Hill was soon given his own show on Channel 4. He later hit the mainstream with Harry Hill’s TV Burp on ITV.