Manchester City are looking to put the band back together. Well, the Spanish lead singer and the funky Brazilian bassist, as it emerges Pep Guardiola wants Dani Alves on a free transfer. Alves is out of contract following two seasons at Paris Saint-Germain and despite having recently turned 36, he is keen for one more shot at the big time. Which is where Guardiola comes in. City’s manager enjoyed huge success with the right-back during their time together at Barcelona and, having just seen him lead Brazil to Copa America glory, feels he can provide cover for – and possibly competition to – Kyle Walker. Two issues, however: City already have a reserve right-back in Danilo and Alves turned down the chance to join City in the summer of 2017 after leaving Juventus, making any move to the Etihad Stadium somewhat awkward. Across the city, Manchester United appear to be moving ever closer to signing Sporting Lisbon midfielder Bruno Fernandes. Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has been chasing the highly-rated 24-year-old for some time as he looks to bring some success and, let’s face it, pride back to Old Trafford and could finally land his man for around £60m after Sporting moved ever closer to acquiring Macedonian midfielder Aleksandar Trajkovski from Palermo, who very much looks like a Fernandes replacement. Solskjaer also appears to have given up on signing Sean Longstaff from Newcastle after being quoted £50m for the 21-year-old. Oh Mike Ashley, you really are something else. Speaking of midfielders, Idrissa Gueye has again been linked with a move from Everton to PSG. The Senegal international appeared set to swap Merseyside for Paris in January only for the deal to hit a brick wall. Well now it seems to be back on, with the French champions also keen on Leroy Sané should the Germany winger, who has been pursued by Bayern Munich for some months now, be allowed to leave City. Elsewhere, West Ham are weighing up a move for Diego Costa. Manuel Pellegrini is desperate to sign a striker following the departures of Marko Arnautovic, Andy Carroll and Lucas Pérez and having lost out on Maxi Gómez, the Chilean may just be crazy enough to take a punt on Costa, who is no longer wanted at Atlético Madrid and has also been a linked with Everton and Wolves. Arsenal transfer alert! Yes Gooners, your club may actually sign a footballer this summer. And make that TWO footballers, with Unai Emery supposedly keen on bringing in Lucas Vázquez and Mariano Díaz from Real Madrid. But it simply wouldn’t be Arsenal if there wasn’t a complication, with Real apparently reluctant to sell the pair as they count towards their quota of homegrown players. Finally, Aston Villa want to secure a deal for the wonderfully named Bjorn Engels from Stade Reims. The 6ft 4ins tall Belgian centre-back, who has been capped at under-21 level by his country, has caught the eye of Dean Smith as he continues to beef up his squad ahead of their return to Premier League action.