Yerry Mina has been charged with misconduct by the Football Association for an alleged breach of betting regulations, the Everton defender having appeared in an advert for a gambling company. Mina’s case will be heard by an independent regulatory commission, that is expected to be a three-person body. The potential sanction faced by the 24-year-old is down to the commission’s discretion, with one factor being how Mina decides to plead. The Columbia centre-back has 48 hours to answer the charge, the deadline being 6pm on Friday. “Yerry Mina has been charged with misconduct in relation to The FA’s betting rules. It is alleged the defender breached FA Rule E8 (3) by participating in an advertisement for betting activity which he is prohibited from engaging in,” read an FA statement. The charge comes a week after Daniel Sturridge was fined £75,000 and given a six-week suspension, of which four are suspended, after being found guilty of breaching betting regulations. The FA is appealing the independent regulatory commission ruling on the basis that, in their opinion, the ban should be at least six months. Everton signed Mina from Barcelona last August for £28m after he had scored three goals at the World Cup, one of which came in Colombia’s last-16 match with England. He endured an injury-hit debut season at Goodison Park and will be hoping for more game time, especially if, as expected, Everton are unable to turn Kurt Zouma’s loan move from Chelsea into a permanent deal. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Another player who may also not be at Everton next season is Idrissa Gueye, with reports claiming Paris Saint-Germain have had a £28m bid accepted for the Senegal midfielder. Gueye came close to moving to PSG during the January transfer window but Everton’s valuation of around £30m prevented the transfer. Everton’s £8m signing of Fabian Delph from Manchester City clears the way for Gueye to leave.