Remarkable close-up footage that appears to show an uncontacted tribesman in the Amazon rainforest has been released by an indigenous media group that wants to raise awareness of the threat posed by illegal loggers, miners and drug traffickers. The video clip shows a bare-chested man with a spear, who is believed to belong to the Awá people. He is seen sniffing a machete that has been left in the undergrowth, before growing suspicious – and then alarmed. He flees into the undergrowth with a fellow hunter when he realises he is being watched. The Awá have been described as the world’s most threatened tribe by the NGO Survival International, which has tracked killings by loggers, who surround and frequently encroach upon the group’s territory. Many of the community have been forced to abandon the forest, but some remain in self-imposed isolation. Their existence has been called into question by commercial interests that want to move into the land, but the new footage has been cited as proof that they remain in the territory. It was recorded by a member of a neighbouring tribe, the Guajajara, which is trying to defend one of the last pockets of intact forest in Maranhão, a massively deforested state in the north-east of Brazil. “We hope this film produces something positive. We hope it makes an impact around the world to help protect our people and our forest,” said Flay Guajajara, who shot the image while out hunting and released it through the Mídia Índia platform. The images were screened on TV Globo’s Fantástico investigative documentary show on Sunday night along, with an interview with anthropologists familiar with the Awá. The documentary maker Sonia Bridi said the tribe live in such fear that they teach children not to cry, so no one can know where they are. “How sad, to have to live in constant fear,” she tweeted after the programme. The Guajajara are also under pressure but have organised networks of forest guardians to patrol their land, film incursions, and evict loggers. Similar strategies have also been adopted by another Maranhão tribe, the Ka’apor. Olimpio Guajajara, coordinator of the Guardians of the Amazon, said three of the group’s members have been murdered in this activity, which highlighted the need for more longterm support. He said: “We Guardians are defending our people’s rights, defending the uncontacted Indians, and defending nature for all of us. We need the land to be protected for good.” Indigenous groups say successive governments have failed to adequately recognise their territorial rights and their role in protecting forests that are globally essential for carbon sequestration and natural habitats. Under the president Jair Bolsonaro, they say their situation has become more fraught because the administration has moved to open up protected areas to agribusiness and miners. According to Survival International, loggers have been emboldened by the government and their camps can now be seen on the edge of Awá land. Director Stephen Corry said: “This video is further proof that the uncontacted Awá people really exist. And a glance at a satellite photo shows just how much danger they’re in. Loggers have already killed many of their relatives and forced others out of the forest. He added: President Bolsonaro and his friends in the logging industry would like nothing more than for those who still survive to be eliminated. Only a global outcry stands between them and genocide.”