Swimming Australia and Mack Horton will receive an official warning from the sport’s world governing body, Fina, after the Olympic champion sensationally protested against controversial Chinese star Sun Yang’s 400m freestyle win at the world swimming titles. Reaction to Horton’s gesture was furious in China. The China Daily led the chorus of disapproval, saying: “Horton’s behaviour was not an insult to Chinese athletes, but an insult to himself.” Vile messages have also inundated Horton’s Instagram page since Sun claimed the protest was disrespectful to China, with death threats directed at the Olympic champion, his family and his girlfriend. Swimming Australia was confident Horton would escape sanction after refusing to shake hands with Sun and not joining his bitter rival on the podium on the titles’ opening night at Gwangju, South Korea, on Sunday. But Fina released a statement on Monday night that confirmed not only Horton but also the national body would receive a warning letter despite Swimming Australia claiming it had no prior knowledge of his protest. “The Fina executive met today in Gwangju to analyse the situation related with the men’s 400m free victory ceremony and has decided to send a warning letter to Swimming Australia and to Mack Horton,” the statement said. “While Fina respects the principle of freedom of speech, it has to be conducted in the right context. “As in all major sports organisations, our athletes and their entourages are aware of their responsibilities to respect Fina regulations and not use Fina events to make personal statements or gestures. “The matter over which Mack Horton was allegedly protesting is currently under review by [the Court of Arbitration for Sport] and therefore it is not appropriate for Fina to prejudice this hearing by commenting further.” Horton snubbed Sun, who served a 2014 doping ban, after the triple Olympic champion was allowed to compete ahead of the Cas hearing in September that may end the Chinese star’s career. The 10-time world champion has been accused of smashing vials of his blood with a hammer during a clash last year with testers, and faces a lifetime ban if found guilty. The chief executive of Swimming Australia, Leigh Russell, stood by the 23-year-old. “Swimming Australia respects the position Mack Horton took during the medal ceremony and understands his sense of frustration,” she said in a statement. Horton’s father said his son was not taking aim at China with his protest. “I think Mack, like so many in the sport, would just like consistency in the approach to the testing regime,” he told 3AW radio. “This is not about China. We have huge respect for China. This is about ensuring the systems and processes in the sport keep the sport clean.” The American breaststroke champion Lilly King revealed the Australian received a standing ovation at the athletes’ village for refusing to acknowledge Sun on Sunday night. “We were kind of waiting around for that awards ceremony to see what was going to happen and yeah it was awesome,” two-time Olympic gold medallist King said. “When we walked into the dining hall, he walked in after us and like the whole dining hall erupted in applause so it was pretty great to see the athletes united on his stance and supporting him as well. “I don’t think anyone at Fina’s going to stand up for the athletes, so the athletes have to stand up for themselves.” Sun – who claimed a fourth straight 400m world title – wasn’t so impressed, saying Horton’s stance was disrespectful to China. “It was unfortunate because disrespecting me is OK but disrespecting China was very unfortunate and I felt sorry about that,” he said. The Australian team supported Horton’s stance but said they had no prior knowledge of the protest. “That was his idea to do that. But let’s put it this way, I understand him very much,” Dolphins head coach Jacco Verhaeren said. Teammate Mitch Larkin said “99%” of athletes at Gwangju backed Horton’s Sun snub. “We are all fighting for a clean sport,” he said. Horton’s bitter rivalry erupted at the Rio Olympics when he dismissed Sun as a “drug cheat” before upsetting the Chinese star to claim a shock 400m freestyle gold.