If the next British prime minister was hoping the new president of the European commission would bring fresh thinking on Brexit, the nomination of Germany’s defence minister, Ursula von der Leyen, to replace Jean-Claude Juncker is unlikely to be a welcome development. Von der Leyen, who, as the daughter of a commission official spent the first 12 years of her life in Brussels, is a key ally of Angela Merkel, with whom she has worked since 2005. Like Merkel, she has championed the idea of a close relationship between the EU and UK after Brexit. Yet Von der Leyen, one of Germany’s most popular politicians, has been withering about those who campaigned for Brexit. Describing events since the referendum as a “burst bubble of hollow promises … inflated by populists”, she has told German industry to prepare for Britain to leave with no deal. “They had promised that Britain would benefit from Brexit,” Von der Leyen said last year. “The fact is today that Brexit is a loss for everyone.” She has since cautioned that a no-deal Brexit would be the “worst possible start” to the close long-term EU-UK relationship that Berlin holds desirable. Von der Leyen, 60, is the daughter of Heidi and Ernst Albrecht, the latter having been a senior politician in the centre-right Christian Democratic Union who rose to be governor of the state of Lower Saxony after his spell in Brussels in the 1950s. She studied economics at the universities of Göttingen and Münster before attending the London School of Economics where she used the pseudonym Rose Ladson because she was seen as a potential target for West German leftwing extremists. Von der Leyen then read for a medical degree, becoming a gynaecologist, and only entered politics at 42. A mother of seven, she has held government positions as labour and family affairs minister, driving forward key policies on gender quotas for company boards and improved maternity and paternity pay and rights. Merkel cited Von der Leyen’s interest in the international stage when appointing her as Germany’s first female defence minister in 2013. In 2011, Von der Leyen spoke of her desire for a “United States of Europe along the lines of federal states like Switzerland, Germany or the US”. She has since claimed that Brexit, and the loss of the “pragmatism” of the British in the EU, should propel the bloc towards further integration, and has voiced support for a European army. “A European army is a vision that might become a reality in generations to come,” she said last year. “What we see today and what we already achieved is the first concrete steps on this way. By giving birth to the European Defence Union, we have started to build what I like to call the ‘army of the Europeans’. We maintain national armies, under the authority of sovereign states, but better coordinated and mutually reinforcing.” As commission president, Von der Leyen will represent the EU on the world stage, and a key task will be building a working relationship with Donald Trump’s White House. She has previously criticised a lack of strategy in Trump’s approach to Vladimir Putin’s Russia and has suggested the US president’s frosty relationship with Merkel is based on his outdated view of women. “A woman like Angela Merkel, a globally respected head of government with a long experience, probably did not appear in his worldview before,” she said.