Everyone loves to hate a fat cat. And so, in 2016, when former chancellor George Osborne decided to reduce pension tax relief for very high earners, he must have thought he was on to a sure thing. After all, with a UK average household income of only £26,000, who would ever complain about the fate of people so indecently well paid they could afford to set aside up to £40,000 a year in pension contributions? Three years on, Osborne’s slam-dunk strategy for bolstering the exchequer’s coffers is wreaking havoc on the NHS. Something as arcane and tedious as pension tax law is threatening to increase waiting lists, lengthen delays in starting cancer treatment and endanger the lives of NHS patients. According to the BMA, in the Kafkaesque world of Osborne’s pension reforms, it is now possible for an NHS consultant to earn a mere pound of extra income and be stung with an eye-watering tax bill of up to £13,500. It sounds ludicrous. Yet social media is littered with stories of consultants being hit with unexpected tax bills of tens of thousands of pounds when they help out their trusts by working extra hours to bring down waiting lists. Some have been forced to remortgage their homes to pay them, while others have even been threatened with bailiffs. Now, senior doctors are voting with their feet, either retiring early or refusing to work any extra sessions for fear of ending up having to pay for the privilege. The result – at time when more than 4.4 million people are languishing on NHS waiting lists for non-urgent care – is a perfect storm of excess demand and a dwindling consultant workforce. Patient safety is in jeopardy. Osborne changed the law so that the very highest earners could no longer claim tax relief on £40,000 of pension contributions annually. Instead, the annual allowance now tapers down from £40,000 to only £10,000. Seems reasonable enough. But fiendishly complicated rules around how the taper is calculated mean high-earning doctors can suddenly hit a cliff-edge income where, unbeknown to them, tapering kicks in and additional earnings can trigger massive retrospective tax bills. Working longer hours may result in tax rates of more than 100% – you are literally increasing your workload for a pay cut. No one would pretend that NHS consultants are not well paid, or that the tax quirks of those on six-figure salaries are a pressing issue in national life. But this is an example of fiscal reform having disastrous unintended consequences. Consultants who would be only too willing to help their trusts tackle backlogs of thousands of patients needing operations and assessments by working extra weekends, for example, are now too afraid to do so. The health secretary seems to have forgotten NHS patients completely “Why would I risk doing that?” one surgeon friend told me this week. “Yes, the department’s struggling, but why am I going to spend even more weekends away from the kids if it means taking home less money? At this rate, I’ll be ending up taking early retirement.” She is not alone. According to research commissioned by NHS Providers, who represent most of the NHS’s 240 trusts, more than 40% of NHS consultants have reduced the number of extra shifts they do to avoid punitive tax bills. A third of consultants are now considering early retirement. When the single greatest problem facing the NHS is understaffing – we are currently short of 40,000 nurses and nearly 10,000 doctors – the government’s failure to address these perverse incentives is sheer madness. Health secretary Matt Hancock is burying his head in the sand as senior doctors are discovering it is more cost-effective to quit the job they love than continue working. Then again, on this, the first anniversary of Hancock’s time in office, it is hard to pick out his standout moment of managerial ineptitude. Was it the time he confessed to preparing for no-deal Brexit by overseeing the greatest stockpile of fridges in the history of cold storage? Or was it perhaps when he refused to rule out patient deaths being caused by a no-deal Brexit, and started sheepishly hoarding NHS body bags? The health secretary has been so busy running for prime minister, warning of the perils of no deal, before enthusiastically endorsing Boris Johnson – the prime ministerial contender whose entire campaign hinges around big butch promises of no-deal bravado – he seems to have forgotten NHS patients completely. For once, in an NHS in which morale is rock bottom and staff burnout rife, Hancock has an easy fix. Simply insist the Treasury changes these absurd rules that make senior doctors worse off for working extra hours. The fact that he refuses to do so speaks volumes about how little he values patients. • Rachel Clarke is a palliative care doctor