Ten minutes after the end of this ultimately rather brutal eight‑wicket semi-final defeat of Australia Adil Rashid was down by the boundary signing autographs for a throng of England fans. As he posed for another selfie Jason Roy appeared behind him, wrapped him in a bear hug and carried him off up the stairs, both feet off the ground, to the safety of the England dressing room. It was that kind of day. With England batting second on a clammy afternoon, and starting to thrum up through the gears at 25 without loss, Roy had already begun to do extraordinary things. Earlier Australia had made 223 on a pitch that seemed a little grippy at times. Mitchell Starc came bounding in off that endless run. The third ball of his third over was full and close to leg stump. At which point Roy paused, paused a little more, opened his front foot and revolved his wrists at the last moment, sending the ball not for a scurried single, but miles up in the air, swirling and dipping over the deep fine-leg fielder and, into the crowd. It was a moment of such outrageous skill that the only sensible response was a burst of laughter. Starc stood and glared and grinned and tried to summon an appropriate reaction as Roy walked very slowly up the wicket, with something brilliantly alpha even in those few steps, a man staring at the world through the heat of his own extraordinary talent. As revealed in the Guardian, the Cricket World Cup final will be shown on free-to-air television now that England have qualified for the showpiece event against New Zealand. "Eoin Morgan has backed the decision to show the Cricket World Cup final on free-to-air television, a story revealed in the Guardian. "It's very cool," said England captain Eoin MOrgan. "Particularly given the 2005 Ashes for me was the day cricket became cool – it was front and back page, everyone talking about it – that’s really good for the game. It’s great news it’s on free to air." The match will be screened from 9am on both Channel 4 and Sky Sports, which holds the  UK broadcast rights. However, Channel 4 are also due to show the British Grand Prix on Sunday – the only live free-to-air slot for Formula One on British television this season – meaning cricket coverage will switch to More 4 for the duration of the race at Silverstone. Twenty minutes later, with England at 50 without loss, Nathan Lyon came into the attack. Lyon has a strange kind of voodoo where England are concerned. Watchfulness would be the key, stout defence, taking a look. Lol. Of course it wouldn’t. Lyon sent down a snaking off-break. Roy slid his front foot out of the way and eased his first ball miles back into the stand over long-off. And there was something luminous about him at Edgbaston, the sense of someone entirely in control of his own mechanics, his own method. How often do you get to see anyone operating at this level on this kind of stage? Four balls later Roy dropped down on one knee and reverse-swept Lyon for four, taking the day away from Australia’s world champions on a pitch where everyone bar Steve Smith had scratched and fiddled in the morning. England and semi-finals. It is supposed to hurt. It is supposed to be fraught with doubt, a shared folk memory of chances missed, moments lost. Not today, not with this team. And not for Roy who must on this form – 85 here made it five scores of 50 or more in six World Cup innings – be considered the most beautifully destructive one-day opener in the world right now. All the best strikers of a ball seem to have an area where their talent resides, a part of the body from which it springs. With Roy it is the forearms, the way he simply hurls them through the ball like a Mexican featherweight unloading another whip-crack combination. Here that assured aggression was all the more remarkable because at the halfway point the feeling was that Australia had posted a challenging total. England might have blinked. Early on Starc hit Roy in the stomach as he tried to pull. The next ball was defended, bat, chest, heart, spleen, guts, head all in behind the line. And from there he was off. There was a pair of dreamy cover drives, the ball fizzing and fading as it skimmed the grass, drawing the first of those luxurious cheers from the afternoon crowd. At 71 for no wicket the Bairstow-Roy partnership pushed its average score up past 70, miles ahead of any other pair in the history of ODIs. Another bravura cover drive took Roy to 53 off 50 balls. Marcus Stoinis came on to bowl. Time to have a look? Again, Lol. Roy came walking, ambling, sashaying down the pitch and produced a one-legged flamingo whip to midwicket. Those who know him say that Roy is, in the best possible sense, quite straightforward in his mental approach. This is not a professional sportsman encumbered by doubt or tortured mental processes. It is a genuine gift in itself. Plenty of athletes spend their careers trying to pare things back, to fade out the white noise. What a rare and hugely underrated talent to be able walk out and forget yourself, to see only the moment. Roy eventually went for 85 off 65 balls, and in an ugly way too, openly disputing an incorrect decision on a catch behind. He had killed the chase, though, with 85 out of 147, and five sixes to go with nine fours. These were match-sealing runs too, runs at the sharp end of the day, of the tournament and of his own international career. There is a suggestion Roy will also play Test cricket this summer. It is a bit of a gamble. But then there is also something about unignorable talent, about players who must simply be allowed to play. The red ball will swing and pitches will be trickier. But Roy’s technique is good, his method is simple, those hands describe an easy arc. Before then there is, of course, a final to play. It has been breathless to this point. No doubt Roy will approach Lord’s the same way, with that same feeling of a man operating outside the occasion and leading fearlessly, carelessly from the front.