When Rod Laver won Wimbledon for the fourth and last time in 1969 it was the 11th time in 14 years that an Australian man had won the title. Though John Newcombe won in each of the two following years, only two other Australian men – Pat Cash in 1987 and Lleyton Hewitt in 2002 – have won since. Evonne Goolagong, Sam Stosur and, most recently, Ash Barty at last month’s French Open have won grand slam titles on the women’s side and the country has produced numerous doubles champions. But in wheelchair tennis they have a superstar. Dylan Alcott is so famous in Australia that he recently won a Logie, an award for the most popular new talent on television, recognition of his work as a TV host. On the court he is now a nine-times grand slam singles winner and on Saturday he completed the “Dylan slam”, his 6-0, 6-2 win over Britain’s Andy Lapthorne giving him his fourth straight grand slam title. Alcott plays in the quads event, open to competitors who have a permanent physical disability that results in significant loss of function in three or more extremities, while also fulfilling the sport’s minimum disability criteria. The event was added to the roster at Wimbledon for the first time this year and Alcott, the red-hot favourite, at the first opportunity took his chance. Hugely charismatic, Alcott doubled up as an on-court interviewer at this year’s Australian Open and said his Wimbledon trophy would take pride of place at home. “It sounds weird but I like using the trophy,” he said. “You get a Tiffany crystal vase at the US Open. Why not put delicious, beautiful flowers in it, like we do? We actually use them. And it’s cool. Then they’re around the house. You don’t look like as much of a wanker as well. “This one means [a lot]. Wimbledon … this is the Holy Grail of tennis, isn’t it? I think the Wimbledon trophy, we’ll be ditching the Logie. Sorry TV Week, if you’re listening.” Alcott and Lapthorne had won the doubles title together the previous day but the Briton, the same age as the Australian at 28, was well-beaten. Four months after breaking his wrist, being in the final here was a significant achievement. “Dylan was far too good, he’s probably the best player I’ve ever played,” Lapthorne said. “If he’s on like that and I’m not. I thought my career was over after Australia and, even though I got my behind kicked, hopefully next year I can come back and put on a better show.” There was a shock in the women’s wheelchair event as Aniek van Koot upset her fellow Dutchwoman Diede de Groot to win the title. De Groot’s French Open win last month had given her all four majors at the same time but her hopes of a third straight Wimbledon title were ended with a 6-4, 4-6, 7-5 defeat. Britain’s Gordon Reid and Alfie Hewett, who had won the wheelchair men’s doubles event in each of the previous three years, were beaten 6-4, 6-2 by the Australian Open champions, Joachim Gerard of Belgium and Sweden’s Stefan Olsson, in the final. “They played a great match,” said Reid, who won the first ever Wimbledon wheelchair event in 2016. “A big thanks to Wimbledon and the LTA, they have helped grow the game.” In the boys’ doubles Arthur Fery and Toby Samuel lost 6-4, 6-3 to the American Govind Nanda and Liam Draxl of Canada. Ukraine’s Daria Snigur won the girls’ title, beating the American Alexa Noel 6-4, 6-4.