Among the famous and the privileged taking part in this year’s Magnolia Cup, Glorious Goodwood’s charity race, will be an 18-year-old from Peckham with a determination to do things that are not expected of her. Just five months ago, the riding ambitions of Khadijah Mellah did not extend beyond occasional lessons at the Ebony Horse Club in Brixton but a week on Thursday she is expected to line up against former cyclist Victoria Pendleton, Irish model and TV presenter Vogue Williams, Apprentice series nine runner-up Luisa Zissman and others in a cavalry charge at the Sussex racecourse. It will be a huge moment for Khadijah, though she seemed full of poise on Friday as she was guided through the final stages of her training by two of her mentors, Hayley Turner and Oli Bell, the latter executive producer of a documentary film about the challenge she has taken on. It will also be a significant moment in British racing, as it is thought she will become the first jockey to wear a hijab in a race here. Such records are not kept but no one in officialdom can remember a precedent. Khadijah, who has tackled many different sports and is a black belt in karate, is a particular fan of the fundraising athlete Manal Rostom, founder of the women-only online support group Surviving Hijab. “Khadijah sent her a message saying: ‘You’re an inspiration’,” Bell reports. “She told me, if one person messages me and says I’m an inspiration, that would make me the proudest person. She’s a real titan. She might only be 18 but when we asked her about doing this, she said yes, 100%.” The daughter of a handyman, Khadijah had a keen interest in horses from an early age but, from her home in south London, was not best placed to do anything about it. By repeated begging, she managed to get her parents to drive her out to Kent for a lesson or two but it was too far and too expensive to become a habit. “There’s this mosque in Brixton, sometimes we go for arabic classes or religious celebrations, and we were walking past and my mum saw a leaflet up in the window. She was like, ‘There’s a riding club in Brixton’. I was like, yeah, Mum, sure. Absolutely no way. Oh my God, there is!” This was Khadijah’s introduction to the Ebony Horse Club, which describes itself as “transforming young lives through horses in south London’s most disadvantaged communities”. It took her two years on a waiting list before she could join but she has long been a regular and it pains her that more people are not aware of the opportunity. “To this day, people are like: ‘You ride in Brixton? Where?’ There’s literally a railway that goes above it, you see the horses from the train. Does no one pay attention? “When we go on hacks along the road, people are like: ‘Why is there a horse in Brixton? Are you police?’ Well, do I look like police?” It was with the aim of raising the club’s profile that Bell, who is a patron, arranged for one of its riders to take part in the Magnolia Cup. Khadijah’s response was: “Oooh a race, that sounds cool.” There have since been moments when she has reviewed the wisdom of that answer, as when Brief Goodbye took off with her along the gallops at the British Racing School on Friday. But after six weeks based here, with ready access to insights from the vastly experienced Turner, she has the look of a jockey and all are hopeful she will hold her own at Goodwood. “She looks tidier than I do,” Turner says, as they compare styles on adjacent equicizers, or mechanical horses. She tells Khadijah to tie a knot in the end of her reins, so it doesn’t hang down and catch around her boot, and explains the importance of not relaxing when the winning post is reached, which has led to more than one unseated rider in past Magnolia Cups. “Relaxing is the worst thing to do,” Turner says. “Your legs will go to jelly. Concentrate the whole time and keep your core strong until you’ve pulled up.” Khadijah’s parents worry about a fall, while her friends tell her she must be mad to risk failing in public. But she seems to be enjoying the buzz. She is also, she says, “quite into motorbikes”. Bell’s film, Riding A Dream, is being made by some of those who worked on the Guardian’s Oscar-nominated film, Black Sheep, and he hopes it will be broadcast in the autumn. By then, Khadijah plans to be studying mechanical engineering but she may continue riding out in Newmarket and her younger brother, Abdus, will keep her apprised of the latest in racing as he seeks a jockey’s career. “I’ve grown closer to my brother because I now see eye to eye with him about racing,” she says. “It’s something he’s very into and now that I’m into it too, we can have a good conversation.”