Campaigners for British citizens in Europe say they are being treated as nonentities by Boris Johnson in his race to get Brexit over the line. They say they have been completely forgotten by the new prime minister, who instead went out of his way to pledge that he would look after EU citizens in the UK in his maiden speech in Downing Street. “It is very disappointing that he mentioned EU citizens in the UK but he didn’t mention us in his speech,” said Jane Golding, co-chair of British in Europe, which represents 1.3 million Britons on the continent. Ingrid Taylor, a Briton living in Munich, said Johnson’s appointment was not helping Britons in Germany. “I fear that ordinary Germans are starting to lose patience with the UK – so far we Brits here have experienced only sympathy and understanding. Now that Johnson, a deeply despised figure here, has become prime minister, that goodwill is under threat,” she said. “Last night, with a group of Germans at a lecture at Munich University, I was called upon to explain what the hell is going on in the UK and left in no doubt that the appetite for granting any further extension is nonexistent.” Without a deal or a transition arrangement, many rights of Britons will be left to individual member states. Those who work in the EU fear they will lose employment, social and healthcare rights if the UK crashes out without a deal. Those who have worked in the UK but retired to the continent face uncertainties over pensions and the right to healthcare paid for by the NHS. Johnson repeatedly pledged new legislation for EU citizens in the UK during his leadership campaign and gave them prime billing again in his maiden speech as prime minister on the steps of No 10. “I can assure you that under this government you will get the absolute certainty of the rights to live and remain,” he said. However, he made no mention of Britons in Europe. “We are pleased he is making these sorts of assurances to our friends in Britain, but we were not expecting that after all this time the British in Europe would be forgotten,” said Golding. Campaigners for EU citizens in the UK welcomed Johnson’s remarks and said they felt “more optimistic” that the threat of a Windrush scandal would be removed from EU citizens’ future. Nicolas Hatton, cofounder of the campaign group the3million, said they hoped Johnson would introduce a “declaratory system” instead of the current system whereby EU citizens only get legal “settled” status after Brexit if they apply for it, something the Home Affairs select committee has also criticised. “The thing is, most Brexiters think it was wrong of May to have used EU citizens as a pawn, not because they care more than her about us, but because they see it as a barrier to getting a deal done,” said Hatton. “If Boris gets it taken off the table, that will be good news, but the devil will be in the detail.” Before the referendum, Johnson was in favour of allowing EU citizens to enjoy the status quo after Brexit – something the EU agreed to. But May decided on a different path, forcing EU citizens to apply to stay in the UK in the settled status immigration scheme. About 900,000 of the estimated 3.6 million EU citizens in the UK have already applied, but campaigners fear vulnerable groups including the elderly, children in foster care, homeless people and those with minor criminal records will fall through the cracks. “There will be another Windrush unless Boris can guarantee our status will stay the same for our lifetimes, the next 40 or 50 years,” said Hatton.