As a player, Steve Bruce would put his face where the less courageous would not dare waft their boot. He wore the scars with pride. Similar has gone for his managerial career. With his 10th job as a boss set to be working with Magic Mike Ashley at Newcastle, football’s Bernard Cribbins doppelganger will be taking on a role that many have winced at. “Never go back,” Sam Allardyce said last week, even though his last Tyneside tenure and resultant redundo payment paid for that Casa St James bolthole on the Costa Blanca. The news that Bruce has resigned from Sheffield Wednesday, two days after an angry Owls fan confronted him at Lincoln, suggests he will soon be sitting in a sleazy snack bar sucking sickly sausage rolls in a dirty old town on the banks of the Tyne. Get Mark Knopfler’s Local Hero on maximum volume, fire up the Spender box set, speak wistfully of the Wallsend Boys Club, Brucey is gannin yem, man! A homecoming the Toon Army will get behind? Probably not while their sweet memories of Rafa Benítez’s flowing football linger. Will those intrepid fans making their way to this week’s Premier League Asia Trophy in China be able to resist a pilgrimage to watch Dalian Yifang, where the old master now earns his yuan? They’re away at Guangzhou Evergrande Taobao on Wednesday and at Tianjin Teda on Saturday. The incoming boss clearly does not fear being tainted by a previous association with a rival. After all, he’s the former Sheffield United manager who eventually joined Wednesday, the Birmingham City captain and manager who went to Aston Villa, and a former Sunderland manager with his heart now set on being in Newcastle’s dugout. And neither has he ever appeared too wary of owners with reputations. There was 1960 FA Cup final broken-leg victim Dave Whelan at Wigan, the D!ildo Brothers at Birmingham and the Allam Family of “Hull City Tigers” renaming infamy. “He seems to work with difficult people and he manages well,” Roy Keane’s autobiography wrote of a former teammate. “He has a nice way about him.” High praise indeed from Roy, and The Fiver can corroborate, having once seen Brucey help a cleaner at Hull carry out the bins. “There are a lot of strange names. Someone’s called Potato” – David Lind, a 39-year-old Swedish man, tries to explain why he should have been allowed to change his name to Tottenham. Yup, 39! “I was surprised to learn that Social Media Disgrace Twitter has been promoted to Social Media Atrocity Twitter (Friday’s Fiver). Almost as if The Fiver was invited to a certain social media conference in a big white house recently, declaring all social (and other) media not currently their favourite to be the spawn of the devil. It’s at least heartwarming to know that in football, no big European club would call a press conference just to complain how they are portrayed in the medi ... Oh!” – Thomas Krantz. “Re: Crouchy’s retirement: HHAGTFABM. Too soon?” – Grant McPhee. “With reference to Friday’s Bits and Bobs, I think you have somehow misunderstood the intentions of pigeons which go around loudly cooing: in my experience, they are certainly hungry, but probably not for food. To avoid the savage scissors of The Fiver lawyers, I would suggest the strutting, cooing males are normally on the lookout for a conjugal confrontation, which regrettably conjured up some disturbing images in the context of Jürgen Klopp’s keenness on Rhian Brewster’s undoubted footballing abilities” – Chris Weaver. “Congratulations! For a few hours on a sunny Sunday afternoon, at least in London, you succeeded in your campaign to STOP FOOTBALL! Where will you turn your attention next? STOP TENNIS?? STOP CRICKET??” – R Reisman. “I thought The Fiver must have got that Dundee Utd v Hearts fixture wrong, but then I Googled it and it seems not. The 2018-19 season is ongoing with Afcon, and the 2019-20 is already starting with fitba’. Never mind STOP FOOTBALL, how about STOP FOOTBALL BENDING TIME AND SPACE?” – Craig Fawcett. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’the day prize is … Thomas Krantz, who wins a copy of Here We Go: Everton in the 1980s – the players’ stories. Manchester City have touched down for their pre-season schlep round east Asia two days late after some admin-bungling grounded their flight out of Manchester. Miffed Arsenal fan groups have united to express their dismay at the way Stan Kroenke is running the club and urged the USA! USA!! USA!!!-based owner to make “new and dynamic appointments” to reinvigorate a club that “feels like an investment vehicle”. Paul Pogba’s hopes of leaving Manchester United this summer are becoming remote with the club receiving a sum total of naff-all bids for the midfielder this summer. Sheffield United have had an opening bid of £15m for goal-guzzling Swansea striker Oli McBurnie rejected. Nasser al-Khelaifi, the president of PSG, appears to have sought payments for a Mr 15% which could have violated transfer regulations, and to have given inaccurate information to a French judge, according to leaked documents. And KILLA FAME, the LA rapper who is said to have located and returned Daniel Sturridge’s pilfered pooch, has got fresh and funky on Social Media Disgrace Twitter over the amount of cash he was given by the out-of-contract striker. “Don’t offer a reward [of £30,000] if you not planning on Living up to your word!!” he roared. Antoine Griezmann’s move to Barcelona was a year in the making, but will it suit Lionel Messi, asks Sid Lowe. Christian Eriksen is running out of options for a future away from Spurs, reckons Ed Aarons. Ole Gunnar Solskjær is shaking up his Manchester United backroom staff as he searches for success, writes Jamie Jackson. Check out all the Premier League transfers so far this summer and what each club still needs. And get your transfer window kicks Europe-wide with our snazzy interactive. Bob Bradley has recovered from his Swansea nightmare and taken the MLS by storm with unstoppable LAFC, whoops Graham Ruthven. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!