The Football Association is to appeal against the six-week suspension and £75,000 fine handed to Daniel Sturridge for breaching its betting rules. A regulatory commission has found the former Liverpool striker guilty of giving his brother inside information on a possible move to Sevilla but the FA considers the sanction too lenient. Sturridge’s suspension from all domestic matches came into effect on Wednesday. The former England international is without a club following his release by Liverpool and, with the final four weeks of the ban suspended, will be free to resume his career from 31 July. He will therefore not miss any competitive football unless he breaches betting rules again. The FA charged Sturridge with misconduct in November 2018 and expected a more severe punishment if he was found guilty. The authority has announced it will appeal against the findings of the independent body that investigated the case and also informed the player’s legal team of its intentions. A date for the appeal has not been set. It confirmed in a statement: “The FA respectfully disagrees with the regulatory commission’s findings and will be appealing against the charges which were dismissed and the sanction which was imposed.” Sturridge was cleared of nine of the 11 charges he faced relating to his transfer from Anfield in January 2018. On two accounts, however, he was found to have told his brother, Leon, to bet on a possible move to Sevilla. The Spanish club was ultimately unable to agree the terms of a loan deal with Liverpool and Sturridge joined West Bromwich Albion until the end of the 2017-18 season. Sturridge said it was “extremely disappointing” to learn of the FA’s appeal and that he would defend his position. He described the past 15 months as “very tough” and added: “I am pleased that nine of the 11 charges were dismissed and that the panel found me to be an honest and credible witness, and that my actions on one particularly difficult day were out of character.” The FA’s statement said: “Mr Sturridge faced 11 charges. Nine of those charges (1a, 1b, 2, 5, 6a, 6b and 7-9) concerned alleged breaches of the inside information rule, in that, it was said, Mr Sturridge had provided inside information to friends and family about his possible transfer moves in January 2018, which information had then been used for, or in relation to, betting. Those charges were dismissed by the regulatory commission. “The regulatory commission found proved charges 3 and 4, which alleged that, in that same transfer window, Mr Sturridge had instructed his brother, Leon, to bet on a possible move by him (Daniel) to Sevilla FC. In issuing that instruction, the regulatory commission found that, as a matter of fact, Mr Sturridge had provided his brother with inside information for that purpose.” Sturridge has been training this summer in Los Angeles, where he has a home and a dog, Lucci, who disappeared last week during a break-in before being found following an appeal on social media. Aston Villa are among the clubs interested in the former Chelsea and Manchester City striker.