Novak Djokovic began his defence of the Wimbledon singles title with a solid 6-3, 7-5, 6-3 win in just over two hours against 35-year-old Philipp Kohlschreiber on Centre Court that reached no great heights but eased the world No 1 into the tournament without fuss. Djokovic’s serve grew in precision and menace after a shaky start. He fired 12 aces and struck 36 clean winners, keeping unforced errors down to 19 while his opponent found the chore of resistance too wearing towards the end. It is no secret that Djokovic can be vulnerable early in a set, a match or a tournament and, when he double-faulted at the start, a mild thrum of concern ripple through the stands. An ace settled his nerves but he dumped a backhand to drop serve. It would be rash to suggest that overconfidence has ever consumed Kohlschreiber when across the net from the very best – although he beat Djokovic in Indian Wells this year – and he handed the break back immediately. The German fashioned another couple of break points in the fifth game, only to watch Djokovic’s second ace fly past him for deuce, and the moment was gone. Djokovic paused mid-serve in the seventh game, and looked to be having trouble with sweat rolling down into his contact lenses; three years ago in hot and humid Dubai, his lenses gave him serious trouble and he had to quit after going a set down against Feliciano López. The defending champion, behind in the serving cycle, was under pressure again early in the second set and an uncharacteristic miss-hit forehand close to the net put him 2-0 down. Again Kohlschreiber cracked with ball in hand, his single-handed backhand letting him down on break point. Stirred for a second time, Djokovic once more raised his level. When he drop-shotted sublimely on the stretch in the fifth game, he raised his fist in triumph. The good vibes were flowing, but Kohlschreiber held for 3-2. To his credit, Kohlschreiber went shot for shot with Djokovic and saved four break points to force the Serb to hold to keep the set alive. He did so, untroubled, broke to 30, and struck his ninth ace on his way to going 2-0 up in less than an hour and a half. The pattern of stubborn if unspectacular resistance stayed in place until Djokovic broke in the historically pivotal seventh game of the third set, and from there he coasted to the line.