It is perhaps the toughest job in Boris Johnson’s new government, but the new prime minister has handed the role of chief whip not to one of his campaign enforcers such as Gavin Williamson or James Wharton, but to a relative unknown, Mark Spencer. Spencer’s profile is so low outside SW1 that a Google search produces mostly links to the well-known high street chain. However, the long-serving whip is described by colleagues as a generous, consensus operator, more universally popular than his predecessors Julian Smith and Williamson. Two key members of the One Nation group of moderate Conservatives were first out of the traps to congratulate Spencer. Nicky Morgan tweeted it was “a great appointment – Mark is respected on all sides of the party” and Tory veteran Nicholas Soames tweeted: “A really excellent sane and wise choice.” Even Nick Boles, the former Tory MP who quit his party in frustration over a possible no deal, praised Spencer as “one of the nicest people in the Conservative parliamentary party … firm, fair, with his feet planted firmly on the ground. And he makes great pies!” A former dairy farmer, Spencer was elected as the MP for Sherwood in Nottinghamshire in 2010 and has spent two years in the whips’ office, most recently promoted to deputy leader of the House of Commons and comptroller of the household, a ceremonial role which dates back to the 14th century. He is regarded as a safe pair of hands in more ways than one, having played in goal for the MPs’ football team at Conservative conferences, winning man of the match in 2017 for saving a penalty. As chief whip, he faces the possibility of a Conservative majority of just one if the party loses the Brecon and Radnorshire byelection next Thursday although, in practice, the suspended MP Charlie Elphicke is likely to vote with the government on key Brexit legislation. However, Spencer will need to turn his attention immediately to a new crowd of restive rebels on the backbenches – including Philip Hammond, David Gauke, Rory Stewart, Margot James, Anne Milton and Alan Duncan. Spencer will also have to mend relations with the Democratic Unionist party, who have welcomed the victory of “committed unionist” Johnson. The DUP leader, Arlene Foster, said she had spoken to Johnson and confirmed its confidence and supply deal with the Conservatives would continue.