Roughly, life is a search for joy, and most of us plough through it experiencing nothing remotely comparable to the taking of a World Cup wicket. So when we watch others enjoy the moment, our sense of wonder encompasses not only cricketing skill but emotional fortitude: how do they not collapse in a heap of weeping, cringing emotion? Sheldon Cottrell’s work in this field is especially mind-blowing: snort in at speed; knock over another patsy; calmly salute the accomplishment. Happily, the rest of us can now incorporate it into our daily routines so, coming to a home near you: grown adults snapping to attention after successfully loading dishwashers, changing lightbulbs and wiping bottoms. Very good, sergeant. It feels fairly strange to cite the progenitors of our species as an innovation, but such has been the patriarchy until now. Finally, after 44 years, women joined the official commentary teams on the men’s World Cup and – amazingly! – it transpired that Mel Jones, Isa Guha, Ebony Rainford-Brent and Alison Mitchell grasp the impenetrable intricacies of the game they love, describing them with clarity and elan. Of course, this can never be as enlightening as tales of golf, wine, and who pays for dinner, but you can’t have everything. Once upon a time and not so long ago, the ability of professional athletes to run fast and jump high was little more than a nice thing to have. No longer. Throughout the tournament, Jonny Bairstow’s outfielding was astonishing, but when things got real the tingles and expletives came on account of the s’perb New Zealanders. In the semi-final, with things getting tenser, Martin Guptill’s phenomenal throw removed MS Dhoni; then, in the final, with things getting tensest, Lockie Ferguson hurled 15 stone of fast bowler into the ground to catch Eoin Morgan, before Tim Southee did similar to remove Jos Buttler. It was as predictable as it was shocking. In all sports, it’s helpful to know the state of play, and even more helpful if, to access this valuable information, one does not require a PhD in applied mathematics. Because we are all extremely bored of the words “net run-rate”, suffice it to say that head-to-head is a more definitive calculation than one that requires an actual calculator. And, though England did their bit as hosts, sacrificing their security to sustain a flagging round-robin, the problems with the format and schedule remained evident: we need more teams, more knockouts and more momentum, which is to say that the brilliant climax should not obscure what can be improved. Oh, and boundaries scored is no way to settle a tie. It is generally held that inclement weather caused a succession of slow and sticky wickets, which is why teams batting first generally scored fewer than expected and teams batting second generally failed to chase them down. And these were indeed important factors – but to cite them as sole factors is to ignore the perennially influential brothers, SB Pressure and WC Pressure. England would back themselves to chase 233, 286 and 242 playing on cobbles; India would have fancied 240 to make the World Cup final in their sleep. But they fell short, because also in the mix was responsibility, personality and immortality. Sport is simple, but people are complicated. It’s been a rough few years for the name Colin, falling out of favour along with other upstanding staples such as Gary and Brian. But in nominative determinism’s Colin de Grandhomme we have a worthy partisan. Throughout the competition his muscly medium bothered everyone, and he finished it with a lower economy rate than anyone, reminding us that, if you perform your skills with confidence, composure and love then they can be enough – however simple they may be. Human beings are fond of both laziness and notoriety, which is why nicknames are a thing. In the first instance they save effort and, over time, construct an alter ego allowing their subjects to feel special, powerful and changed. Andre Russell’s “Dre Russ” encapsulates this perfectly, its brash unfussiness part of a persona that must assault cricket balls in order to survive. But these forces cannot always be harnessed. When West Indies played Australia, Russell came in with Jason Holder ensconced at the other end and their team requiring a comfortably manageable 99 runs from 90 balls. So he promptly dre russed a four and a six from his first five balls, then missed with four huge dre russes, before dre russing another four and getting out, dre russed, for 15 off 11 balls. West Indies lost narrowly and went out of the World Cup early. When talking about cricket we waste a lot of time talking about nonsense such as batting, bowling and fielding, when really we should just be talking about Pakistan. They were as wondrous as ever during this World Cup, whether in abject collapse to West Indies or in dropping five catches while beating South Africa, and only they could defeat both finalists yet fail to reach the knockouts. Whether in victory or defeat, no other team channels the shining, flowing, spitting force of humanity with such alacrity; represents their people so completely; ravages hearts with base impunity. Within them resides everything that is brilliant about everything. The UK is a frightening place nowadays, with so much in the hands of so little. So the England and Wales one-day team are a lesson and a balm, radiating warmth, substance and zest thanks to a leader who reminds us what leaders are meant to be. Taking pride in the achievements of others can feel odd, but not here: England’s world champions represent the best of our collective body, a group of different ethnicities and personalities helping each other be the best that they can with a love that is moving to behold. If we cannot take pride in them, we cannot take pride in anything. Ben Stokes diving for home and the ball clipping his bat before racing to the fence was not simply an incredible cricketing coincidence, but as staggering an event we will ever see, a moment of pure, uncut drama that was particularly, peculiarly cricket, whole countries and communities united in its thrall. While Stokes apologised to Kane Williamson for the ridiculousness of his redemption narrative, our only clue as to what would happen next was whatever we imagined could not happen next. And sure enough, when England’s two batsmen came out for the super over, something celestial seemed to be at work: Benjamin and Joseph in fraternal partnership, brandishing their sacs for golden cup and greater good. And something celestial was indeed at work: sport itself, a transformative, transcendental explosion of all that we are and all that we are not, taking us outside of ourselves while forcing us to consider ourselves. So before we wonder how the hell we carry on from here, let’s remember this: though such moments are rare, they need not be fleeting, because they have something for every day of our lives and we must savour them for every day of our lives. Go well. • This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.