Boris Johnson has come out in defence of the right of the press to publish leaked diplomatic dispatches sent by the former British ambassador to the US Sir Kim Darroch, saying it would amount to “an infringement on press freedom and have a chilling effect on public debate”. Johnson criticised the police over a warning to journalists that they could face prosecution if they publish any further leaked cables.Speaking at a Tory leadership hustings at Wyboston, in Bedfordshire, he said that while it was right the perpetrator of the leak was “hunted down and prosecuted” it was wrong for police to target the media. “It cannot conceivably be right that newspapers or any other media organisation publishing such material face prosecution,” he added. “In my view there is no threat to national security implied in the release of this material. It is embarrassing, but it is not a threat to national security. It is the duty of media organisations to bring new and interesting facts into the public domain. That is what they are there for. It came after Hunt, the foreign secretary, who is battling head to head with Johnson to be the next Conservative prime minister, said he would “defend to the hilt” the right of the press to publish the leaks. Hunt wrote on Twitter: “These leaks damaged UK/US relations and cost a loyal ambassador his job, so the person responsible must be held fully to account. But I defend to the hilt the right of the press to publish those leaks if they receive them and judge them to be in the public interest: that is their job.” The Metropolitan police has launched a criminal investigation into the leak of the messages, which were sent to the Mail on Sunday. The UK’s largest police force threatened the media with prosecution for publishing the dispatches. George Osborne and other editors accused Scotland Yard of encroaching on press freedom. The inquiry by the Met counter-terrorism command, which is responsible for investigating breaches of the Official Secrets Act, was announced in a statement attributed to the assistant commissioner Neil Basu. Earlier, the former defence secretary Michael Fallon suggested journalists should be subject to the Official Secrets Act. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Saturday, Fallon welcomed the Met investigation, describing the leak as a “clear breach of the Official Secrets Act” and “damaging to diplomatic efforts”. He added: “As soon as we find who did it, we should have them investigated and prosecuted.” Fallon said the advice to newspapers about not publishing the material was “quite logical”. Most of the offences covered by the legislation affect crown servants and government contractors. Any unlawful disclosure relating to security or intelligence by a member of MI5, MI6 or GCHQ is an offence. Officials do not need to sign the act to be bound by its provisions. The maximum punishment for leaking documents is two years in prison or an unlimited fine. An official is guilty of a crime if he or she 'without lawful authority makes a damaging disclosure' of information about international relations between states, defence, law enforcement, or which falls into a class of information likely to damage the security services’ work. Leaks are deemed to be damaging if, among other consequences, they 'endanger the interests of the United Kingdom abroad'. There is a defence for any leaker that they released the material not knowing it would be damaging. Prosecutions under the Official Secrets Act are rare. Recent cases have included that of the MI5 agent David Shayler in 2002. He was jailed for six months. In 2007, a Scotland Yard civilian employee, Thomas Lund-Lack, was sentenced to eight months for leaking information on planned al-Qaida operations in Britain to a Sunday Times journalist. A number of cases have involved civil servants who mislaid sensitive information. At least one, Richard Jackson, a Cabinet Office official, was fined £2,500 under the act after he left classified papers relating to al-Qaida and Iraq on a train. Owen Bowcott, Legal affairs correspondent He added: “If they are receiving stolen material then they should give it back to the rightful owner and should be aware of the huge damage done and potential greater damage by further breaches of the Official Secrets Act.” Fallon was then asked by the presenter, John Humphrys, whether journalists should comply with the act. He responded: “I don’t think anyone can entirely absolve themselves of the need to avoid damage to this country. “We have press freedom … but we also have laws. We have the Official Secrets Act and it is important that law is upheld.” When news of the Met police inquiry broke, Osborne, the former chancellor and now editor of the Evening Standard, appeared to suggest the statement, which called for any leaked documents to be returned to the government, was written by a junior officer and showed a lack of understanding of press freedom. The statement said: “The publication of leaked communications, knowing the damage they have caused or are likely to cause, may also be a criminal matter. “I would advise all owners, editors and publishers of social and mainstream media not to publish leaked government documents that may already be in their possession, or which may be offered to them, and to turn them over to the police or give them back to their rightful owner, Her Majesty’s government.” In the cables allegedly leaked to the Mail on Sunday, the UK’s outgoing ambassador to Washington, Sir Kim Darroch told his bosses in London that: Osborne described the statement as “ill-advised”, saying: “If I were the Metropolitan police commissioner, and I wanted to maintain my credibility and the credibility of my force, I would quickly distance myself from this very stupid and ill-advised statement from a junior officer who doesn’t appear to understand much about press freedom.” On Saturday he tweeted: What a mess the Met Police have got themselves into attacking press freedom. No prosecution would have a chance of succeeding anyway. I predict a u-turn today by Commissioner overruling Mr Basu; if they stick with his threats to the media then there will be calls for resignations Tim Shipman, the Sunday Times political editor, criticised the “sinister, absurd, anti-democratic statement this evening threatening journalists with arrest for printing government leaks”, and asked the Met on Twitter: “Do you have any comprehension of a free society? This isn’t Russia.” The Liberal Democrat MP Norman Lamb said the remarks suggested a “slippery slope to a police state”. Speaking at the Tory hustings, Johnson said: “In my view there is no threat to national security implied the release of this material. It is embarrassing, but it is not a threat to national security. “It is the duty of media organisations to bring new and interesting facts into the public domain. That is what they are there for. “A prosecution on this basis would amount to an infringement on press freedom and have a chilling effect on public debate. That is my view. Darroch announced he was resigning on Wednesday, saying his position had become “impossible” following the leak of dispatches in which he described Donald Trump’s White House as “inept” and “dysfunctional”. The comments drew a furious response from the US president, who said the White House would no longer deal with Darroch. In the House of Commons on Thursday, the Foreign Office minister Alan Duncan said an internal Whitehall inquiry had found no evidence the leak was the result of computer hacking. Instead, he told MPs the focus was on finding “someone within the system who has released illicitly these communications”. The chair of the foreign affairs select committee, Tom Tugendhat, questioned whether journalists who published such material were committing an offence. “I doubt it is a crime to publish. The ability to have a free press is essential,” he said.