There was a time, just a few days ago, when it felt like this week’s Spin was destined to be a wake, a coming-to-terms with another unexpectedly premature World Cup departure for an England team completely and thrillingly restyled since their last such failure, but still unable to escape the same miserable fate. Sunday’s victory over India has at the very least postponed such soul-searching, and it could yet be that the competition will culminate in the English not drowning sorrows but downing champagne. Whether it helps them into the semi-finals or simply precurses fresh disappointment, England’s victory over India – a group-stage win over an already all-but-qualified opponent, mind you – stands as their greatest World Cup result for nearly three decades. Not since their run to the 1992 final had they had beaten either Australia or India at a World Cup, while New Zealand remain unbeaten by the English since 1983. The 1992 final was England’s third in five Cups, with the other two campaigns ending in the semi-finals; since then they have failed to get to the last four, had amassed a total of seven victories (and 18 defeats) against the nine other teams involved in this year’s event (without ever beating the three best ones), boasted a 1-1 record against Ireland and had additionally beaten Scotland, Canada, the Netherlands, Kenya, Namibia, Zimbabwe and the United Arab Emirates. For a nation of England’s history and standing, it is an utterly humiliating record. Over the years, every follower of the England team has thus been imbued with a certain dread of the World Cup, which inevitably percolated into the reporting of their exploits. The Guardian’s coverage of 45 years of World Cup eliminations seems to fall neatly into two parts: two carefree decades during which England largely met expectations and – at least initially – defeat didn’t really matter because it wasn’t proper cricket anyway; and an extended and still ongoing period in which pleasure, hope, optimism and indeed all positive emotions were repeatedly deflated under a barrage of snicks, slashes and occasional bayonet thrusts. Contrast, for example, our report on defeat to West Indies in the 1979 final, when we appeared almost grateful for the hiding that had been administered – “It was a match between reason – in the form of English thought, practice and experience – on the one hand and West Indian instinct on the other. Fortunately for cricket’s good, the West Indies won it gloriously,” wrote Scyld Berry – with Mike Selvey’s dread-laden description on the team’s elimination in 2015. “England batted as if their own shadows would have given them the jitters,” he wrote after the decisive defeat to Bangladesh. “They were, or at least looked, totally scared of failure, knowing what the consequences would be.” Paul Fitzpatrick in 1983 commented on “the near flawless way they had come through the preliminaries … not that there was the slightest disputing India’s victory” in the semi-finals. Four years later they lost by seven runs to Australia in the final. “The margin of victory does not reflect the game, as the Australians were substantially the better of two quite ordinary sides,” wrote Selvey. “For England, the dream of paradise in the Garden of Eden died at the very beginning, as the butterflies took wing and got the better of the seamers.” Finally, there was Pakistan in 1992. “The 22-run victory did not flatter Pakistan and there can be no excuses for England,” Selvey wrote. “The team had all but climbed the mountain only to stumble and fall when approaching the summit. They were beaten by a superior team on the day who finally played to their enormous potential.” That remains the last World Cup exit that was not followed by recriminations and resignations. To skip through the subsequent competitions, there was a quarter-final exit against Sri Lanka in 1996 – “From WG Grace to disgrace seems a fitting epitaph to English cricket today,” wrote Alan Hubbard in the Observer. “England were not just eliminated from the quarter-finals but they were outbatted, outbowled and given a lesson in objectivity, passion and tactics by a developing nation that would not have been given house room at Lord’s only a few years ago.” In 1999, in England, they were eliminated in the group stage by Zimbabwe’s victory over South Africa. “For England it is just all over,” wrote Paul Weaver. “In the soap opera that is the English game this will be seen as a particularly dark episode. The World Cup itself will continue to play before sell-out crowds, but for the domestic game it has been a disaster.” In 2003 Selvey generously insisted that England “should not slink home”, having overcome the Netherlands and Namibia “efficiently”, beaten Pakistan “brilliantly” and played creditably in two-wicket defeat to Australia. “They now need to go the extra yard.” It’s fair to say they didn’t. “England were bundled out of the World Cup yesterday with all the dignity of a drunk escorted from a temperance night club,” Selvey wrote after a grim defeat to South Africa in 2007. “If the whole sorry exercise had been genuinely embarrassing to watch then goodness knows what it must have been like to play. This was as humiliating as it gets.” The 2011 tournament brought another quarter-final defeat to Sri Lanka. “England were taught a salutary lesson,” Selvey wrote. Unfamiliarity with the conditions in India and Sri Lanka contributed, but they had been “inadequate with the bat and toothless with the ball. The immediate aftermath of a World Cup provides a natural time to take stock, evaluate and move on. The next tournament, four years hence, is in Australia. It will pose more familiar questions.” There were certainly more familiar questions when England were sent home after the pool stage. “At the start of January, around the time when England arrived in Australia, Stuart Broad said what may just be the most prescient thing anyone has uttered since,” raged Selvey. “‘We would have to have an absolute stinker,’ he opined, ‘not to make the quarter-finals.’ Well he got that one spot on. A stinker might have got them closer but absolute was what he foresaw and absolute is what they delivered.” And so to 2019. Entertaining as it is to read through decades of frustration and fury, the nation’s scribes are long overdue an opportunity to write a different story and will take their seats at Durham on Wednesday still desperately hoping that this will be the year. Jonny Bairstow might think they have been “waiting for us to fail”, but the truth is they don’t know any other way. • This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.