As chair of the Windrush Commemoration Committee, I want to reassure those who feel Waterloo station should not be the site for the monument (May’s plan for Windrush memorial at Waterloo met with ‘disgust’, theguardian.com, 22 June). The committee’s brief was “to identify a prominent central London site, which maintains high footfall, has historic relevance and significance to the Windrush generation”. We debated several options before the decision of Waterloo station was made. It is where thousands of West Indians arrived from Southampton, as I did, in 1960. They were heading to Britain, not Brixton. They met loved ones under the iconic clock and dispersed across the nation. The monument will celebrate not only those who arrived on the Empire Windrush in 1948 at Tilbury, but also those who came later. Windrush Square in Brixton was strongly considered, as we were aware of the importance of the area, which was highlighted by Windrush pioneer Sam King. But I believe he would have seen the bigger picture: to celebrate the inspirational Windrush story of courage, resilience and dedication nationally and internationally, in the centre of our capital. Brixton and other areas where West Indians settled will be part of an interactive audiovisual element in the monument, telling the story of the Windrush saga, including the current scandal. All this will be a legacy for our children. The station’s £200m development with the monument at its centre will transform the area into an exciting destination, with shops, restaurants and walkways connecting to the South Bank, attracting visitors from across the world. I have pledged to make Windrush pioneers and their descendants proud, and will continue to do so with passion and vigour.Floella BenjaminLiberal Democrat, House of Lords • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition