From the Lionesses in France to Cori Gauff at Wimbledon, there have been no shortage of success stories of late but Castleford in West Yorkshire is hardly somewhere that immediately springs to mind when thinking of women’s sport. Yet the mining town with a population of 40,000 is hoping to make an impression on the sporting landscape today. “It can be seen as a stereotypical area given its past,” says Lindsay Anfield, who is spearheading a women’s rugby league revolution in the town. “There were no recognised sporting teams in the town until we formed. But don’t forget that young girls wanting to play sport need role models just like young men do.” Anfield is head coach of Castleford’s Women’s Super League side. The Tigresses are only three years old but have captured the attention of a town where rugby league is more akin to a religion. This season they are top of the table with six wins from six and face Wakefield in the Challenge Cup semi-finals on Sunday. “I think the people of Castleford have bought into the fact we’re trying to put ourselves at the forefront of this revolution,” Anfield said. Crowds well in excess of 1,000 regularly watch their home games and a fortnight ago the club set a record attendance for a women’s rugby league game in Britain, when 1,492 watched them defeat Bradford. The numbers may not seem earth-shattering but the average attendance in football’s Women’s Super League last season was 833 and Castleford are drawing in crowds similar to Manchester City. This story is all the more fascinating for the fact that the players and coaches are doing it for free. “We have fantastic local sponsors but it’s no secret that nobody gets paid,” said Anfield, who is a PE teacher by day. “They train twice a week from 6.30pm to 10pm which, after day jobs or studying, can be a real slog.” Anfield says the support of the men’s team has been instrumental in their transformation. Jon Wells, Castleford’s director of rugby, said: “I’m over the moon the people of Castleford have bought into it. I don’t think it’s beyond the realms of possibility that 5,000 could be here watching a game soon. We talk about the pioneering players Castleford have had and it’s not foolish to say that in 20 years, people will mention the likes of Georgia Roche in the same breath.” Roche, nominated for the BBC’s Young Sports Personality of the Year award last year, is the heartbeat of a Tigresses side who play exciting, attacking rugby league. Wells said: “I have two young daughters and I want them to see there are strong role models on our doorstep. I can point my kids the way of Georgia. The impact she and this team are having on young girls wanting to play rugby in the town is incredible. I’ve never seen anything like it. “You look at the all-time greats here like Malcolm Reilly, John Joyner and the legacy they left … I genuinely think in a decade or two, someone like Georgia could be in that bracket.”