Arsenal have started disciplinary proceedings against their club captain, Laurent Koscielny, after he refused to travel to the United States on Thursday lunchtime for their pre-season tour as he attempts to force a move. The 33-year-old centre-half is believed to have his heart set on a return to his native France, with Lyon, Bordeaux and Rennes possible destinations. Koscielny has been dismayed at how Arsenal have triggered a one-year option on his contract to extend him until next summer, believing that he was set to become a free agent in this window. He is demanding that the club free him of his obligation and allow him to leave for nothing. But Arsenal took up the option in good faith – as they did at the end of June with another of their veteran defenders, Nacho Monreal – and, to them, it is a little late for Koscielny to be arguing against its legitimacy. They are furious at Koscielny’s behaviour and have taken the unusual step of releasing a statement to condemn him. The player’s future at the club is in grave doubt and, if he stays, he is certain to be stripped of the captaincy. “Laurent Koscielny has refused to travel to the US for our pre-season tour,” Arsenal wrote. “We are very disappointed by Laurent’s actions, which are against our clear instructions. We hope to resolve this matter and will not be providing any further comment at this time.” It has emerged that discussions over Koscielny’s future have been taking place since before the end of last season, although they have escalated since his return to pre-season training last Friday – by which time the contractual option had been exercised – with the threat being made about him refusing to travel to the US unless his wishes were met. Arsenal were unsure as to whether he would see it through but they know now. Koscielny reported for training on Thursday morning only to inform the club that he would not board the team flight to Los Angeles, which departed at 12.30pm. Arsenal begin their tour with a game against Colorado Rapids on Monday night and thereafter they face Bayern Munich, Fiorentina and Real Madrid. Arsenal’s position is that they simply cannot have players walking out on their contracts, particularly key ones such as Koscielny. They say that they have had no official contact from rival clubs regarding him. Unai Emery’s other established options in central defence are Shkodran Mustafi, Rob Holding, Sokratis Papastathopoulos and Monreal. The club have been open to offers for Mustafi, and Holding will miss the start of the season as he finishes his recovery from a cruciate knee ligament injury. Emery also has Calum Chambers and Konstantinos Mavropanos – although the former is for sale – and he hopes to sign William Saliba for £27m, although the 18-year-old defender would be loaned back to St Etienne for the season. Koscielny joined Arsenal in the summer of 2010 from Lorient for £10m and he played for them in their FA Cup final victories of 2014 and 2015. His stance is another headache for the club as they fight to strengthen the squad with a restricted budget, owing in part to their continued absence from the Champions League.