Ever since Jackson Hastings stepped off a plane and signed for Salford a year ago it always felt a case of when, not if, he would move on. Yet it seems there are still one or two twists remaining before Hastings bids adieu to the Red Devils. In fact, there is the potential to create history for a club who have spent most of their existence battling at the wrong end of the Super League table. “We’ve proven this year that anything can happen: to finish with a Grand Final? It would be more than a dream come true,” says the 23-year-old Australian. Next year Hastings will join Wigan. It is the step up many in the game believe a player of his calibre is ready for; some even suspected a move back home to the NRL was inevitable to right the wrongs of his acrimonious exit from the competition last year when he was eventually released by Manly. Before all of that, however, Hastings has plenty left to give to the club who he admits saved his career and also helped foster a newfound maturity. “It was so hard to decide I’d leave Salford,” he admits. “The love and support they’ve given me is incredible and the supporters were a massive part of why I stayed this year. People have told me they’re sad I’m leaving but thankful I’ve given my heart and soul to the club. They’ve given me everything, so that was the least I could do in return. “I’ve always left clubs on bad terms, so for this to be able to be on my terms and be able to tell Watto [Ian Watson, the Salford coach] … I started tearing up. They’ve invested time and effort into me as a person and, having felt like an outcast at places before, I’ve felt part of a family here.” With Salford holding such a special place in his heart, Hastings is commendably frank about the reasons for his move to Wigan. “It was a rugby decision; the financial part was never a concern,” Hastings says. “My agent deals with all of that. I play to win and you want to look back and be able to say you’ve won trophies and won competitions.” Linking up with a familiar face from his time in Sydney also played a part. “Knowing Adrian Lam [the Wigan coach] was huge,” says Hastings. “I played with his son at the Roosters and he’s helped me out in the past. “When we spoke, I just knew the way he wanted to play would appeal to me. I just hope people know that this decision is because I want to be the best player and person I can be, not because of more money. I had Leeds, Wigan and clubs back home offering deals but clubs in the NRL wanted me to play out of position. I think I’ve matured into a half who can lead a team at Wigan.” Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels But before he moves down the M61 there is unfinished business at Salford. The Red Devils, who many believed would struggle this year, are four points behind fifth-placed Catalans – whom they face on Sunday – with seven games remaining. Win and a push for the play-offs is very much on the cards. “Finish in the top five and anything can happen,” he says. “We’ve had a siege mentality here all year with nobody giving us a chance and, believe me, stranger things have happened in sport than us making the play-offs. I’m fully committed to trying to make that happen before I go.” Hastings and so many of Salford’s stars are leaving next year, leading some pundits to believe the imminent break-up of their squad could mean a collapse in form for the rest of this year. “To question an athlete’s commitment is embarrassing,” he says. “We’ve taken that criticism to heart and I promise you this group are not looking to next year. We’re trying to make the play-offs. When I leave here I want to be able to look the supporters in the eyes and say I gave it everything: what better way than by making the play-offs.” Leeds Rhinos v Hull FC London Broncos v St Helens Salford Red Devils v Catalans Dragons Castleford v Warrington (3.30pm) All 3pm unless stated