For the second time in less than a year, English football fans have been put in a situation that is quite frankly intolerable. Yes, it’s a semi-final of a major tournament, one step from glory, and we all know how these effing things usually pan out. England have only ever won three semis in a history stretching all the way back to 1872: at the 1966 Football World Championship for the Jules Rimet Trophy, the 1984 European Competition for Women’s Football, and the 2009 Uefa Women’s Championship. To be fair, that data isn’t quite as damning as it first appears. England would clearly have notched a few more semi-final wins had the women been allowed to play from the get-go, as opposed to 100 years later. They’ve reached twice as many finals in less than a third of the allocated time! Ladies and gentlemen, a round of applause please, in recognition of another glorious FA triumph. The point is, England supporters need not brace themselves for an evening of inevitable misery. Sure, some pain and suffering will undoubtedly occur, during Phil Neville’s pre-match interview mainly, as he tries but fails to whip up the audience with a Mancunian delivery so dreary and one-note that you could be forgiven for thinking Liam Gallagher was running through his Glastonbury set again. However, the game itself could be a source of great pleasure for English fans. As the world’s No 1 team, the USA! USA!! USA!!! go into the match as favourites. But England know they can go toe-to-toe with the reigning champions, having given as good as they got en route to lifting the SheBelieves Cup in a 2-2 draw exactly four months ago. Neville has said as much in a couple of interviews, but we won’t quote him as we want to keep everyone’s energy levels up. Much will most likely depend on who gets the best of things on the USA! USA!! USA!!! left, where Megan Rapinoe faces down Lucy Bronze. The American co-captain has scored five goals in this tournament already, but Bronze is another level compared to anything she’s faced in France so far. Bronze also has an endearing habit of hoicking the ball into the opposition’s goal in big matches, and with net-bothering ferocity to boot. So should the Lyon right-back have another banner day, a third major semi-final win for the Lionesses in 47 years (the men really need to take a good look at themselves) is a genuine prospect. But if England don’t make it, further success for Rapinoe will really irritate Donald Trump. So in that childish yet righteous sense, it’ll be a win whatever happens. Join Paul Doyle from 5pm BST for hot and steamy Africa Cup of Nations MBM coverage of Benin 0-1 Cameroon, before Scott Murray steps up for England 1-3 USA! USA!! USA!!! in the Women’s World Cup. “As part of our partnership launch with Arsenal we have been made aware of the abuse of a [Social Media Disgrace Twitter] personalisation mechanic created to allow excited fans to get their name on the back of the new jersey. Due to a small minority creating offensive versions of this we have immediately turned off the functionality and the [Social Media Disgrace Twitter] team will be investigating” – Adidas UK respond after a social media disgrace gambit backfired spectacularly, leading to the company tweeting out pictures of its new Arsenal shirts with racist and offensive slogans on the back. Who could have possibly foreseen that backfiring? It’s David Squires on … Megan Rapinoe v the USA! USA!! USA!!! president. You can get your own too. “So, there’s a relentless drilling noise today at Fiver Towers (yesterday’s Quote of the Day). That could explain lack of humour in one day of a tea-timely email. But was there drilling last week? Last month? Since the beginning of the TV and radio listings?” – Mike Wilner. “How would Fiver staff know if the drilling had been going on all day. Maybe one or two hours, but all day?” – Marc Meldrum. “My thoughts go out to Trevor West (yesterday’s Fiver letters), who appears to be suffering from knack-knack” – Matt Richman (and 1,056 others). “Your august publication has the innate knack for using the word ‘knack’. Knack has never been knacked, for me, or its use knackered. Knack shouldn’t be sent to the knackers’ yard” – Andrew Tate. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Marc Meldrum. 17 June: “I’m now looking forward to officially starting as manager and working alongside the coaching team to help create a club that Cornwall can be proud of” – new manager Paul Wilkinson cannot wait to make Truro City proud. 2 July: “I’m delighted to be here, Bury is a club with a great history and I can’t wait to get started. I’m determined to drive the club forward in the right direction” – new manager Paul Wilkinson cannot wait to make Bury proud. Days after walking away from Newcastle United, Rafael Benítez has swapped his black-and-white tie for a red-and-white one … having signed up to trouser £12m a year as Dalian Yifang’s new boss. “What I have found at Dalian is an incredible project that has arrived at the perfect time,” he ker-chinged. Frank Lampard’s Derby County are close to agreeing a deal with Phillip Cocu to succeed Frank Lampard’s Derby County manager Frank Lampard just as soon as he becomes Chelsea’s Frank Lampard. Tanguy Ndombele will be appearing in one of those Pochettino lean-in pictures soon after signing a six-year Tottenham deal to seal his £55m move from Lyon. Manchester United look to be in pole position to sign Harry Maguire, mainly it seems because they’ll fritter more money for him than Manchester City. Chris Wilder is playing fast and loose with Sheffield United’s pre-season preparations after inviting Ravel Morrison to train with the club in Portugal. “It could be a good fit for both,” blathered the optimistic Blades boss. And members of Macclesfield Town’s squad are taking the club to court over unpaid wages. “Having exhausted all other options, we feel we have been left with no alternative but to seek legal advice and take action in order to gain payment of wages, for the last two months,” read a statement from the group. Stina Blackstenius: the Sweden striker who came in from the cold. In praise of the mighty Megan Rapinoe. By Charlie Brinkhurst-Cuff. “I’m not really sure what I will say to him. I really like him as a player, so I’ll probably just say that.” Alex Mann talks Thiago Silva after that Glastonbury cameo with Dave. When the best of Serie A beat a Football League all-star XI. Do read. The transfer window totaliser is nearing £2bn. Blackpool’s new owner Simon Sadler gets his Sandford on in this chat with Proper Journalism’s David Conn. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!