England’s run to the semi-finals, and indeed final, could not have been more quintessentially English. The team came into the tournament on a great run and hope was lifted to even greater heights with a few high-quality performances, only to be met with a crash back to traditional English cynicism when we almost inevitably lost to two tournament underdogs. From this point on though, they were exceptional, rising to the challenge of what essentially became four consecutive knockout games. What else can be said about the final? It was the best game of cricket I’ve witnessed and quite possibly the best of all time. The match had it all and England finally proved that they can stand up in those pressure moments in a knockout tournament. They had no small degree of luck and there was plenty of tension, but how else would you want to win your first Cricket World Cup? Let’s hope this group stays together for one more World Cup under the cool head of Eoin Morgan and a coach who will further develop this exciting brand of cricket. It would be easy to see this as the pinnacle, but how incredible would it be to push for an Australia-esque World Cup dynasty? Matt Leech We delivered the greatest of World Cup finals. No other countries would have produced such a game. New Zealand always get stuck into games and regularly deliver some of the greatest cricketing spectacles. It’s such a shame we remain financially uninteresting for cricketing schedulers. Winning the World Cup might have changed that, but we are worthy runners-up. Jimmy Neesham was my player of the tournament. He plays hard and fearless, keeps going and has a mental toughness and mature outlook on life. He will have plenty of big moments in his career. Malcolm Eddington India were like a critically acclaimed television show. After power-packed leading performances from neo-noir legend Rohit Sharma and the experimental yet highly engaging directorship from Jasprit Bumrah, most expected that pair, along with a strong supporting cast, to help India execute a stunning finale. But, despite bringing in the biggest viewing figures, the show was cancelled at the last moment by the executives at the World Cup – the notorious Kiwis. MS Dhoni was a fan favourite, but his personal style did not suit the overall tone of the crew. Rishabh Pant, a cult hero on the local soap opera, Indian Premier League, wasn’t ready for the biggest stage just yet. Surely, by the time the next big show comes around, he will be in the spotlight. Scriptwriter Virat Kohli was excellent but still did not meet his lofty standards and fluffed the ending. Cameos from Sir Ravindra Jadeja grabbed bits and pieces of the public imagination and an unexpected starring role during India’s final moments justified calls for his regular introduction to the set-up in the future. Abhijato Sensarma Despite the horrible thrashing in the semi-final, we performed above expectations. Six months ago I didn’t think we’d make it to the last four; in some respects we got through because other sides failed to deliver. Mitchell Starc was our best performer. It was a shame he went AWOL in the last two matches. Alex Carey looked a class above most in his ball-striking and attitude. He was a real find. To play a great knock after being cleaned up by Jofra Archer really showed he has what it takes. The performances of Glenn Maxwell and Marcus Stoinis were really disappointing. The one innings where Maxwell looked really like to kick into gear was the one where Usman Khawaja ran him out horribly. The semi-final revealed all our weaknesses at once, which was a shame. Unfortunately our domestic one-day competition is now contained in a short period at the start of our season. It’s not enough for players to improve their skills in this format on the biggest international stage. Scott Meehan Pakistan did well. Our performance would be viewed much more positively had we reached the semi-finals, but that’s how fine the margins are. The game against West Indies was very costly and some fans think the Sri Lanka washout was a missed opportunity. Although we have no one to blame but ourselves for not reaching the last four. After beating both the finalists in the group stage, it’s a shame we weren’t consistent enough elsewhere. We have a few special players coming through and they will surely help. Although fielding remains a problem. Awais Ahmed We were hot favourites to finish in the bottom two, yet finished sixth and may have qualified for the semis had we won our two washed-out matches. We have a bright talent in Avishka Fernando. In fact, we could have a fearsome batting unit in 2023. The bowling will be the real concern. We have to search hard for the next Malingas and Muralis. Malinga still has a role to play in four years’ time. We need his personality and experience in the team. And our former cricketers need to take part in building cricket from scratch. The current administration is useless. Akesh Samuditha It took us four games to get a point on the board and we had to thank the English summer weather for that. South Africa paid the price for a terribly slow start, and highlights were few and far between. The AB De Villiers debate before the tournament obviously didn’t help. I’m hugely disappointed that we were so poor early on. The late wins against Sri Lanka and and Australia, were spoiled by the fact that there was so very little to play for. Wasting a successful 300+ run chase against Australia in a dead rubber hurts. Nils Louw After a great start to the tournament – beating South Africa and almost forcing a win against the Kiwis – the Tigers threatened to be the story of the World Cup, but it never quite happened. Instead the campaign ended in a whimper with damaging losses against both south Asian neighbours. The defeat to Pakistan was particularly disappointing given the historical context and the fact they were playing in front of a packed house at Lord’s. It was easily their worst performance of the tournament. In contrast, the stunning run chase against the Windies on the postage stamp-sized Taunton ground was the tournament highlight, reaching the target of 322 with such ease and with so many overs to spare. It gave fans genuine hope for a top-four finish. Had fine margins gone their way, a semi-final place would have been a reality. The team didn’t quite live up to its billing for the emotional Tiger fans. A feeling of the wheels coming off was compounded by the swift dismissal of coach Steve Rhodes long before England lifted the trophy. Giving player of the tournament to Kane Williamson was obviously a sympathy vote. Shakib Al Hasan was the true star of the World Cup. After spending a decade being the most underrated international cricketer in the most underrated international team, Shakib finally became a household name – for those households with Sky TV anyway. His consistency batting at No 3, often arriving at the crease early in the innings, and scoring at nearly a run a ball was staggering. Add to that tidy reliable off-spin and you have the complete package. Tawhid Qureshi We were terrible for most of it. Bowling Pakistan out for 105 in the first game got our hopes up, but there wasn’t enough thought into anything after that and we played out the tournament as a Chris Gayle testimonial tour. At least we beat a plucky Afghanistan side. The authorities must begin planning for the next World Cup immediately by investing in players who will be available solely for the longer version of the game. We have become champions of the T20 game, but the same players struggle in longer formats. T20 is hurting the quality of players in the longer versions. The problem remains that we have a very small pool of players. Glen Ducreay It was always going to be tough. Always. I’m disappointed we didn’t take any points but there were some competitive performances. Falling 11 runs short of beating India, and two balls from shocking Pakistan, were the best memories. Captain Mohammad Nabi had plenty to say before the tournament, but his inexperience showed in the field. I’ll be happy if we can progress tactically and learn from the experience of playing against the very best. Anwarzai