Kids have never had such exposure to international culture. On Nickelodeon and Cartoon Network, they can feast on a non-stop deluge of American teen sitcoms and animation. On Netflix, their choices heave with Spanish, Japanese, Polish, German and Hindi programming. If you are brave enough to let them watch YouTube, they can get their fill watching poorly made and genuinely disturbing Estonian footage of zombie bears trapped in a destructive cycle of compulsive behaviour. For the most part, however, the BBC refuses to succumb to such frivolous globetrotting. The programmes it selects for children are almost entirely British in design and execution. CBBC has Danger Mouse and Blue Peter and Horrible Histories. Its younger cousin, CBeebies, has Octonauts and Teletubbies and Bing who, quite frankly, would end up marooned on a floating prison barge if he tried pulling any of those antics in another country. They are British shows for British people, and if it so happens that they are not entirely British-made shows – like that ropey CGI Peter Rabbit series – at least they have the decency to re-dub the whole thing with British accents. Except that isn’t the case any longer. As of today, CBBC is the home of Holly Hobbie; a Canadian-US Hulu series that couldn’t be any less British if it underwent a round of expensive tooth-whitening surgery. It is set in small-town America. It is produced by American Greetings Entertainment. Its cast is entirely North American. It is based on the life of a real American illustrator who made her fortune by selling her likeness to a range of deliberately folksy dolls, which is just about the most American thing I have ever heard. There is simply no way to disguise how intrinsically American Holly Hobbie is. And that’s quite rare. Ofcom demands that the overwhelming majority of programming on CBBC be original and UK-commissioned so, aside from a smattering of movie spin-off cartoons and the occasional stupid prank show, it’s almost completely impossible to hear an American accent on CBBC these days. When you do, it can’t help but stick out. Which isn’t to say that Holly Hobbie doesn’t fit on CBBC. It absolutely does. Holly is the sort of girl who, when confronted with sheep in the road, cycles up to them and says: “Beep beep.” She sells muffins in her grandmother’s cafe after school. She finds herself permanently adjacent to endless Little League games. If the show was any more wholesome, it would die of constipation. As such, it slots right in to the CBBC schedule. But part of me wonders whether the sheer Americanness of Holly Hobbie is a step too far. American shows are everywhere right now. If you’re a kid with even the slightest ability to channel-hop in 2019, you will be inundated with American shows wherever you look. They’re not all bad – in fact, in the case of something like Netflix’s Ask the StoryBots, they can be world-beatingly great – but they are ubiquitous nonetheless. Until now, the BBC’s childrens’ output felt like a respite from that; it felt like an oasis of smaller, homelier shows that you could put on whenever you got worried that your child was about to start saying “zee” or “fire truck”, or using the incorrect number of syllables to pronounce the word “aluminium”. It’s always good, especially when you are young, to see a version of yourself reflected onscreen. For the most part, the BBC is tremendous at providing that for British children. Its shows have a grounding in place that would be missed if it just imported programmes wholesale from elsewhere. It would be a shame for CBBC to lose such a delightful niche by shipping in more US shows such as this. So, as needlessly confrontational as this is going to sound on Independence Day, Holly Hobbie should think about going back to where she came from.