With the Women’s World Cup in full swing women’s football is starting to get the recognition it deserves. This World Cup is a momentous global celebration of the growth of the women’s game but at the same time we should not forget the persistent challenges that continue to undermine women’s football and the women and girls involved in the sport. In particular, a continued and profound culture of abuse, harassment and exploitation in women’s football cannot be ignored. It is nothing short of a tragedy that football, which has a unique potential to inspire and empower, is still not a safe sport for women and girls internationally. As manager of the Afghanistan women’s national football team for the last three years, I have witnessed the blatant disregard for the protection of women and girls in football. The experiences of Afghan women in football are both heartbreaking and symptomatic of a culture and a system that has gone unchallenged for far too long. This broken culture is founded on a lack of accountability within women’s football. If this culture is left unchecked, it can give a green light to the abuse, exploitation and harassment of women and girls. Sadly this is often a hidden problem. Without proper reporting systems players know that the implications of speaking out against staff and officials can be stark. In Afghanistan many of the women who spoke out about abuse are now refugees, forced to rebuild their lives and careers in foreign countries without comprehensive support. In the wake of death threats and intimidation, these women know they cannot return to their own country and are left with the daily fear of not knowing what might happen to their loved ones back home. The result is that many women and girls are afraid to speak out about their experiences. Added to this there remains an unwarranted distinction between the women’s and men’s game. In many clubs, academies and federations around the world women’s football is treated as a “tick the box activity”, not an opportunity for development. Associations will do the bare minimum to justify Fifa funding, with little interest or expertise in using that money to grow the women’s game. This can have a direct impact on practices on and off the pitch. When staff and officials realise they can neglect women’s football and governing bodies are not monitoring their behaviour, a culture of disregard for women and girls can take hold. Despite the lack of accountability and often the sheer disregard for the women’s game I believe that change is possible. Culture is a human construction and it can be rebuilt. That is why I am supporting AFDP Global’s #FearlessFootball campaign to transform radically the global culture of football. The campaign not only highlights the current problems but also offers clear solutions based on total professionalism This necessary culture change will be possible only if football’s governing bodies approach the women’s game with full professionalism. This means refusing to accept lower standards in the management of the women’s game, in every area. This is not just about money. It is about a fundamental shift in mindset and approach. Providing funding is great but, without proper governance and oversight, funding empowers football associations that degrade and abuse the women’s game for their own gain. The #FearlessFootball campaign is calling on football’s governing bodies to adopt a zero-tolerance approach to the abuse crisis in women’s football. Crucially the campaign not only highlights the current problems but also offers clear solutions based on total professionalism. The focal point of the campaign is the #FearlessFootball petition, calling for football’s governing bodies to put transparent safeguarding protocols into place to stamp out all abuse and mistreatment of women and girls. Football associations need to know that they will be held accountable for their actions and the conduct of their staff. The future can and will be so much brighter for the women’s game if governing bodies take action to change the culture of football. I look forward to a day where, irrespective of geography or context, families will encourage their daughters to participate in football, knowing that the sport offers outstanding opportunities for physical, mental and personal development. This will not happen if the safety of girls in football is not guaranteed. Female leaders need to play a key role in rebuilding the culture of the game. According to the best data available, out of 177 Fifa member associations, only 8% of executive committee members are women. Even the governance of the women’s game is not in the hands of women. Women need an autonomous voice in the development of the game in order to drive change for the benefit of the women’s game. However, the #FearlessFootball petition is not a women’s petition. It is a petition that should be supported by anyone who believes that safety in sport is a human right. Our call to action puts the onus on football’s governing bodies to place well-being of athletes at the centre of football culture. The world is watching. Stand with us by signing the petition Read the full declaration of principles