Prep 10 min Rest 20 minCook 45 minServes 6 For the shortcrust pastry (or use ready-made)250g flour125g butter, plus extra for greasing1 tsp salt1 egg yolk, beaten, plus a little extra for brushing40g cold water For the filling200g white crab meat250g podded broad beans1 bunch coriander, picked and chopped1 medium-sized red chilli, sliced (pith and seeds removed, if you prefer less heat)2 limes, zested and juiced For the savoury custard 300g double cream200g milk2 whole eggs plus 3 egg yolksSalt and black pepper To make the pastry, using your fingertips, rub together the flour, butter and salt in a bowl until the mix resembles breadcrumbs. Add the beaten egg yolk, then the water, and bring together to make a dough. Cover with airtight wrap and put in the fridge to rest for at least 20 minutes. Heat the oven to 140C (120C fan)/275F/gas 1. Roll out the rested pastry to 3mm thick and use it to line a greased 25cm tart ring. Prick the base all over with a fork, line with greaseproof paper and baking beans, then blind bake for 16 minutes. Lift out the greaseproof paper and the baking beans, brush the base all over with beaten egg yolk and return to the oven for six minutes more. Once cooked, remove from the oven, trim the top of the tart and leave to cool. Meanwhile, make the custard. Combine the cream, milk, eggs and egg yolks, and whisk smooth. Pass through a sieve, then season. Spoon the crab, broad beans, coriander and sliced chilli into the tart case. Stir the lime juice and zest into the custard, pour on top, then return to the oven for 18 minutes, or until the custard is set. Remove, leave to cool until warm or at room temperature, and serve. Prep 15 minRest 20 minCook 45 minServes 6 For the shortcrust pastry (or use ready-made)250g flour1 tsp salt125g butter, plus extra for greasing1 egg yolk, beaten, plus extra for brushing40g cold water For the filling500g leftover roast lamb, shredded (alternatively, encase a lamb shoulder in a salt-and-rosemary crust, roast at 220C for 20 minutes, then slow-roast at 130C for four hours more; leave to cool before shredding)2 litres brown chicken stock1 bunch mint, leaves picked and chopped1 green and 1 yellow courgette, thinly sliced1 splash olive oil2 sprigs thyme, picked100g grated parmesan To make the pastry, use your fingertips to rub together the flour, salt and butter in a bowl until they look like breadcrumbs. Add the beaten yolk, followed by the water, then bring together into a dough. Cover with airtight wrap and refrigerate for at least 20 minutes. Heat the oven to 140C (120C fan)/275F/gas 1. Roll out the pastry to 3mm thick, and use it to line a greased 25cm tart ring. Prick the base all over with a fork, line with greaseproof paper and baking beans, then blind bake for 16 minutes. Lift out the paper and beans, brush with beaten egg yolk and bake for six minutes more. Remove, trim the top of the tart and leave to cool. Turn the oven to 195C/(175C fan)/385F/gas 5½. Bring the stock to a boil, and reduce by two-thirds to concentrate the flavours. Mix in the lamb and mint – the shredded meat will soak up the rich stock – then transfer to the tart case with a slotted spoon. Lay the courgettes neatly on top, in alternating colours, drizzle with oil, and scatter on the thyme and parmesan. Bake the tart for 12 minutes, then remove and serve hot with boiled and minted new potatoes. Prep 10 minCook 50 minServes 6 3 red onions, peeled and thinly sliced 1 pack ready-rolled all-butter puff pastryOlive oil 2 sprigs thyme, leaves picked100g grated parmesan 500g selection of heritage tomatoes 1 ball mozzarella 25g basil leaves25g coriander leaves150g pine nuts Sea saltA few rocket leaves, to garnish Melt a big knob of butter in a frying pan on a low heat, then cook the onions until soft and caramelised – about 20 minutes. Roll out the puff pastry into a square, rectangle or circle, then roll over the very edges to create a thin crust. Transfer to an oven tray lined with greaseproof paper. Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Spread the cooked onions over the centre of the pastry, brush the edges with oil and sprinkle over the thyme and parmesan. Bake the tart for 18 minutes, then leave to cool a little. Cut the tomatoes into even wedges or slices, then arrange neatly on top of the onions. Drain the mozzarella, tear into small pieces and use this to fill the gaps in the tart topping. Scatter the basil and coriander on top, followed by the pine nuts. Drizzle oil all over the tart, and sprinkle with sea salt. Return the tart to the oven for eight minutes more, then serve dressed with some rocket leaves as garnish. Prep 10 minCook 40 minServes 6 1 roll shop-bought puff pastry 1 tbsp fennel seeds, lightly crushed 100ml good olive oil 1 fennel bulb, thinly sliced, fronds reserved4 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped1 avocado 2 tbsp miso paste (you can get this in most supermarkets) 1 lime, zested and juiced 200g smoked salmon, sliced Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Roll out the puff pastry into a square, rectangle or circle, then lift on to an oven tray lined with greaseproof paper. Put the fennel seeds in a heavy-based saucepan with a good glug of olive oil, then fry gently until golden. Add the fennel bulb and garlic, and cook on a low heat until very soft. Spread the fennel mix evenly over the pastry, bake for 20 minutes, then remove and leave to cool to room temperature. Meanwhile, peel and stone the avocado, then cut into neat slices. In a bowl, mix the miso paste with the lime zest and juice, and the remaining olive oil, then gently mix in the avocados. Arrange the salmon in a neat layer over the base of the tart, top with the avocado mix and fennel fronds, and serve. ⁃ The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US. • Recipes by Adam Smith, executive chef at Coworth Park, Sunningdale, Berkshire