Irish cabinet ministers will meet on Tuesday to hear of the “dire” consequences of a no-deal Brexit on Ireland and the all-Ireland economy. At a special cabinet meeting, they will be briefed on three reports prepared by the office of the deputy prime minister, Simon Coveney, which set out the difficult challenges Ireland faces if Britain leaves the EU without a deal. Ireland’s education minister, Joe McHugh, told RTÉ Morning Ireland on Tuesday: “We have always taken this seriously. Simon Coveney is heightening the conversation today. We are preparing for the worst. We are still hoping we won’t get to that situation today.” McHugh, who represents the Donegal constituency, which borders Northern Ireland, said he would tell the cabinet about the impact Brexit was having already on sectors such as tourism, which is promoted on an all-Ireland basis and is down by more than 20% in the north-west of the island. After the cabinet meeting, a detailed update on last year’s contingency plan will be published for discussion in the Irish parliament later this week. The principal report for the cabinet is more than 100 pages long and details increased concerns about how the government can maintain an invisible border with Northern Ireland while protecting the EU single market. It is understood that in the immediate aftermath of a no-deal Brexit, checks on customs declarations and VAT could be conducted away from the border. The challenge is how to conduct mandatory health checks on animals and foods that cross the border. One option being considered by the EU agriculture department is to disrupt the all-Ireland economy. At present, this involves one-third of milk from Northern Ireland being processed south of the border and more than 400,000 sheep being slaughtered annually in abattoirs hundreds of miles away in the republic. EU sources have said that under the rules, milk from Northern Ireland will not be permitted into the republic from 1 November in the event of a no-deal Brexit because it will be deemed to have come from a third country. Coveney said in Dublin: “The government is increasingly concerned about how it can reconcile the twin obligations to maintain an open border on the island while at the same time protecting the single market and customs union if the UK leaves without an agreement.” “We can’t allow … Northern Ireland effectively to become a back door – if it’s unguarded – into the EU single market and customs union,” he added. The Irish government has been caught in a bind, refusing to discuss plans for the border in the event of no deal because that would risk legitimising a disorderly exit. At the same time, it is aware of its EU obligations to protect the single market from third-country goods. McHugh told RTÉ: “We cannot have a border. It’s not feasibly possible to have that on the island of Ireland. “This seamlessness of the border, the benefits of the Good Friday agreement since 1998, the movement of people, commerce, common travel area, we have to ensure we protect all of those in every respect.” Coveney will deliver three memos on no-deal contingencies, covering 20 different issues including aviation, haulage, exports to the UK and the safeguarding of medical supplies. The cabinet will be asked to approve permanent border inspection posts at ports and airports including Dublin and Rosslare in the south-east, where ferries run to Wales and France. A 24-hour monitoring operation to handle post-Brexit traffic at Irish ports will also be assessed with input from the Irish revenue commissioners, the gardaí and Transport for Ireland. It is expected to act as an early detection centre to foresee any problems arising from the immediate chaos expected in November. One of the three reports is dedicated to a communications strategy for Ireland and provides a “wake-up call” to businesses to take the prospect of no deal seriously.