Eoin Morgan has called on his England players to deliver an iconic sporting moment that inspires the nation by winning their first World Cup at the most famous cricket ground of all. With Lord’s a picture, the weather set fair, the match televised free of charge across Sky and Channel 4, and the only major sporting distraction a handful of motor cars and tennis players, Sunday’s final between the previously uncrowned England and New Zealand has all the ingredients to be a classic. Morgan, expected to name an unchanged side from the one that tore through Australia in Thursday’s semi-final at Edgbaston, is under no illusions about the enormity of the occasion and its transformational potential. Morgan said: “I haven’t allowed myself to think about lifting the trophy. Sport and cricket in particular is very fickle. If you ever get ahead of yourself, it always seems to bite you in the backside. “But for us to win it, around the country it would be awesome – great for the game. It would be quite iconic and certainly in young kids’ memories if they are watching it at home and we manage to lift the trophy. It would be awesome.” Only one batsman, Albert Trott back in 1899, has launched a cricket ball over the pavilion at Lord’s, but Jason Roy has his sights set on joining him after escaping a ban for today’s World Cup final against New Zealand. It's a fanciful notion, but Roy’s response when this feat was put to him – 'Oh really? Let’s try to get an opportunity tomorrow' – was in keeping with the relaxed mood as England prepared for the game of their lives. Having struck three successive sixes twice in this tournament – including an effort off Steve Smith that found the Edgbaston pavilion’s upper tier – Roy is probably as equipped as any to repeat Trott’s blow. But the incendiary opener, averaging 71 in the campaign, nearly missed out on the final following a significant show of dissent towards the umpire during the win over Australia. Roy has apologised to the umpire, Kumar Dharmasena, and was fined. 'To get out like that was slightly disappointing, and I probably showed it more than I should have,' Roy said. 'But it’s professional sport and emotions run high.' Ali Martin Regardless of the result, Morgan knows his trailblazing side have secured a place in English cricket history. They have risen from the despair of a miserable group-stage exit four years ago to No 1 in the world rankings thanks to a diverse set of talents embracing their captain’s dynamic style. No side during this time can match their 65 ODI wins, their 44 totals in excess of 300 – India are next best with 25 – nor their 2,389 fours and 582 sixes. England’s attack, a homogeneous collection of right-arm fast-mediums and an off-spinner for years, now boasts the electric pace of Jofra Archer and Mark Wood, as well as a top-class wrist-spinner in Adil Rashid. Morgan said: “It’s important to recognise the work that has been done and the foundations that have been laid. It’s not just for this World Cup, it’s for the future. “We’d all like to be contenders going into every World Cup and not just an afterthought, as we probably have been before. That’s a lot of hard work behind us and we’ve earned the right to be in the final because of that. But I don’t think it’s all or nothing.” His ambitions for the team are slightly compromised by his employers, with the England and Wales Cricket Board set to relegate the men’s domestic 50-over cup to secondary status when the currently unloved 100-ball competition overlaps next year. Back in the here and now, England head into Sunday’s final with a tailwind of goodwill – not least from the 101 England players to have featured in previous men’s World Cups, who in a video produced by the Professional Cricketers’ Association have sent messages of support. “As the only Englishman to play in all three losing finals – 1979, 1987 and 1992 – I know the pain of losing,” said Graham Gooch, the former England captain. “You’ve played brilliantly so far. Believe in yourselves, everyone in our country is proud of you. Go and win the trophy.” Morgan’s one injury doubt before the match, Jonny Bairstow, is all set to play despite a groin niggle and with a green tinge to the pitch 24 hours out, the chances of Moeen Ali returning as a second spinner alongside Rashid appear to be slim. Before heading off for photographs with his opposite number, Kane Williamson, Morgan offered one final thought on proceedings, a reminder that Lord’s – his home ground for Middlesex – often produces low-scoring affairs in ODI cricket and added: “It will be a bit of a battle.”