Jeremy Hunt has implored British diplomats to continue “speaking truth to power and standing up for British interests” as the fallout from the resignation of the UK ambassador to Washington became a key battleground in the fight to succeed Theresa May. In a message to all Foreign Office staff that will be seen as a coded rebuke to Boris Johnson, Hunt praised the departing ambassador, Sir Kim Darroch, hailing him and his diplomatic colleagues as “the best of Britain”. “The twin roles you perform of speaking truth to power and standing up for British interests have never been more vital,” wrote Hunt, the foreign secretary, on Thursday. “Please keep speaking up without fear or favour, remembering that the UK government alone will determine appointments based on our national interest alone.” He added: “I want you to know that you will always get all the support you need to carry out your vital work. I will ensure you get it.” The reassuring missive was released after a day in which Johnson, the clear favourite to become the new prime minister, faced intense criticism from Conservative party colleagues over his perceived abandonment of Darroch. At a Tory leadership hustings on Thursday evening, Johnson claimed he fully supports Darroch, despite his previous repeated public refusals to do so. He told the audience: “I rang Kim, I think yesterday, and said how much I regretted his resignation, which indeed I do. He, I think, was the victim of a very unpleasant stunt by somebody who tried to – and succeeded in – leaking his confidential diptels [diplomatic communications], which are intended to guide ministers and the government about his thoughts about what’s going on in Washington. “And I think it was absolutely disgraceful that those diptels were leaked and I think it is vital – and as I said to Kim and I say to everybody – that all our civil servants, all great ambassadors such as Sir Kim, should feel free to speak without fear or favour to their political masters and then it is up to their political masters to decide what to do with it. And I think whoever leaked that, those diptels, deserves to be hunted down and prosecuted.” Born in County Durham in 1954, Sir Nigel Kim Darroch graduated with a degree in zoology from Durham University after attending Abingdon school on a scholarship. Tall and gregarious, he was nicknamed “Kimbo” at the Foreign Office, where he began his civil service career in 1977 and climbed the ranks of diplomacy in postings from Japan to Italy. He entered the public eye when he was frequently seen at Cameron’s side as his national security adviser from 2012 to 2015, joining him on trips to war zones, and chairing meetings on international crises, from Russian aggression in Ukraine to the collapse of the Libyan government. But it is his roles prior to that, as Blair’s top adviser on Europe, and as the permanent representative to the EU under Brown, that led to his vilification by Conservative Brexit supporters, who regard him as an arch Europhile. In January 2016 he took up the role of HM ambassador to the United States. Despite having been appointed when Hillary Clinton was thought likely to win the presidency, Darroch threw himself into courting Trump’s inner circle, “flooding the zone” of people in Trump’s orbit, hoping to gain influence through showing up and cultivating contacts. He also worked hard to court well-connected American journalists so he could benefit from their insights. In July 2019, Darroch resigned as ambassador, after a series of leaked diplomatic messages revealed that he had described the administration as "inept" and "clumsy". This led to a vocal Twitter outburst from Trump. Darroch could never have imagined that his distinguished 40-year diplomatic career would end with a US president publicly volleying insults his way, calling him “a very stupid guy”, “wacky” and “pompous fool”. Rowena Mason in London and David Smith in Washington Asked why he had been less willing to offer such clear public backing before Darroch felt moved to resign, Johnson said: “I must say that I think there has certainly been an attempt to politicise this issue and to take the career prospects of Sir Kim and turn them into an issue in the Conservative leadership contest. I notice that. “What I will say is that I don’t think that should happen and, as I said in the debate, I don’t think that issues of personnel in our civil service should become footballs in political conversations and just as the advice that civil servants give to ministers should be sacrosanct and ministers should not reveal it and should not betray it.” In the background, there is also a fierce wrangle over who should replace Darroch in Washington and, crucially, whether the decision should be taken by May or her successor. At an urgent Commons question about the affair, a series of Tory MPs lined up to criticise Johnson, who repeatedly refused to back Darroch after Trump insulted the ambassador in a series of tweets and said he would no longer deal with him. One Conservative backbencher, David Morris, said Johnson, a former foreign secretary, should make a formal apology to parliament. “Do you not feel that it is incumbent on every member of parliament in this place to back up our excellent diplomats and civil servants, and the honourable member for Uxbridge should come to the house and apologise?” he asked. Adding to the likely discomfort of the Johnson camp, the Foreign Office minister tasked with responding to the urgent question was Sir Alan Duncan, who had the day before accused Johnson of throwing Darroch “under the bus”. Johnson has praised Darroch but stayed otherwise silent after declining several times during a Tory leadership TV debate on Tuesday night to offer support, something friends of Darroch said was a key element in the ambassador’s decision to resign the next day. One of Johnson’s leading allies, the chief secretary to the Treasury, Liz Truss, spoke up for him on Thursday, telling a journalists’ lunch that while she did not like overseas leaders such as Trump “slagging off” the UK, she agreed with the US president’s criticism of May’s Brexit deal. On the timing for appointing a new ambassador, Truss predicted this would take months and so it would be a job for the next prime minister. On Thursday evening, Johnson talked up the importance of the maintaining a working relationship with Washington, but insisted that there were circumstances in which he would publicly criticise Trump. He pointed to his response to Trump’s claim in 2015 that some parts of London were “so radicalised that police are afraid for their own lives”. At the time, Johnson noted, he had replied that the “only reason I wouldn’t go to some parts of New York is the real risk of meeting Donald Trump”. That came after other Tories had been openly critical of him. During the urgent question, one Conservative MP, Roger Gale, told the Commons: “The failure of the former foreign secretary to leap to the defence of Sir Kim shows a lack of leadership that is lamentable.” Tom Tugendhat, who chairs the Commons foreign affairs committee, was less direct, but made his feelings known, saying the loss of Darroch after Trump’s comments amounted to the UK being bullied. Tugendhat said the government should “always stand up for those we send abroad, military or civilian, and will back them to the point that is necessary in the interests of the British people, and no one else”. The only support for Johnson in parliament came from the veteran Tory backbencher Peter Bone, who said: “The attacking of colleagues is completely wrong and people should be ashamed of themselves when they’ve done that.” The urgent question was tabled by Labour’s Pat McFadden, who said the decision of Darroch to resign, despite having the full support of Theresa May and her cabinet, was “a dark moment for our democracy and for the standing of the United Kingdom”. McFadden said Johnson’s lack of support for the envoy was “an appalling abandonment of someone in the firing line”. He added: “Real leaders protect their people, they don’t throw them to the wolves because they can sniff a prize for themselves. His actions are a chilling warning of what is to come if he becomes prime minister.” Duncan said he would not be responding to such views on Johnson: “I hope the house will understand if I hold back today from making any further comment on the right honourable friend the member for Uxbridge. I said enough yesterday to make my position entirely clear.” Duncan nonetheless managed to reiterate his condemnation of Johnson several times in ways varying from the coded to the open. Responding to one question, he replied: “It is everyone’s duty, and everyone in this house’s duty, to defend our ambassadors. They are our ambassadors doing our duty. If they do something terribly wrong or break all the rules, that’s altogether different.” Duncan later drew laughter after the Liberal Democrat deputy leader, Jo Swinson, cited his description of Johnson’s actions as “the behaviour of an utter wimp”. “I seem to recall that was one of the kinder words I used yesterday,” he told MPs, adding: “I think what I would rather do is concentrate on the specific details of the question put, the merits of Sir Kim Darroch rather than the … merits of anyone else.” Predictions about who will fill the role have already begun, with names mentioned including Sir Mark Sedwill, the head of the civil service. Sir Mark Sedwill became Britain’s most powerful civil servant in autumn 2018, after it became clear that predecessor Sir Jeremy Heywood was terminally ill. He took the job without having to go through a formal interview process. Already the country’s national security adviser, he had been deputising for Heywood and, having worked with Theresa May for several years, the 54-year-old was someone May felt she could trust. Unlike all but one of his predecessors, Sedwill had never worked at the Treasury, although he holds a masters in economics from Oxford. “Mine is an unusual background for cabinet secretary, having spent much of my career overseas in security and international roles,” he said recently.Sedwill rose up through the Diplomatic Service, becoming Britain’s ambassador to Afghanistan in 2009 and Nato’s representative in the conflict-ridden country a year later. There were also spells in the Home Office before he became permanent secretary there at what was May’s department in 2013. Ministerial advisers say his background means he has little patience for leaks, currently running at epidemic rates amid the constant rowing about Brexit. “He just doesn’t understand why anybody would leak, whereas Heywood would see it as an occasional occupational hazard,” one said.Some even believe Sedwill has been looking for the opportunity to prosecute a leaker, with regular cabinet papers marked secret so they would be covered under the Official Secrets Act, meaning that any leaks could potentially be a criminal offence.The sharply worded letter he sent to the senior ministers who sit on the National Security Council on 25 April 2019 made clear that immediate cooperation with the forthcoming inquiry was expected. As a result of his investigations, Gavin Williamson was sacked as defence secretary. Dan Sabbagh, Defence and security editor The appointment would help smooth the return to the cabinet of Gavin Williamson under Johnson, whose campaign he has helped run. Sedwill played a leading role in Williamson’s dismissal as defence secretary in May after an inquiry found he had leaked information about the role of Huawei in the UK’s 5G network. Political figures named as possible successor include the former Tory leader Iain Duncan Smith, the international trade secretary Liam Fox, and the chancellor-turned man-of-many-jobs George Osborne.