Kirsty Young is to step down permanently as the host of Radio 4’s Desert Island Discs, saying it is time to pursue new challenges. The broadcaster made her debut as the presenter of the long-running programme, a staple of BBC radio since 1942, in 2006. Last summer, she announced she would be taking a break from the show, which has been hosted in her absence by Lauren Laverne, for a “number of months” as she was suffering from a form of fibromyalgia. BBC Radio 4 said in a statement Young had decided to step down permanently. Young said: “After 12 incredibly happy and fulfilling years on Desert Island Discs I’ve decided to step down permanently. “Having been forced to take some months away from my favourite job because of health problems, I’m happy to say I’m now well on the way to feeling much better. “But that enforced absence from the show has altered my perspective on what I should do next and so I’ve decided it’s time to pursue new challenges. “Having hundreds of castaways share their triumphs, tragedies, tribulations and tracks with me over the years was a huge privilege and an education. I am so thankful to Roy Plomley for the brilliance of his format, and I wish the programme and Lauren all the very best.” Young has presented 496 episodes of the programme as well as fronting its 70th and 75th anniversary celebrations. Her castaways have included Zadie Smith, David Beckham, Bruce Springsteen, Victoria Wood, Dame Kelly Holmes, Dame Judi Dench, George Michael, Alice Walker, Tom Hanks, the second world war pilot Eric “Winkle” Brown and Sir David Attenborough. Desert Island Discs was first broadcast on 29 January 1942 – was Vic Oliver, a music-hall star from the 1930s was interviewed by presenter Roy Plomley. Comedian Arthur Askey made the first of his record four appearances on 2 April 1942 – the others came in 1955, 1968 and 1980. He shares the record with David Attenborough, who was the the 70th-anniversary guest on 29 January 2012 and had also been on in 1957, 1979 and 1998 Roy Plomley himself was one of the earliest subjects. he was interviewed by the BBC’s head of music Leslie Perowne in May 1942. Plomley made another appearance as castaway in May 1958, interviewed by Eamonn Andrews. The programme was dropped as part of a postwar shakeup at the BBC in 1946, but was revived in 1951 and has been going strong ever since. Asking guests to choose a luxury only began on 16 September 1951, when the actor Sally Ann Howes, during the era of rationing, modestly requested garlic. The tradition of giving castaways a copy of the Bible and the complete works of Shakespeare and asking them to choose another book started a month later. In 1964 the herring gulls that accompany the opening music were replaced after listeners pointed out they were indigenous to the northern hemisphere and would not have been found on the shores of a tropical island. The sounds of tropical birds were substituted, but even more listeners complained, so after a couple of months the geographically inappropriate gulls returned. Plomley’s final castaway was the actor Sheila Steafel. The programme was broadcast on 11 May 1985. The interviewer died of pleurisy 17 days later. He had presented 1,791 editions of the programme over a 43-year period. Plomley was succeeded by Michael Parkinson. He planned to ask more searching questions and to listen to the music with the castaway in real time.  Parkinson’s first castaway, on 5 January 1986, was film director Alan Parker. He did the show for a little over two years. Parkinson’s successor was Sue Lawley, who came aboard in the spring of 1988. She had herself been a castaway in November 1987. Her luxury item was an ironing board. Her first guest, on 27 March 1988, was Lord Hailsham. She was to do the job for 18 years. The 50th anniversary guest on 26 January 1992 was the then prime minister, John Major. He chose a full-scale model of the Oval cricket ground as his luxury item. Lawley’s final interview was with actor Joan Plowright on 27 August 2006.  She was replaced by Kirsty Young, who opened on 1 October 2006 with illustrator Quentin Blake as her first guest. Mick Jagger is one of the famous Desert Island Discs refuseniks – George Bernard Shaw, Laurence Olivier, Ted Hughes and Prince Charles turned it down too. Stephen Moss  The BBC’s director of radio and education, James Purnell, said: “Kirsty has been a wonderful host of Desert Island Discs for more than a decade and her intuitive interviewing style as well as her warmth and humour has helped bring out incredible life stories and anecdotes from her castaways. We know how loved she is by listeners and we all wish her well for the future. “Lauren Laverne has been doing a brilliant job at the helm in Kirsty’s absence and I’m delighted she continues to host one of Radio 4’s most popular shows.” Laverne will continue to host Desert Island Discs for the foreseeable future. She said: “Stepping in for Kirsty on Desert Island Discs [which was already my favourite programme] has been an enormous honour. I wish her the very best in her next chapter.”