Ilya Kaminsky has only published two poetry collections in 15 years, but his second, Deaf Republic, has been hailed as “a contemporary epic”, “a perfectly extraordinary book” from a poet described by the writer Garth Greenwell as “the most brilliant of his generation, one of the world’s few geniuses”. The man who has attracted all this hyperbole has a wraparound smile, and responds to a photographer’s demand to look more animated by reciting poetry in Russian and English. “Here is some Mandelstam,” he says. “Now I am going to give you some Emily Dickinson.” His speech drags slightly and he is apologetic about his accent: “After all this time, it should really be better,” he says, “but I only hear what the hearing aids give me.” For Kaminsky is hard of hearing – so, if you count sign language alongside Russian and Ukrainian, he is speaking in his fourth language. Deaf Republic is an investigation into “what happens to language in a time of crisis, how we carry on and how we try to remain human,” he explains. “It’s something I’m trying to find out in my book and in my life.” In just under 60 lyric poems, some only two lines long, it tells the story of a fictional town whose inhabitants react to the murder of a deaf child by shutting their ears. Little Petya’s crime is to spit at an army sergeant who has arrived to break up a public gathering in a time of martial law. “Deafness passes through us like a police whistle,” say the townspeople of Vasenka, who are described by the author as “the ‘we’ who tell the story”. Kaminsky himself lost most of his hearing after contracting mumps aged four in the Ukrainian city of Odessa. “The Soviet doctor said it was just a cold and sent us away,” he says, without self-pity. This life-changing medical misjudgment would connect him with history in ways that he is still processing. “It is on the day Brezhnev dies that my mother learns of my deafness, and the odyssey of doctors and hospitals begins,” he wrote recently. “My mother shouts at senior citizens in public transport to promptly get up please and give her sick child a seat; my father, embarrassed, hides on the other side of the trolley. I cannot hear a word … Brezhnev is dead. Strangers wear black clothes in public. Thus begins the history of my deafness.” It was only after he arrived in the US at the age of 16 that he was fitted with hearing aids. “When I came to the west I saw that there was this otherness that I didn’t perceive before,” he says. “Pretty much all my childhood and adolescence was spent watching the Soviet Union fall apart, but I couldn’t hear, so I followed the century with my eyes. I didn’t know anything different, but now I understand that I was seeing in a language of images.” Born into a Jewish family in Odessa in 1977, he would observe cultural variations through gesture: “You really notice as a deaf child how faces move differently when a different language is spoken.” The Yiddish-inflected animation with which his parents talked contrasted with the Soviet-imposed Russian of his school teachers, so that the writing of Isaac Babel came as a revelation: “He wrote in a very stylised Russian with Yiddish grammar and it was shocking to me to see that the way my parents spoke in private was in a book.” Poems are like spells. They’re not just about an event. They become an event themselves He isn’t totally deaf, he points out, and “maybe because of how my parents handled it, I never felt it was a disability. It was just how I lived.” Odessa was a cosmopolitan place, a “city of laughter” in which poetry was revered, and from an early age Kaminsky wrote and learned it by heart. When he was 12 his prose writing was published in the local newspaper, after he answered a call-out to schoolchildren to contribute, because the paper had no money to pay journalists. At 15, though he thought of poetry as “a private thing”, he produced his first chapbook. He had graduated from school by the time the family was forced into exile. He is at pains to emphasise that his is not a tragic refugee story: “At 16 I was interested in smoking and dating girls.” But the family’s decision to leave followed years in which it had become increasingly difficult to live as a Jewish family in Ukraine. “When people have problems, they like to blame those that are not a majority,” he says, delicately. Pressed about the particular spur for their departure, he adds: “If your door is burned, you are free to claim asylum.” Now, as on many occasions, I am unsure how literally he is speaking. His brother, an engineer 15 years his senior, had recently married and emigrated to Rochester, New York, so the family followed him there. In Odessa, his parents had mingled with artists and journalists. His mother had been a bookkeeper and his father had held down a range of jobs, from cook to factory worker, having been denied a university education because his family had been identified as “enemies of the people”. When Kaminsky’s father was just one year old his parents had been arrested. He recalled these events shockingly in his debut collection, Dancing in Odessa: “ ... he [grandfather] was shot, and my grandmother raped / by the public prosecutor, who stuck his pen in her vagina.” Later, his father’s grandmother managed to “steal” her grandson back from the authorities. Deaf Republic returns to this history through a bicycling impresario, Momma Galya Armolinskaya, who smuggles a baby out of an army checkpoint in a bundle of laundry after both her parents are executed in reprisals against the silent insurrection. Momma Galya is like a visitant from a Chagall painting, presiding over a troupe of militant puppeteers who teach sign language by day and garotte soldiers by night. At 53, we are told, she is too old to give birth to children but is “having more sex than any of us”. Kaminsky’s own parents, to whom the book is dedicated, were in their 50s when they went into exile. “In that geographic place and time, the 50s were not young. My father was in his first year of retirement,” he says. Though he makes light of it now, he has previously said: “Immigration is a difficult game; I would not advise it to anyone. It breaks lives.” Within a year of arriving in the US, a few weeks before he began to wear hearing aids, his father had died, so “I will never hear his voice”. Having gone back to school in order to learn English, he began to write poetry in the language of his adopted country, because “it felt kind of wrong to write poetry about [his father] dying. How could a human become a pretty line in a poem? I was afraid it would hurt my mother and my brother, so I started playing with a language they didn’t know.” He went on to law school and briefly worked for San Francisco Legal Aid and the National Immigration Law Center, before settling into a teaching career. He was in his mid 20s when he submitted the manuscript of Dancing in Odessa for the Dorset prize, the reward for which was publication. He won, and his book was instantly and widely recognised, going on to be published in more than 20 languages. So why has it taken him so long to follow it up? “I was writing. I edited anthologies and was teaching. I’m finishing a collection of essays,” he shrugs. “I’m afraid I’m a creature of passions who has trouble saying no to people, partly because I’m a deaf child. That’s possibly why I’m a poet not a novelist.” Invited two years ago to judge the prize that had kick-started his career, he responded by writing individual citations for all 64 entries. But the delay was also due to the formal challenge he had set himself: “I am a lyric poet but I wanted to tell a story so I had to find a way to do it. It had to be this minimalist telling of a large story. I think great poems are like spells. They’re not just about an event. They become an event themselves. Even without wanting to, you remember them.” Away from poetry-loving Odessa, Kaminsky battles against the tyranny of irony. “If you live in Brooklyn or Bloomsbury, you’re ironic 24/7. It’s a useful device but any device has to have some sort of emotional urgency, otherwise it’s just style,” he says. “But maybe as an eastern European I’m just more comfortable with emotion.” Underpinning his work is a politics of deafness. This is observed by another acclaimed deaf poet, Raymond Antrobus, winner of this year’s Ted Hughes and Rathbones Folio awards, who wrote of Deaf Republic: “I’m imagining a younger me, struggling to fit in at deaf school, secretly writing poems and coming across this book. It would have changed my life.” The text of Deaf Republic is punctuated with sign language illustrations, and ends in a four-word sequence which roughly translates as “The town watches the story of the earth”. “The deaf don’t believe in silence. Silence is the invention of the hearing,” insists Kaminsky. Asked to elaborate on this, he cites a study in which hearing and deaf people from different cultures, and with different languages, were confined to separate rooms. “By the end of the experiment the hearing people were sitting in different corners of the room whereas the deaf ones were creating a new language. Deaf culture is such a beautiful thing. It has one of the youngest languages in the world and is still developing.” He removes his hearing aids on trips back to Odessa, because only through lip-reading can he experience its familiarity He retains an ambivalence about his own place in the hearing world, removing his hearing aids on trips back to visit friends and family in Odessa, because only through lip-reading can he experience its familiarity. It’s a realisation that ties in with his artistic credo that the absence of language gives us power: that sometimes the most potent truths can be contained in “just a few words surrounded by space”. Deaf Republic is bookended by two poems that speak as much about the US as they do about the land of his birth. The prologue acknowledges a plural guilt: “In the street of money in the city of money in the country of money, we (forgive us) lived happily during the war.” Kaminsky is now a professor of poetry at a technical college in Atlanta, where he lives with his wife, Katie Farris, also a writer and poet. In San Diego, where they both worked previously, he witnessed “grotesque images of what happens at borders in the US and the rest of the world”. The afterword, significantly, narrows this peacetime guilt down to the singular: Inhabitant of earth for fortysomething years I once found myself in a peaceful country. I watch neighbors open their phones to watch a cop demanding a man’s driver’s licence. When  the man reaches for his wallet, the cop shoots. Into the car window. Shoots. Kaminsky still does voluntary work as an advocate for orphaned children on the border between the US and Mexico. “The US is in such a complicated situation,” he says. “It tried to build something so beautiful. It’s truly an international country. But it began by the genocide of everyone who lived there, and it has never really acknowledged that. It has so much fear and conflict with itself that it needs to learn and pay reparations.” He momentarily frets that he is getting himself into trouble, then loses himself again in the question of whether poetry might help to offer a way out of the impasse. “I’m trying to show the private lives, and not just the constant public violence. It’s not always doom, doom, doom, there are moments of kindness and tenderness always.” He still cleaves to his teenage belief that poetry is a private language, but happily it is one that contains an existential paradox. “Every real poet is a private poet, but if they are a good poet their language will be powerful enough to speak privately to many people at the same time.” • Deaf Republic is published by Faber (£10.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.