People probably know Billy Bunter, the Heavyweight Chump of Greyfriars, but how many recall the equally food-obsessed Hungry Horace, a stalwart of the Sparky? We remember Beryl the Peril but what about the even more troublesome Jonah? “Jonah was on the back page of the Beano for seven or eight years,” said comic expert Steve Marchant. “He was an ugly sailor. Every week he would rock up on to somebody’s boat and the boat would sink, that was the gag. The humour was in how the inevitable happens … terrific stuff.” Visitors to the recently relocated Cartoon Museum in London will from Monday be able to see examples of Jonah, a strip drawn by Ken Reid, at a new temporary exhibition: Comic Creators: The famous and the forgotten. The show explores comic creations which have become imbued in the national consciousness, and others who arguably deserve to be. Marchant, who has curated the show, fully expects people to go: “I know Desperate Dan, I know Dennis the Menace, I know Judge Dredd … but what the hell is this? “I’m putting stuff up which I think is equally as good. There are people who were doing brilliant work throughout the 20th century but have just slipped through the cracks of history and it has been part of my jolly job to take the ones, in my view, who are worth rediscovering.” A case in point might be Bunter, the fabulously famous and stout comic star who first appeared in 1908. Bunter strips are displayed next to Hungry Horace, a little-remembered character in Sparky whose love of cakes, sausage rolls, milkshakes and biscuits regularly got him in trouble. They are not comic strips likely to be seen today. “Nowadays the idea of having kids’ comic characters who were morbidly obese probably wouldn’t go down too well,” said Marchant. “Back in the day it was funny.” Other strips on display will include Tinker, a girl’s comic character based on Tinkerbell; and Marvelman from the 1950s, perhaps the first successful British superhero. There is also an unpublished cover from Battle Picture Weekly, with a cartoon of a soldier on the ground about to be bayoneted – “Death Lunge! Is D-Day Dawson Finished!” It was considered too strong even for the certain type of boy growing up in the 1970s who made up the comic’s core readership. The exhibition is the first of what will be three temporary shows a year at the museum, which opens at its new home near Oxford Circus on Monday, a year after it was forced to leave its previous premises near the British Museum. Museum director Becky Jephcoat said they had to leave because of an unexpected rent increase. The move to Wells Street has worked out well because the museum has found a new, bigger space which comes with a peppercorn rent and space for a learning studio and “destination” shop. A £1m redevelopment has resulted in a brilliant blank canvas for the museum. Jephcoat said: “We want to make the museum much more immersive and relevant and attract new audiences.” The main exhibition gallery, curated by the Guardian’s Steve Bell, tells the story of the history of cartoon and comic art with examples from the museum’s collection of 6,000 pieces. The museum first opened in 2006, attracting 26,000 visitors a year. Jephcoat said they expected that number to reach 55,000 within three years. • The Cartoon Museum opens 1 July, 63 Wells Street, London W1A 3AE.