The last time we encountered the team behind the wildly unpopular pirate radio station Kurupt FM, the end was nigh. In the living room of a grotty flat in Brentford, west London, spectacularly delusional frontman MC Grindah spat his final nonsensical bars to an assembled audience of equally witless friends, family and fellow crew-members – a council-imposed relocation to Essex having forced his UK garage collective to disband for ever. Or that was how People Just Do Nothing – the much-loved BBC mockumentary series that followed the gang’s feckless attempts to win the fame and adulation they claimed they already had – concluded in December last year. In reality, it was hard to believe this would be the last we would hear from the self-appointed “best MC in the galaxy” and his pals DJ Beats, Steves and Chabuddy G: over its five series, the show’s makers had developed a cast of characters too good to be left to sink with their sitcom ship. Which is why the lads have returned with something for all you “podcast-listening brehs with your little foldaway bikes”. In other words, they have joined the podcast goldrush with a six-part Audible series that sees them tackle a new theme each week, from fashion to the supernatural, technology to relationships. The result, unsurprisingly, is a string of discussions so dumb you somehow end up knowing less about the subject than you did before the episode began. If People Just Do Nothing’s faux-interview segments and cold sweat-inducing cringe comedy strongly recalled The Office, the podcast sees the lads draw from a different giant of the sitcom world. Bathos-laden broadcasting, aimless chat filler and awkward phone-ins: there is a lot of Alan Partridge’s DNA here. The opening episode, on the subject of music, even features a purported guest appearance from Stormzy that updates Knowing Me Knowing You’s iconic Roger Moore no-show for the Snapchat generation. As that description suggests, the show doesn’t take the current crop of iTunes chart-bothering, heart-on-sleeve interview podcasts as its framework. As well as Partridge, it looks to the stunt-peppered banter of Chris Moyles-era Radio 1 for inspiration – in one episode, drug casualty and resident dogsbody Steves is forced to test out his survivalist skills during a week-long stint in the wilderness of Richmond Park. Being terminally behind-the-times forms a considerable chunk of the Kurupt FM brand, after all (nowadays, UK garage is more of a nostalgia industry than a relevant part of the pop culture landscape). And the gang’s lackadaisical approach to the zeitgeist is the root of much of the comedy here. Freed from the strictures of small-stakes sitcom plotlines, the characters are given more time to wallow in their bizarre, year 2000-centric worldview. It is a perspective mined to glorious ends in the opening episode, in which the crew give a potted history of western music, tracking its evolution from classical to rock (“the only person I know that’s used a guitar successfully is Craig David”), then reggae and, of course, the pinnacle of all cultural achievement, UK garage. The unfettered chat also provides an opportunity to flesh out the PJDN universe. We even get a highly fanciful – and sublimely funny – Kurupt FM origin story, which involves Wiley, Skepta and Grindah spitting “a 300-bar verse” in which “every single word rhymed”. In fact, the podcast sees Grindah’s delusions ramp up a gear, the MC’s ridiculous stories about losing his virginity to five strippers and taking on professional fighters in the street – all of which take place “on holiday” – bringing to mind Jay from The Inbetweeners. But Grindah and his idiotic boasts do have an unfortunate tendency to drown out some of the other characters, particularly Chabuddy G. Asim Chaudhry’s dodgy and decidedly weird entrepreneur has to qualify as one of the most novel, amusing and sympathetic comedy characters in recent memory and he feels underused here. When he does make an extended appearances – such as in the episode about fashion in which he discusses his personal style (spoiler: it involves a pleather corset) – every line is gold. Such gag-dense dialogue is presumably pre-planned, but this sitcom-podcast hybrid doesn’t feel airless or staged. Instead, the vibe is freewheeling and it is clear the cast are genuinely amusing each other – you can hear them grinning through the speakers. Rather than squeezing the joke dry, this new venture proves how much mileage there is left in their niche. Kurupt FM is dead, long live Kurupt FM.