A detachment of nearly 30 Royal Marines and Gibraltarian police have seized a supertanker suspected of carrying Iranian oil to Syria in what the UK said was a breach of European Union sanctions against the regime of Bashar al-Assad. The British Foreign Office praised “firm action by the Gibraltarian authorities” in intercepting the vessel, called Grace 1, although Spain said Gibraltar had acted in response to a request made first by the US to the UK. Fabian Picardo, Gibraltar’s chief minister, thanked the efforts of the “brave men and women” from the Royal Marines and the local agencies involved in the operation, and confirmed that the Grace 1 had been detained. The chief minister added: “This action arose from information giving the Gibraltar government reasonable grounds to believe that the vessel, the Grace 1, was acting in breach of EU sanctions against Syria. “In fact we have reason to believe that the Grace 1 was carrying its shipment of crude oil to the Banyas refinery in Syria.” Just under 30 Royal Marines from 42 Commando were involved in the overnight seizure, with some landing on the ship’s deck rapidly descending down ropes suspended from a Wildcat helicopter and the rest following up via speedboat. UK Ministry of Defence sources said that British troops were at all times acting under civil authority, the direction of the Gibraltar police. The marines provided the technical expertise to allow the vessel to be boarded at sea. Spain’s acting foreign minister, Josep Borrell, said Gibraltar had acted following a request from the US to Britain. Borrell added that his country was looking into the seizure and how it may affect Spanish sovereignty. Spain does not recognise the waters around Gibraltar as British. Grace 1 was travelling east through the straits of Gibraltar. Tracking data from Lloyds List showed that it had started its voyage in Iran, travelling around Africa, before it passed through Gibraltarian territorial waters. Analysts believe it is carrying just over 2m barrels of Iranian crude oil. Mapping data showed it sailed a longer route to the mouth of the Mediterranean, around the southern tip of Africa instead of via Egypt’s Suez Canal. Lloyds List, a specialist shipping website, reported that Grace 1 had “a complex ownership chain” and was controlled by Russian Titan Shipping, a subsidiary of Dubai-based shipping company TNC Gulf. Executives connected with both companies hold Iranian university and technical qualifications, or list their names in Farsi. The EU has imposed a series of economic sanctions against Assad’s regime in Syria in response to the country’s civil war. The UK Foreign Office said: “We welcome this firm action by the Gibraltarian authorities, acting to enforce the EU Syria sanctions regime.” But the action also comes amid a period of heightened tension between the US and Iran as the nuclear agreement aimed at halting Iran’s development of nuclear weapons unravels. Iran has been accused of sabotaging oil tankers in the strait of Hormuz, a policy of brinkmanship that analysts say is designed to show the US there is an economic cost to the Trump administration’s decision to pull out of the nuclear deal and impose economic sanctions. Picardo said: “I want to thank the brave men and women of the Royal Marines, the Royal Gibraltar police, HM Customs Gibraltar and the Gibraltar port authority for their work in securing the detention of this vessel and its cargo. Be assured that Gibraltar remains safe, secure and committed to the international rules-based legal order.”