The Australian Diamonds demolished Barbados 91-22 at the World Cup in Liverpool thanks to a blinding first-half defensive effort, but while the reigning champions were not pushed on-court, the tournament’s punishing structure is emerging as a hot topic off it. In recent days, the Diamonds coach, Lisa Alexander, has called on the game’s governing body to consider changing the format, to alleviate pressure on players and avoid ugly blow-outs. Alexander addressed the issue after her side’s 99-24 win over Sri Lanka on Sunday – which came on the back of two other substantial preliminary round wins – and again tonight. She questioned whether 16 is the right number of teams if the sport’s showcase event is to appeal to broadcasters. It was an argument writ large as her side dismantled world number 12 Barbados in a match which became less of a contest as every second passed. While it is vital nations like Barbados have a chance to play against the world’s best, Alexander said it’s not “necessarily conducive” to great TV. Then, there is the reality of playing five matches in five consecutive days, as the Aussies will do before finally getting a rest day on Wednesday – ahead of a clash with New Zealand the following day. “Having that kind of schedule and not being able to replace players if they’re injured, that’s a downer. It’s going to take its toll and players are going to get injured,” she said, referring to the dilemma facing England, who lost defender Layla Guscoth to an Achilles injury on the second day. Guscoth can’t be replaced, so the Roses must play out the tournament with 11. “It’s just not ideal for having your very, very best netball played,” Alexander added. “I think it’s under-appreciated how intense our sport is.” “I’d probably have a few more days off in-between. You might of had a day off in between your preliminary stage and your next stage. Unfortunately, I know why it can’t happen so we have to deal with what we have. The fact is, some countries can’t afford to be here any longer. So you’ve got to either choose to have a world championship like this or you have it different, and then you’re cutting out other countries, so that’s the decision the INF [International Netball Federation] will have to make.” The coach will be happy to have got through tonight without any major injuries and despite calls for her to “find her seven”, Alexander again tinkered, starting with captain Caitlin Bassett at shooter, paired with Steph Wood. Kelsey Browne, who has been best-on twice in three games, but started the match with both knees taped, got the nod at wing attack. Paige Hadley took centre. Jo Weston got a run at wing defence and freshly-minted Diamond Sarah Klau, who usually plays keeper, started at GD, with Courtney Bruce behind her. In a slick opening stanza, the Diamonds took control, with Bassett sinking 15/15 and Wood 8/10, a 92% combined return. While the captain looked exasperated with some poor feeds, at the other end, Weston was having a blast, disrupting almost everything that came her way. The quarter ended 23-5. Defence took over in the second, with Bruce, Klau and Weston having a three-way blinder, with four intercepts, 13 deflections and just two obstructions for the half. It was 46-7 at half-time. After five changes at half-time left only Weston and Bruce from the starting seven, the Diamonds continued their dominance, with Caitlin Thwaites and Gretel Tippett shooting. Thwaites finished with 20 at 100% accuracy and Tippett missed just one. Next up, Australia plays Malawi on Tuesday UK time, before New Zealand on Thursday. With points from earlier games carrying over, the trans-Tasman rivals are both likely to advance to the semis but it is still a key test. The Diamonds will likely face England, South Africa or Jamaica in their semi later in the week.