Rewilding is an attractive ecological concept urgently in need of an agreed definition. Bristol Zoo’s plan to introduce bears and wolves into ancient woodland requires greater scrutiny (1,000 years on, wolves and bears to get back together in UK woods, 17 July). Wild bears and wolves are creatures that roam over large areas of land. As top predators, they require a diversity of habitats to meet their life-cycle and dietary needs. When you are trying to put top-level predators back into an ecosystem, you need the other trophic levels, too. In short, bear and wolf conservation is a landscape-scale issue. What we see at Bristol is a novel zoo exhibit. An enclosure of 1 hectare, 1.5 times the size of a typical football pitch is a tiny area for both species. The animals will need feeding, and the woodland will require ongoing active management to minimise negative impacts on old trees and to ensure adequate regeneration. There is nothing self-sustaining or “wild” about these conditions. Perhaps if visitors were exposed to a wolf pack hunting down a stricken deer they would get some sense of the rewilding reality. Rewilding cannot just be a feel-good concept that apparently rights an ecological wrong from past land-use practices. We need a definition that recognises the complexity of our current landscape and the trade-offs that will result from a rewilding policy. Consider sheep, bears and wolves? Probably not a happy combination. We also need to address the climate emergency and the most responsible and sustainable land-use options, such as recent calls for large-scale afforestation. Let’s have a more critical debate about what rewilding really means, who gains, who loses, and how we integrate competing land-use imperatives.Edward WilsonPenrith, Cumbria • Your article fails to mention that in order to build its new exhibit lamenting the loss of ancient woodland, Bristol Zoo has damaged that very habitat. Had the development application for this exhibit been considered under the recently revised National Planning Policy Framework it would have been rejected for contravening planning laws designed to protect ancient woodland. It is therefore vital that this does not set a precedent. Ancient woods are unique natural habitats, having developed from their undisturbed soils and seedbanks over centuries. They are irreplaceable. Sadly ancient woodland cover stands at just 2%. It is laudable to mourn the species we have lost, but not at the expense of habitat for the wildlife we have saved. Bristol Zoo has an excellent track record in conservation, which makes this all the more disappointing. Abi BunkerDirector of conservation and external affairs, Woodland Trust • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition