The World Cup final was quite an occasion, with 26,000 people packed into Lord’s. The players were wearing whites, with no names or numbers on their backs. The bowling was opened, for Australia, by Dennis Lillee and Jeff Thomson, a pair to strike fear into any opponent, yet no batsman felt the need for a helmet. Clive Lloyd of West Indies made a match-winning hundred wearing glasses. The past is another planet. It was 21 June 1975, and reader, I was there. I was 12, which may be the perfect age to be taken to your first big sporting event: tall enough to see, old enough to know what’s what, young enough to have an autograph book. My brother Charlie, who was 14, had caught the cricket bug and passed it on to me. Our dad was a member of MCC and had secured tickets for the final, which cannot have been pricey because the official receipts were £66,950, £2.50 per head. He had only a moderate interest in cricket but his father had played for Leicestershire and he liked the fact that an immoderate interest had shown up in his sons. The talent, alas, had decided to skip more than one generation. Like Lloyd, Charlie and I wore specs; unlike him, we were more in demand as scorers than players. We had been packed off to boarding school at eight, which, in sport as in many areas, was a mixed blessing. There were cricket pitches and nets on site and long summer evenings to practise your straight drive or pore over the first-class averages. But there was only one telly, firmly switched off on weekdays, and the place was run like an open prison, so it was difficult to go and see your heroes. In three years of cricket mania, Charlie and I had been to Lord’s once. It was a Test match, which was cool, but it was against New Zealand, who batted all day in their signature style: decidedly dour. We were with my mum, who sat there catching up with her correspondence. This may explain why Charlie and I became cricket writers. Just before the 1975 World Cup, a sleepy boarding-school Sunday suddenly burst into life. The headmaster offered to take a carload of boys to Lord’s to watch Middlesex play the Australians. We raced around the ground in our Aertex shirts, Thomson slung the ball like a human catapult and Rod Marsh hit a six into the road. This was more like it. A World Cup final was even better, and by a stroke of luck – or karma, after all that incarceration – it fell at half-term. It was our first one-day international, as it must have been for many people: it was only the 33rd ODI ever staged. Looking back, you can see the administrators making it all up as they went along. The official programme, which we insisted on buying, didn’t even say “World Cup”. The cover was headed “PRUDENTIAL CUP”. The editor, sensing that nobody would know what it was, added a subtitle: “International Championship Cricket”. The cover star was Sunil Gavaskar of India, who promptly wrote his name in World Cup history by batting through 60 overs against England for 36 not out. Somehow the tournament fell into place. The weather smiled and there was live coverage on BBC television, squeezed in before Wimbledon. The 15 games were all done and dusted in 15 days. The only thing that went wrong, to schoolboy eyes, was that England were demolished in the semi-final by an unknown Australia swing bowler called Gary Gilmour. The final was everything we could have wished for. West Indies piled up 291 for eight, which seemed colossal. Australia kept in touch with the run rate and might well have won had they not suffered five run-outs, three of them to the-then little-known Viv Richards. The Wisden Almanack, unused to all this newfangled excitement, attributed them to Alvin Kallicharran. Decades later, I came to love a song by Leonard Cohen called Waiting For The Miracle. “I haven’t been this happy,” Cohen sings, in his magnificent monotone, “since the end of World War II.” That’s how I’ll feel on Sunday morning, joining Rob Smyth to write the Guardian’s over-by-over coverage. I haven’t been this excited (by sport) since that day in 1975. I’ll be thinking of Charlie, who died in 2014. And feeling about 12.