Yes, climate change mitigation requires excess atmospheric carbon dioxide to be absorbed and stored in vegetation (Planting billions of trees ‘best way to save planet’, 5 July). However, the strategy is not as straightforward as presented. Put simply, we emit the carbon in fossil fuels into the atmosphere as excess CO2. This absorbs heat otherwise leaving the planet. A policy of planting vegetation, especially trees, that absorbs CO2 lessens this excess. So far, so, good; but we must ask what eventually happens to this vegetation? Burning it indiscriminately only puts the carbon back into the atmosphere, albeit with a time delay. So the basic criteria must include: fossil fuels remaining underground; timber becoming permanently locked up (eg, in buildings and furniture); and vegetation, including leaves and branches, being composted into soil. By the first criterion, a major aspect becomes using the vegetation to substitute for fossil fuels. The many processes are well known, including modern biomass and biofuel technology. These must expand to global scale while improving efficiency and harmlessness in use. Moreover, success in mitigating climate change demands that we in the developed world curb our excessive lifestyles. The third criterion touches on a subject that is poorly assessed. Much more vegetation should be composted into soil – for example, garden and field hedge cuttings. No field fire can be a bonfire, they are all malfires, provoking climate change. Above all, mitigating climate change by growing trees should also become a personal challenge. Our breath takes in oxygen and expels carbon dioxide; a tree does the opposite. Each of us needs one mature tree for our metabolic equilibrium. Moreover our average UK lifestyle with oxygen-consuming fuels requires 100 trees. Do you have 101 trees? If not, why not? There are many ways to invest in trees – go to it.Dr John TwidellHorninghold, Leicestershire • Damian Carrington hails new research revealing that “a worldwide planting programme could remove two-thirds of all the emissions that have been pumped into the atmosphere by human activities”. The analysis found there are 1.7bn hectares of treeless land on which 1.2tn native tree saplings would naturally grow. That area is about 11% of all land and equivalent to the size of the US and China combined. Unfortunately that area also rivals the extent of the bright polar sea ice, whose loss to global warming threatens to amplify climate change by decreasing the Earth’s “albedo” – its average capacity to reflect solar energy back into space. Just as the deep blue sea is darker than polar ice, green forests tend to absorb roughly twice as much solar heat as the generally paler ground they overshadow. Geoengineering is where you find it, and humanity’s impact on albedo – we have already physically altered half of the land surface of the Earth – deserves as much thought as managing our carbon footprint.Russell SeitzSenior research fellow, The Climate Institute • As a local climate action group that has planted over a quarter of a million trees over the past 21 years, we welcome the acknowledgement that tree-planting can play a significant role in tackling the climate crisis. However, it is (literally) important to keep our feet on the ground. First, the total projected cost of $300bn is based on a price per tree of 24p – we can’t even buy trees for that, let alone do the necessary fencing and protection to keep animals away from them as they grow, and cover other planting costs. Second, Prof Simon Lewis’s point about soils is a vital one. The map of the UK showing potential planting areas appears to envisage trees being planted on blanket bogs. These peat bogs are Britain’s most significant habitat type due to their global rarity and carbon storage (far in excess of our woodlands). Tree-planting on these areas would be totally counterproductive. Third, planetary-scale landscape plans may look good on paper, but they are unlikely to come to fruition without involving local people, and huge cultural change. Realistic (and non-bureaucratic) incentives to cover the true costs of increasing tree-cover will be necessary, but they will not be a quick fix. So, yes to trees, but not at the expense of urgent measures to cut carbon dioxide emissions. The government currently spends £2.5bn on export subsidies for UK companies’ fossil fuel projects abroad. Reallocating this funding to clean energy and reforestation would be the place to start.Penny EastwoodTreesponsibility, Climate Action in Calderdale • Your editorial (6 July) makes a crucial point in connection with reforestation and the preservation of existing forests, that “the green movement is not just about economics. It must also speak to our spiritual sides if it is to mobilise a global coalition”. We face the threat of possible climate breakdown and ecosystem collapse, and the reality is that neither the corporate world nor the governmental world are going to initiate decisive action against their own short-term interests, defined in terms of growth and electability. One way to achieve the critical mass needed to drive significant change in human behaviour is to mobilise the world’s largest voluntary organisations – the religions. Grounded in moral and ethical principles, they claim an “anthropocosmic” perspective; they have vast human and material resources, and billions of positively motivated and socially committed followers around the globe with whom they are in ongoing communication. What the religions really need, however, especially those in the western world with declining active memberships, is a compelling cause to help regain the interest and involvement of a younger generation. A compelling cause? That’s exactly what the ecology and environmental movements offer – the opportunity to care for what the religions think of as “God’s creation”. On the other hand, what ecologists really need is the sheer weight of numbers that religions can provide – the millions of supportive activists required to put pressure on the corporate and governmental worlds, to force them to listen, face facts, and act with urgency. The ecologists and the religions really do need each other.Michael BarrettOxford • The boggling cost of planting trees to save the world from climate catastrophe (£240bn) is only marginally more than the £205bn to replace Trident. Can we please put this spending choice to a vote?Geoff MeadenCanterbury, Kent • The most memorable thing about the “Plant a tree in ’73” campaign (Letters, 6 July) was Monty Python’s response: “Buy a saw in ’74.”Judith BatesTewkesbury, Gloucestershire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition