Alyssa Naeher Did not have to make a save until Lineth Beerensteyn’s effort 13 minutes from time. 6 Kelley O’Hara Was enjoying herself until a clash of heads with Lieke Martens. Replaced at the interval by Krieger. 5 Abby Dahlkemper Rarely flustered over the past few weeks but Beerensteyn made life difficult at times. Booked. 6 Becky Sauerbrunn A defensive rock, bounced back from a nasty whack after a collision with Danielle van de Donk. 7 Crystal Dunn A superb showing by the marauding full‑back, an underrated commodity in this USA machine. 7 Sam Mewis It was a brave call by to drop Lindsey Horan but Jill Ellis’s decision was vindicated. Relentless. 7 Julie Ertz Had a thumping volley kept out – and her lung-busting performance was deserving of a goal. 7 Rose Lavelle Applied a wonderful finish after a mazy run upfield. An elegant performer in ruthless midfield. 8 Tobin Heath Another fine display by the experienced winger. Gave the Dutch backline a lasting headache. 7 Alex Morgan Never far from the action, she eventually won a spot-kick after going over too easily in the first half. 6 Megan Rapinoe The classy captain displayed the coolest head in Lyon to pass a penalty home. Given a standing ovation. 7 Substitutes: Ali Krieger (for O’Hara h-t) 6, Christen Press (for Rapinoe 79) 6, Carli Lloyd (for Heath 87) n/a. Sari van Veenendaal Made several stunning saves – but her resistance was eventually broken from 12 yards. 8 Desiree van Lunteren Was always going to be up against it against Rapinoe. Caught sleeping early on by a Heath cross. 5 Anouk Dekker Preferred to Merel van Dongen, the defender was exposed as USA began to run riot after half-time. 4 Stefanie van der Gragt The Barcelona defender’s clumsy high boot on Morgan was the game’s defining moment. 4 Dominique Bloodworth Arsenal defender had a solid game after recovering from a late tackle by Ertz. 5 Danielle van de Donk Lively on the flanks until the final whistle but did not have an awful lot to show for it in the end. 6 Jackie Groenen Midfielder struggled to get to grips with the USA’s bite. Bypassed for the Lavelle strike. 5 Sherida Spitse A last-ditch block to prevent Heath adding a third and dropped sweet free‑kick wide. Booked. 7 Lieke Martens Showed glimpses of quality but never appeared to recover from that nasty clash with O’Hara. 5 Lineth Beerensteyn A relentless runner, the Bayern Munich forward largely flattered to deceive as her team toiled. 6 Vivianne Miedema The Arsenal forward passed up her only chance to shoot after a jinking run into the box late on. 5 Substitutes: Shanice Van de Sanden (for Dekker 73) 4, Jill Roord (for Martens 70) 5.