The rate at which pubs are disappearing in England and Wales has halved, prompting claims that government measures designed to arrest the decline may be stemming the tide of closures. About 13,000 closed between 2001 and 2018, which the industry has blamed on factors including high business rates, cheap supermarket alcohol, the rising minimum wage, the smoking ban and changing social habits. But government figures indicate that, while the decline has continued, the speed at which pubs are closing their doors for good has slowed considerably. Some experts have attributed this to measures that make it easier for communities to oppose developers’ plans to demolish or convert pubs, as well as relief on business rates. There were 42,450 pubs at the beginning of 2018 but 914 fewer by the end of the year, a rate of 76 net closures a month. But 235 vanished during the first half of this year, or nearly 40 a month, according to government statistics. The commercial real estate consultancy Altus Group, which compiled the data, said government measures designed to staunch the flow of pub closures appeared to be having some effect. Alex Probyn, the UK chief executive of Altus, praised Philip Hammond’s introduction of business rate relief for a limited number of smaller pubs in England, which he said had saved them on average £6,052 a year. He also highlighted new rules that allow communities to have their local designated an “asset of community value” (ACV), making it harder for the owner to redevelop the site as flats. Once a local council has designated a pub as an ACV, a six-month moratorium is placed on development plans, giving anyone interested in saving the pub time to raise funds to bid for it. John Harrison, from the south Cambridgeshire village of Guilden Morden, was among the leaders of a successful campaign to save the village’s Three Tuns pub, which was due to be turned into residential property. Instead, it is about to throw open its doors again at a launch party in early August. ACV status “stops you being at a disadvantage because of a lack of time”, said Harrison, the chairman of Guilden Morden Community Pub Ltd, which now owns the Three Tuns. “It freezes the process to enable you to get your act together as a community and raise money to make a bid. We raised £250,000 from 267 people from across the village and its surroundings, to verify we could afford it. “This is the moment that shows the whole thing is worthwhile. It’s fully up and running, all the food and drink is ready and we’ll have quite a big party. We’re there and we’ve got a functioning pub.” But some in the industry have cast doubt on the impact of ACVs. “It does delay things but it doesn’t necessarily mean the pub gets saved,” said Mark Dodds, a publican who has been involved in several ACV applications. “As far as I know only about 15 pubs a year end up remaining as pubs after getting ACV status.” And while the rate of decline in pubs has slowed, Kate Nicholls, the chief executive of trade body UKHospitality, said the government still needed to more to stop pubs disappearing from the high street. She said high costs, particularly “extortionate business rates”, were pushing too many pubs to the brink. “We have heard various members of the government say they wish to stimulate investment in high streets and support businesses,” she added. “If they are serious, then they need to tackle these increasing costs. Otherwise, more pubs will close.” 