Boris Johnson has been heavily criticised by fellow Tory MPs over his role in Sir Kim Darroch’s decision to resign as the UK ambassador to Washington, with one backbencher saying the frontrunner in the Conservative leadership contest should come to the Commons to apologise. An urgent question in the Commons about Darroch’s departure, which followed the leak of diplomatic cables critical of the Donald Trump White House, resulted in repeated condemnation of Johnson, and only one Conservative MP came to his defence. The criticism of Johnson was based on his choice of language in a Conservative leadership debate on Tuesday, in which he refused to give Darroch his support, even as his leadership rival, the foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, said he would expect the ambassador to stay in post until his planned retirement. In a shock move that prompted the senior civil servant at the Foreign Office to call an all-staff meeting to reassure “shaken” diplomats, Darroch announced on Wednesday morning that he could no longer continue in his role following the leak. Adding to the likely discomfort for Johnson, the Foreign Office minister sent out to speak for the government was Sir Alan Duncan, who on Wednesday accused him of throwing Darroch “under the bus”. Born in County Durham in 1954, Sir Nigel Kim Darroch graduated with a degree in zoology from Durham University after attending Abingdon school on a scholarship. Tall and gregarious, he was nicknamed “Kimbo” at the Foreign Office, where he began his civil service career in 1977 and climbed the ranks of diplomacy in postings from Japan to Italy. He entered the public eye when he was frequently seen at Cameron’s side as his national security adviser from 2012 to 2015, joining him on trips to war zones, and chairing meetings on international crises, from Russian aggression in Ukraine to the collapse of the Libyan government. But it is his roles prior to that, as Blair’s top adviser on Europe, and as the permanent representative to the EU under Brown, that led to his vilification by Conservative Brexit supporters, who regard him as an arch Europhile. In January 2016 he took up the role of HM ambassador to the United States. Despite having been appointed when Hillary Clinton was thought likely to win the presidency, Darroch threw himself into courting Trump’s inner circle, “flooding the zone” of people in Trump’s orbit, hoping to gain influence through showing up and cultivating contacts. He also worked hard to court well-connected American journalists so he could benefit from their insights. In July 2019, Darroch resigned as ambassador, after a series of leaked diplomatic messages revealed that he had described the administration as "inept" and "clumsy". This led to a vocal Twitter outburst from Trump. Darroch could never have imagined that his distinguished 40-year diplomatic career would end with a US president publicly volleying insults his way, calling him “a very stupid guy”, “wacky” and “pompous fool”. Rowena Mason in London and David Smith in Washington The most vehement criticism came from David Morris, the Conservative MP for Morecambe and Lunesdale, who condemned Johnson for failing to fully back Darroch after Trump insulted the ambassador in tweets and said he would no longer deal with him. Darroch is understood to have made the decision to resign after watching Johnson repeatedly declining to offer his support in the debate. “Do you not feel that it is incumbent on every member of parliament in this place to back up our excellent diplomats and civil servants, and the honourable member for Uxbridge should come to the house and apologise?” Morris asked. Other Conservatives expressed similar views, with Roger Gale telling the Commons: “The failure of the former foreign secretary to leap to the defence of Sir Kim shows a lack of leadership that is lamentable.” The Tory MP Tom Tugendhat, who chairs the Commons foreign affairs committee, was less direct, but made his feelings known, saying the loss of Darroch following Trump’s comments amounted to the UK being bullied. Tugendhat said the government should “always stand up for those we send abroad, military or civilian, and will back them to the point that is necessary in the interests of the British people, and no one else”. Most of the offences covered by the legislation affect crown servants and government contractors. Any unlawful disclosure relating to security or intelligence by a member of MI5, MI6 or GCHQ is an offence. Officials do not need to sign the act to be bound by its provisions. The maximum punishment for leaking documents is two years in prison or an unlimited fine. An official is guilty of a crime if he or she 'without lawful authority makes a damaging disclosure' of information about international relations between states, defence, law enforcement, or which falls into a class of information likely to damage the security services’ work. Leaks are deemed to be damaging if, among other consequences, they 'endanger the interests of the United Kingdom abroad'. There is a defence for any leaker that they released the material not knowing it would be damaging. Prosecutions under the Official Secrets Act are rare. Recent cases have included that of the MI5 agent David Shayler in 2002. He was jailed for six months. In 2007, a Scotland Yard civilian employee, Thomas Lund-Lack, was sentenced to eight months for leaking information on planned al-Qaida operations in Britain to a Sunday Times journalist. A number of cases have involved civil servants who mislaid sensitive information. At least one, Richard Jackson, a Cabinet Office official, was fined £2,500 under the act after he left classified papers relating to al-Qaida and Iraq on a train. Owen Bowcott, Legal affairs correspondent The only support for Johnson came from veteran Tory backbencher Peter Bone, who said: “The attacking of colleagues is completely wrong and people should be ashamed of themselves when they’ve done that.” The urgent question was tabled by Labour’s Pat McFadden, who said the decision of Darroch to resign, despite having the full support of Theresa May and her cabinet, was “a dark moment for our democracy and for the standing of the United Kingdom”. McFadden said Johnson’s lack of support for the envoy was “an appalling abandonment of someone in the firing line”. He added: “Real leaders protect their people, they don’t throw them to the wolves because they can sniff a prize for themselves. His actions are a chilling warning of what is to come if he becomes prime minister.” Duncan said he would not be responding to such views on Johnson: “I hope the house will understand if I hold back today from making any further comment on the right honourable friend the member for Uxbridge. I said enough yesterday to make my position entirely clear.” Duncan nonetheless managed to reiterate his condemnation of Johnson several times in ways varying from the oblique to the open. Responding to one question, he replied: “It is everyone’s duty, and everyone in this house’s duty, to defend our ambassadors. They are our ambassadors doing our duty. If they do something terribly wrong or break all the rules, that’s altogether different.” Duncan later drew laughter after the Lib Dem deputy leader, Jo Swinson, cited his description of Johnson’s actions as “the behaviour of an utter wimp”. “I seem to recall that was one of the kinder words I used yesterday,” Duncan told MPs, adding: “I think what I would rather do is concentrate on the specific details of the question put, the merits of Sir Kim Darroch rather than the … merits of anyone else.”