Followers of British racing are regularly deceived as to who trains certain racehorses, according to documents seen by the Guardian. The sport’s senior officials believe that in many cases horses are being trained by someone other than the person named in the racecard but they feel powerless to act after failing to make charges stick in a high-profile case five years ago. A long list of people have been suspected by British Horseracing Authority staff of training in somebody else’s name in recent years. One has since been jailed. Others have obtained a licence of their own. Three trainers are implicated in multiple cases, meaning they are suspected of allowing more than one person to train horses that are officially registered to their stable. An internal BHA memo from 2015 states: “There are far too many individuals who are renting stables from a licensed trainer and training without a licence, with the licensed trainer accepting payment from the unlicensed person in return for the horses running in the licensed trainer’s name. The licensed trainer registers the unlicensed trainer as an employee of the yard and, at this point, it seems there is very little the BHA can do to stop that individual from acting as a trainer ... If nothing is done to put a stop to this practice, then anyone could quite easily set themselves up as a trainer and work behind someone who can get a licence.” For similar reasons, concerns exist about pre-training yards, generally seen as a legitimate means of preparing a horse for entry into full training. Pre-training yards are not licensed premises, so BHA staff have no right to enter them or conduct inspections. It is suspected that some horses are, in reality, being trained by unlicensed, unregulated persons at pre-training yards and there is little officials can do about it, so long as the horses are moved into a licensed yard 14 days before taking part in a race. In view of the BHA’s limited powers of oversight, there is every possibility that even this rule is not always complied with. Secret trainers are a problem for the BHA, not least because they may include people who would never be allowed a licence because of previous rule-breaking. They are also a problem for gamblers, risking their money on the basis of misleading information. But they are accepted as part of the landscape by many racing insiders, who regard some instances as benign and have no great concern if a retired trainer continues to look after a horse or two in someone else’s yard. In late 2014, the BHA charged Graham Bradley with unlicensed training in relation to 12 horses based at Brendan Powell’s stable in Lambourn. The disciplinary panel accepted that Bradley brought the horses to Powell’s yard and hoped to train them himself once he had obtained his own licence. It found that, at Bradley’s instigation, they were given different feed to Powell’s other horses and had their own farrier, and that he charged their owners directly through his bloodstock company, sometimes invoicing them under the heading “trainers expenses”. In light of these and other details, the BHA argued Bradley was in effect running his own training operation but the panel was not persuaded, concluding that other evidence showed Powell was in charge. The BHA’s disciplinary team responded to the outcome by dropping another case, pending at the time, that was based on similar evidence. No one has since been charged with unlicensed training. Asked to comment on this story, the BHA responded with a plea for tip-offs. It said: “The BHA has a rigorous licensing process which requires applicants to demonstrate suitability across a number of different criteria. This is in place to ensure that only appropriate individuals are granted licences to train in British racing. The BHA will investigate any allegation of unlicensed training and bring charges before the Judicial Panel if necessary. “We would ask any individuals who have concerns and evidence regarding potential unlicensed training practices to contact our integrity team via intel@britishhorseracing.com or Racestraight.”