Google has suspended the secondary ticketing company Viagogo from its paid-for search results, globally and with immediate effect, in what could prove a huge blow to the controversial website’s ability to do business. The search engine’s surprise decision, which was welcomed by campaign groups and MPs, comes with Viagogo also facing legal action from the Competition and Markets Authority. Google said it had found Viagogo in breach of its advertising policy and would begin removing its ads on Wednesday. The Switzerland-based website’s listings have previously appeared at the top of the page when consumers look for tickets, even for gigs by artists such as Ed Sheeran who have condemned the website. But it plummeted down the search results on Wednesday and sits among smaller rivals who have not paid to appear above standard search rankings – and well below main rival StubHub, whose ads are still being accepted. “When people use our platform for help in purchasing tickets, we want to make sure that they have an experience they can trust,” said a Google spokesperson. “This is why we have strict policies and take necessary action when we find an advertiser in breach.” Viagogo has come under fire for a variety of controversial practices, such as “profiteering” from concerts in aid of charity, selling tickets that might see fans denied entry and colluding with professional touts who harvest the best seats at the expense of genuine fans. An undercover investigation by the Guardian last year found that the company had resold tickets for football matches in England, bypassing laws designed to ensure the safety of fans. The CMA is seeking to have the company found in contempt of court for alleged persistent breaches of consumer law, after securing a court order last year that demanded Viagogo overhaul its website. Google was urged to stop accepting money from Viagogo in an open letter signed by the Football Association, several MPs and the trade body UK Music last year. The letter, sent to senior Google executives, said that Viagogo’s prominence in search results, via the search engine’s paid service AdWords, was leading to consumers unwittingly buying sports, music and theatre tickets that may be invalid. Google’s decision to stop taking Viagogo’s money for the foreseeable future is thought to have been influenced by the action being taken by multiple regulators worldwide, including the CMA, to crack down on Viagogo’s controversial business practices. The Guardian has approached Viagogo for comment on its suspension, first reported by the BBC. FanFair Alliance, a music industry group backed by artists including Iron Maiden, Adele, Nick Cave and Arctic Monkeys, has led the campaign to have Viagogo ads removed from Google. The organisation’s campaign manager Adam Webb said: “This is a landmark moment, and a major step forward to preventing exploitation of audiences in the secondary ticketing market. “After publishing extensive research highlighting the impacts of Viagogo’s misleading search advertising, FanFair Alliance has been in constructive conversations with Google for over two years in an attempt to address this issue. “We are delighted they have finally acted and suspended Viagogo’s advertising. We now hope other platforms, particularly Facebook, can follow Google’s example.” Claire Turnham, who was awarded an MBE for her work in securing refunds for consumers who bought tickets from Viagogo, said she was “ecstatic”. “Given almost every victim of Viagogo across the UK and beyond comes via Google we are thrilled they have taken this definitive action to protect the public from ticket abuse worldwide.” Labour MP Sharon Hodgson, who chairs a cross-party group on ticketing, said: “A well respected brand, such as Google, should have done this a long time ago. But I am now pleased that this step has been taken, which will protect consumers and fans.”