The misanthropeThe double Edinburgh comedy award nominee returns with Dots, a show that professes to explore everything from dead German sociologists to sadness. Having appeared on Frankie Boyle’s New World Order and Have I Got News for You, his commanding presence and poise position him as the ideal candidate for panel-show prominence. Monkey Barrel Comedy, Thursday 1 to 25 August Ultimate zinger‘I’ve stopped smoking. More accurately, people who love me kept yelling that they were worried I was going to die, so now I have to smoke a fucking USB stick’ The introvertChanda’s trajectory is far from the hackneyed Footlights to Radio 4 narrative. Having lost his hair in his early 30s through alopecia, the comic went through a radical transformation. He quit his job, retreated from the world and embarked on a life-changing journey around South America (including an unsuccessful ayahuasca trip). He is now back for debut hour Boy from Earth, bringing his highly accomplished storytelling to the fringe, and managing to articulate anxiety and ease all at once – a little bit Woody Allen-ish. If that’s not convincing enough, Simon Amstell calls him the “funniest person on Earth”. Voodoo Rooms, 3 to 25 August Ultimate zinger‘I love pizza. Boy oh boy. I think my favourite thing about a pizza slice is that it points in the direction that it’s supposed to go: my mouth. And it’s also why rice confuses me’ The avant-garde entertainerA New York millennial who is “tragically unverified on Twitter”, Cohen perfectly parodies the angst of the modern female twentysomething experience, swerving the usual avo-toast cliches and heading straight towards oddball musical comedy and wry valley-girl commentary of her hobbies such as “dry-swallowing birth control pills”. The Twist…? She’s Gorgeous is the comedy cabaret act’s debut fringe show; she is joined by Henry Koperski on the keys. Pleasance Courtyard, Wednesday 31 July to 25 August Ultimate zinger‘I love sex because it famously has no consequences’ The truthsayerFollowing the success of Diet Woke, Duker returns with Venus, “an unconventional journey of self-discovery”. The writer, host and unswervingly confident standup has also dabbled in feminist sketches (Channel 4’s Riot Girls), co-hosts a millennial advice show (Radio 4’s GrownUpLand), leads comedy night and “irreverent cabaret comedy show” Wacky Racists and was one of 50 LGBTQ figures on the cover of Attitude magazine’s 25th-birthday edition. She also hates yorkshire puddings. Pleasance Courtyard, Wednesday 31 July to 25 August Ultimate zinger‘I’m a “triple-threat” minority … I make white people uncomfortable when I sing, act or dance’ The lovable witHe has got a large amount of hair, he’s from Watford and he likes to tell jokes about having sex with your dad. In a nice way. Rooke is unlike the majority of male standups on the circuit, but his warmth and charm make him primed for future sitcom success. This year’s show is about, erm, “shagging blokes”. Before you think it’s too uncouth, it’s also set to the sound of a live harp. Assembly George Square Gardens, Thursday 1 to 24 August Ultimate zinger‘Most gay clubs are called things like Savage or Envy or Revenge and I’m just like, why not be called Nice to Each Other!, or Hey You Seem Great! or Who Cares If My T-Shirt’s from River Island, They Actually Do Some Quite Good Stuff!’ The surreal storytellerExpect low energy and highly strange tangents from White, whose previous comic obsessions have included James Nesbitt and The Animals of Farthing Wood. For new show Unending Torment!, apples and Ben Affleck feature prominently, while the rest will veer towards the darker, dreamlike end of the anecdotal spectrum – think Jam and Monkey Dust in human standup form. Heroes @ Black Medicine, Thursday 1 to 25 August Ultimate zinger‘Being single is like living under a table – it’s fun for the first year’ The millennial raconteurA computer programmer and daughter of a former deputy PM of Russia, Koch brings stories from her odd upbringing and nerdy skills to the stage for If/Then. The show sets out to explore what happens when our “expectations for love, happiness and Michael Bublé no longer compute”, specifically looking at feminism and technology. If that sounds a bit like a saggy episode of Black Mirror then fear not: her jokes are savage and she has the accomplished style of a standup who’s been doing this for decades. Monkey Barrel Comedy, Thursday 1 to 25 August Ultimate zinger‘Never trust a dick pic – the camera adds 10lbs’ The satiristIt doesn’t take a psychologist to deduct that US standup Friedman is furious at the state of the world: 2015’s hour was called American Cunt, while this year’s title is Miscarriage of Justice, a show about her country’s descent into fascism. It will all be delivered with her usual deadpan disdain, a tone that fuelled her hyped Adult Swim show Soft Focus, in which she stealthily humiliates unsuspecting and complacent white men, Chris Morris-style. Assembly George Square Studios, Wednesday 31 July to 24 August Ultimate zinger‘The best way to get the government to pay for your abortion in America is by sleeping with a married Republican. You may not even want an abortion but if one of those guys get you pregnant, watch your drink’ Comments on this article are pre-moderated to ensure that the discussion remains relevant to the issues raised by the contributor.