Behold, a wonderful and warming snap from this week’s 31-year Hi-de-Hi! cast reunion. As someone who has watched every episode of the seminal 1980s holiday camp sitcom, it is a pleasure to see old castmates back together like this. Dear Su Pollard, who played hapless chambermaid Peggy Ollerenshaw, hasn’t changed a bit. Indeed, to caption this photo, we may as well use a line from her amusingly exhaustive character biography on Holiday Rock, the Hi-de-Hi! fansite: “Peggy had a rather vivid imagination and was often easily taken in by others’ lies, particularly Ted’s ridiculous tales when he needed a cover story.” Oh my dear me … I’m so sorry. You must forgive me. Having looked a little closer, I can see that the roly-poly funnyman in the centre of the shot is not actually check-suited Maplins comedian Ted Bovis (played by Paul Shane). I had wondered, given that he died in 2013. Instead, it seems to be self-styled Brexit bad boy Arron Banks, who started out in an act called Mississippi Minstrels. Hang on: that was Ted. My apologies again: the character biographies section of Holiday Rock is rather difficult to tear yourself away from, once you become fully enmeshed in its bygone charms. Still, whatever Mississippi Minstrels may have been, I’m sure it would make a popular skit for Arron to get up for his sort-of friend Donald Trump’s next birthday party at the president’s Floridian resort, Mar-a-Lago. Or Racist Xanadu, as I prefer to think of it. Where were we? Ah yes. To further clarify, the gentleman on Banks’s left is not Ted’s comedy sidekick Spike Dixon, described by Holiday Rock as “an incredibly honest and law-abiding man, and the only member of the entertainment staff who didn’t run his own scheme to scam the campers for money”. It is, in fact, Conservative MP for Romford, Andrew Rosindell, a longtime friend of Su. What can I tell you about Andrew? The MPs expenses investigation revealed he had claimed £125,000 in second home expenses for a flat in London, with his primary residence apparently being his childhood home, 17 miles away, where his mother still lived. There have been various other disappointments, including the Independent’s revelation that he had accepted £25,000-worth of trips to the Cayman Islands, the Turks and Caicos Islands, Switzerland, Taiwan and Uzbekistan. Andrew, of course, insisted he could justify every trip, and, anyway, part of that £25,000 was a five-grand Virgin Atlantic upgrade. These days, he believes maroon EU passports have been “a national humiliation”. So don’t ruin what’s coming next with any spoilers for him. Mr Rosindell’s other credits include always being described as a “maverick” entirely by people who have never met one. He memorably once canvassed with his Staffordshire bull terrier, with the dog wearing a union jack waistcoat. As I say, this is eccentricity only for people who have never met anyone remotely intriguing or unusual, and who – if they did – would hang them for being probably foreign or gay. As for the nature of the soiree featuring Andrew, Su and Arron, it seems to have been a Tory fundraiser/Caribbean event, at which Su featured alongside erstwhile ’Allo ’Allo! waitress, Vicki Michelle. Forgotten Celebrity Conservative Patti Boulaye was also in attendance, and there was also a speech by Jeremy Hunt. Yup, I know what you’re thinking: there literally isn’t enough heroin in London to get me through that. Or, as Banks judged: “It was a great evening. Andrew Rosindell is a patriotic Tory MP and a model one at that.” Slightly selective swamp-draining there, given the expenses unpleasantness, but at this stage in our descent down the rabbit hole, we hardly expect coherence or consistency from our bad boys. Arron concluded: “Great evening with people from all of the world.” Regarding the evening’s major star – Su, obviously – this episode is chiefly welcomed for drawing my attention to a frankly majestic Mail on Sunday report, which I somehow seem to have missed back in January of this year. The headline alone is an indication of the veritable treasure trove therein. So here we go: “Hi-de-Hi!, Theresa! Sitcom star Su Pollard causes havoc at Number 10 as she wolf-whistles and berates PM and demands that she speeds up Brexit.” Well now. We lay our scene at some Downing Street drinks reception in early January, intended to bring warring Tory MPs together. For reasons that may for ever remain opaque, Mr Rosindell seems to have bought along Ms Pollard. We will let the Mail on Sunday report take over for a bit: “The 69-year-old comedy actress left No 10 aides speechless after putting two fingers in her mouth for her signature comedy whistle to get the prime minister’s attention at a reception held for Tory MPs and their spouses on Wednesday evening.” Go on. “Ms Pollard, who shot to fame as holiday camp cleaner Peggy Ollerenshaw in the BBC series Hi-de-Hi! was a guest of maverick Essex MP Andrew Rosindell.” Ah yes. There it is. Anyway, how did the prime minister react to this, one of the many indignities visited upon her per week in 2019, only 90% of which were of her own making? “Breaking off a conversation with energy minister Claire Perry,” we learn, “Mrs May said: ‘Hello there, Su.’ The actress and singer shouted back: ‘Hi-de-hi!, Theresa!’” Yup, well, that’s why you’re on the guestlist, Su. And at one level, fair play to her. There is a nice line in the first Bridget Jones movie where Bridget is describing her friend Tom. “Tom, 80s pop icon who only wrote one hit record then retired because he found that one record was quite enough to get him laid for the whole of the 90s.” And so with Su, who played Peggy in Hi-de-Hi! in the 80s, and found that was quite enough to get her invited to several envelope openings a week for the 90s, the 00s, the 2010s, and will doubtless see her right for most of the 2020s, too. As for how the May-Pollard bilateral proceeded from there, a fellow guest tells the paper: “The prime minister is not great at the small talk at the best of times, so it looked pretty painful. Su just kept saying: ‘We want Brexit’ and, ‘What’s happening with Brexit, why is it taking so long?’ and, ‘We want Brexit now.’” Yet worse was to come. Not only was Downing Street approached by the Mail on Sunday for a quote on the prime minister’s lively discussion with Su, but it actually obliged, describing May as “a huge fan” of Ms Pollard’s work. I’m sure we’re all fans of a highfalutin reference to someone’s “work”, calling to mind as it does the literary oeuvre of a Jane Austen or the canvas stylings of a Jackson Pollock, as opposed to someone whose Wikipedia entry for the past couple of decades is best summarised in the line: “In pantomime, Su appears mainly as the Wicked Queen in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, appearing in recent years at Sunderland, Blackpool, Tunbridge Wells, Aylesbury and Malvern.” Still, if one version of Brexit is about restoring Britain to the comforting and largely imagined certainties of yesteryear, could panto or even sitcom bookers do much better than the glittering lineup featured in this picture? Then again, perhaps the production to harness Su, Arron and Andrew’s collective gifts has already been found, and we shall spend the next few years watching the show play out.