The Commons Speaker, John Bercow, has not selected the main amendment designed to scupper attempts by a future government to force a no-deal Brexit by proroguing parliament, frustrating the efforts of backbench MPs led by the Conservative Dominic Grieve. But two other amendments, seeking to extend the rights of abortion and equal marriage to Northern Ireland, have been picked for votes on Tuesday evening and if passed could prove a constitutional headache for the government. The amendments were among more than a dozen tabled to a largely technical bill about Northern Ireland, the body of which is intended to delay elections to the long-suspended devolved assembly and deal with associated budgetary matters. MPs will get a chance to vote on other amendments tabled by Grieve intended to make prorogation more difficult, such as one that would oblige ministers to report every two weeks in October on efforts to restore the Northern Ireland executive. The intention of that would be to require the Commons to be in session to hear the reports, but it is unclear whether a government pushing for no-deal could simply ignore this, even though this could then be challenged in court. Prorogation is the official term that marks the end of a parliamentary session. After being advised to do so by the prime minister, the Queen formally prorogues Parliament. This takes the form of an announcement in the House of Lords on the Queen's behalf. It is a speech, written by the government, which usually describes the bills which have been passed during that session, and summarises what has been achieved. It means that all work on existing legislation stops, and MPs and Lords stop sitting. Prorogation also automatically kills any bills, early day motions or questions to ministers going through parliament. Parliament can then be reopened a few days later with a fresh slate of legislation intentions, set out in a new Queen's Speech at the formal State Opening of Parliament. Grieve, supported by opposition parties and a handful of pro-EU Conservatives, laid an amendment that would have stopped parliament being prorogued in the autumn to achieve a no-deal Brexit. Prorogation has been mooted by some Brexiters as a way of stopping the Commons blocking no deal. But Grieve’s was not among those picked. Selecting amendments is entirely at the discretion of the Speaker, and it is possible Bercow ruled against Grieve’s amendment as it was not directly connected to the bill. An amendment tabled by Labour’s Conor McGinn stipulates that same-sex marriage, which is permitted in all parts of the UK apart from Northern Ireland, would automatically become legal there within three months if the devolved government remains stalled. It has been signed by almost 30 cross-party MPs. Another amendment, tabled by Labour’s Stella Creasy, argues that the government is obliged to extend the right of abortion to comply with UN human rights obligations. This has been signed by more than 80 MPs, including seven Conservatives, giving it a good chance of passing. The government officially supports extending both equal marriage and abortion to Northern Ireland but argues that it must be a matter for the devolved executive, which has been suspended amid political deadlock since January 2017 with no immediate hope of restoration. McGinn has sought to get around these objections by stressing that if the executive and assembly were brought back, they could either endorse or reverse the decision on equal marriage.