When Hannah Rothschild resigned as the chair of the National Gallery late last month she spoke of the “privilege and pleasure” it had been to serve on behalf of the institution and “its exceptional management”. What her statement didn’t mention was an acrimonious dispute over the dismissals of 27 gallery lecturers and educators that has hung over the organisation for nearly two years, seen the intervention of numerous politicians, and was, say insiders, one of the reasons Rothschild stepped down “with sadness” two years before she was due to go. Rothschild, who was the first female chair of the board of trustees of the National Gallery, will leave her post in September and told the Observer that she had resigned “to devote more time to my writing, and to my family’s business and philanthropic activities”. Her departure follows a series of interventions over the gallery’s handling of the dispute, including from the Cabinet Office secretary, David Lidington, Theresa May’s de facto deputy, who recently wrote to Rothschild on behalf of one of his constituents. Rothschild is understood to have been particularly stung by Lidington’s letter in which he expressed the grave concerns of his constituent, who had worked as a lecturer for a decade at the gallery before losing the job in 2017. “She was a good guy as it were. But she simply felt enough was enough,” said a source, who did not want to be named. Seen by legal experts as one of the first public-sector gig economy cases (a comparison rejected by the gallery), the dispute between the 27 claimants and the Trafalgar Square gallery centred on whether the claimants should have been classified as workers rather than freelancers who were ineligible for benefits such as maternity and sick pay. In March an employment tribunal ruled in their favour, rejecting the gallery’s argument that they were self-employed. Last week the gallery said that “it and the 27 educators and lecturers, who had brought legal claims against the gallery, are pleased to jointly announce the settlement of their dispute”. The terms remain confidential, but the settlement is understood to include some recompense. Lidington is not the only politician to have weighed into the affair. Nine MPs, all also representing constituents who had worked as lecturers or educators, wrote to Rothschild after the tribunal’s verdict. Thus far, they have only received an acknowledgment of their letter. One of the nine, the Labour MP Stella Creasy, had separately written before to Rothschild in November 2018 before receiving a reply from the gallery’s director, Gabriele Finaldi, in December. He said that all 27 had been “offered work in some form”, and that “faced with the enormity of the financial claim, the gallery had no choice but to defend itself”. The dismissed workers deny all 27 were offered work. The Observer understands that today just three have permanent contracts, while 10 have been given casual agreements of 23 months, but with no guarantee of any actual work. Sources say the gallery is currently using less experienced people to carry out some of the lecturing and educational roles.This weekend Rothschild, a documentary maker and novelist, did not respond to questions put to her about the conduct of the gallery during the dispute. In her statement last month she said: “Being a trustee and then the first female chair has been a privilege and pleasure. My deep affinity for this wonderful organisation and its exceptional management will continue through my lifetime.” This dispute follows another long-running row with its gallery assistants between 2011 and 2015 over cuts, which led to the Trafalgar Square museum being closed for several days. In the end the assistants, who stayed, were transferred to Securitas, a private firm.