The foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, will be cursing his timing about Hong Kong. Faced with growing criticism from human rights groups over the UK’s muted response to the treatment of protesters in its former colony, he decided last Tuesday to take two decisive steps: to call for an independent inquiry into the police handling of demonstrations on 12 June and to suspend export licences for crowd control equipment that could be used in future against protesters. A statement promising unwavering commitment was also issued by the Foreign Office on the eve of demonstrations held on Monday to coincide with the 22nd anniversary of Hong Kong’s handover to China. As protesters entered and vandalised the Legislative Council chamber, Hunt did not abandon the wider cause. Speaking on Sky on Monday night, he said: “My heart goes out to those worried they’ll lose their precious way of life. I don’t support violence in any circumstances but I understand their worries about changes happening in Hong Kong. “The Chinese government say this is an internal affair and it’s not for Britain to meddle in this, but we signed an agreement ensuring ‘one nation, two systems’ for 50 years, so I hope there are not changes which undermine that legally binding agreement.” But privately the Foreign Office admits that the cause of upholding the rule of law has had a temporary setback. So long as there is “one grievance, but two methods of protests”, there is a danger that peaceful protesters will be dragged into likely Chinese state reprisals. The fear is that China will use the violence on Monday as a pretext to abandon the decision to suspend a controversial extradition law, the singular achievement of the protests, and the vague talk of a new, more lenient policing regime has been abandoned. The Foreign Office, which is waiting for a new prime minister in Downing Street and a new China policy, will be thinking hard about how far, and with what leverage, it can support the protesters and help Hong Kong back on to the path towards universal suffrage. If the principle is to defend the autonomy of Hong Kong and persuade Beijing to treat the special administrative region as a special case, British ministers cannot be too heavy handed in how they project their interpretation of the Basic Law, Hong Kong’s constitution. In the Commons on Tuesday, the Foreign Office minister Alan Duncan made clear he did not wish to dictate to either the Hong Kong government or to China on how to respond to the protests. At the same time, Duncan, whose brief now stretches from France to south-east Asia owing to the suspension of Mark Field, said it was wrong that Hong Kong’s Legislative Council and chief executive were not directly elected by the people. For the moment, the Foreign Office points to the continued independence of the Hong Kong judiciary as a bulwark against authoritarianism. But the reason the extradition law represents such a threat is that it breaks down the firewall between Chinese and Hong Kong law. Behind the Hong Kong issue lies deeper unresolved questions about how to approach to the rise of China, a debate being replicated across Europe and one that has been made more urgent with every US tariff imposed, or threatened by Donald Trump. A recent Commons foreign affairs select committee report on Sino-British relations said it could not detect a coherent cross-government position and rejected the rhetoric of a golden era in relations hailed by George Osborne when chancellor. Osborne, who is tipped for a role in a Boris Johnson government from a perch in the House of Lords, has not changed his strongly pro-Chinese views, and brought Johnson along on an enthusiastic journey through China in 2013. At a Centre for Policy Studies (CPS) conference last month, Osborne claimed Britain could act as a leading counter-balance to Washington’s assumption that China was a strategic competitor. “The US is planning to junk 50 years of doctrine on China and suddenly rush into a confrontation that I don’t they have the appetite for, the stomach for, the resource for and the notion for,” he said. Osborne argued that Beijing deserved a bigger role in the major institutions of a rules-based order, saying China has as big a stake in the success of that order as any other major power. “The biggest threat to the Chinese Communist party is global instability, financial crisis and conflict in Asia and they think long and hard about the survival of the Chinese community party,” he said. He is likely to concur with Peter Mandelson’s recent advice to Johnson not to see the Chinese tech firm Huawei as a security threat, but instead to “carefully weigh up the advice that [Theresa] May received from the country’s cyber and intelligence agencies that US claims about Huawei are misplaced, that the threats of hacking are not new and are not related to an equipment maker’s nationality and that effective management of telecoms risks should continue as it is”. As it stands the UK policy towards Huawei access to Britain’s 5G mobile networks remains on hold. Whatever policy the frontrunner Johnson adopts will require tact. At the same CPS conference, the US ambassador to the UK, Woody Johnson, warned Britain “not to let untrustworthy countries in the heart of our economics and infrastructure”. He said it would be like “letting a kleptomaniac move into your house and then you’ve got to hire three people to follow them around all day”. In the US, the anti-Chinese mood is said to be spreading from Congress to universities, the military and the professions, while Trump’s apparent truce in his trade war with China at the G20 has met with consternation by many Republican senators. For the UK waiting for China’s response to the Hong Kong protests, these are anxious times. It is hard to know if its greatest ally, or its notional adversary is the least predictable. Never has the Thucydides trap looked so dangerous.