Hong Kong police have fired teargas at demonstrators and moved to disperse crowds after protesters stormed the legislative council building and raised the territory’s former colonial flag on the 22nd anniversary of its handover to China. The dramatic scenes came after a peaceful march of half a million people made its way through other parts of the city as its deepest political crisis in two decades showed no sign of abating. For the past month protesters have been demanding the withdrawal of a bill that would allow extraditions to the Chinese mainland as anger has grown against Hong Kong authorities and the territory’s chief executive, Carrie Lam. The police action came against a breakaway group of protesters, some of whom had forced their way into the legislative council building and vandalised its main chamber. Shortly after midnight local time (1600 BST), police in riot gear held up a black flag reading “teargas warning” before shooting several rounds of the gas into protesters. They then climbed over barricades put up by protesters earlier in the day and charged at the people gathered. Outside the legislative council building protesters wearing hard hats, goggles and masks ran away clutching umbrellas as smoke filled the air. Protesters had for hours been repeatedly striking reinforced glass walls with a metal trolley and poles as hundreds of others watched on. Once inside they threw chairs and tore down and defaced portraits of past lawmakers. After the protesters were dispersed, images of the vandalised building were broadcast. More than 50 people were reportedly taken to hospital for treatment after various protests throughout the day. What initially started in early June as protests against a new extradition law have broadened into a pro-democracy movement concerned about the wider relationship between Hong Kong and China and the future for the special administrative region. Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, has offered a ‘solemn’ personal apology for the crisis and also hinted that she had effectively shelved the controversial legislation. However, protesters criticised her as insincere and said she had ignored their key demands. The demonstrations have continued. People have been demonstrating against legal changes that would make it easier to extradite people from Hong Kong to China. Supporters say the amendments are key to ensuring the city does not become a criminal refuge, but critics worry Beijing will use the law to extradite political opponents and others to China. Under the amended law, those accused of offences punishable by seven years or more in prison could be extradited. The government claims the push to change the law, which would also apply to Taiwan and Macau, stems from the killing last year of a Hong Kong woman while she was in Taiwan with her boyfriend. Authorities in Taiwan suspect the woman’s boyfriend, who remains in Hong Kong, but cannot try him because no extradition agreement is in place. Officials have promised to safeguard against abuses, pledging that no one at risk of political or religious persecution will be sent to the mainland. Suspects who could face the death penalty would not be extradited. Hong Kong officials have repeatedly said the bill has not come from the central government in Beijing. However, Beijing has voiced its backing for the changes. Many Hong Kongers fear the proposed extradition law will be used by authorities to target political enemies. They worry the new legislation spells the end of the “one country, two systems” policy, eroding the civil rights enjoyed by Hong Kong residents since the handover of sovereignty from the UK to China in 1997. Many attending the protests said they could not trust China as it had often used non-political crimes to target government critics, and said they also feared Hong Kong officials would not be able to reject Beijing’s requests. Legal professionals have also expressed concern over the rights of those sent across the border to be tried. The conviction rate in Chinese courts is as high as 99%. Arbitrary detentions, torture and denial of legal representation of one’s choosing are also common. After the current crisis, analysts believe the Hong Kong government will likely start a new round of retaliatory measures against its critics while the Chinese government will tighten its grip on the city. Police have said that 32 people have been arrested over the recent demonstrations and five have been charged with rioting, which carries a maximum sentence of ten years’ imprisonment. Six pro-democracy members of the legislature have already been ousted. Lily Kuo in Beijing and Verna Yu in Hong Kong “I don’t know whether this would work, but what other channels are there to make Carrie Lam listen to us?” said a male protester outside the legislative council building, who declined to be named. “We used to protest peacefully but it didn’t work, now we need to get out of this framework and tell them, we’re willing to try anything until you give us an answer.” Police had issued several warnings through the evening and appeared to be gearing up for violent clashes, but had left the protesters largely unhindered in their efforts even as the group tore up the inside of the building. Local TV footage showed police officers armed with non-lethal weaponry in other parts of the government complex as the protesters broke in. One lawmaker, Fernando Cheung, suggested to reporters that the inaction from police had been a trap, aimed at swinging public sentiment against the protest movement with the help of violent and destructive scenes. Half a dozen pro-democracy and independent lawmakers had earlier scuffled with protesters as they called for calm and pushed against the trolley that was being used to enter the council building. “They simply wouldn’t listen to me,” said Lam Cheuk-ting, one of the politicians. “The movement at large is peaceful, but some young people are overwhelmed by a strong sense of helplessness and they’re emotionally charged.” While a small splinter group was causing trouble at the legislature, 550,000 people marched peacefully through downtown Hong Kong without any scenes of violence or chaos. The organisers of that rally – the Civil Human Rights Front (CHRF) – issued a joint statement with democratic lawmakers placing the blame for the destruction at the legislative council squarely on Lam, saying she had “ignored the demands of the people and pushed youngsters towards desperation”. The CHRF also reiterated its five demands: the full retraction of the controversial extradition law amendment bill; an investigation into police brutality; Lam’s resignation; the release of arrested protesters; and the removal of the designation of the earlier clashes as a riot. Lam called a rare press conference early on Tuesday to condemn the “extremely violent” storming of the legislature, which she described as “heartbreaking and shocking”. Speaking beside Lam, police chief Stephen Lo said: “Protesters’ violent acts have far exceeded the bottom line of peaceful expressions of demands.” A joint statement from 41 pro-government lawmakers condemned what they described as “extremely radical and violent acts”, such as the occupying of roads and vandalism of the council building. The rallies are the latest manifestation of growing fears that China is stamping down on the city’s freedoms and culture with the help of the finance hub’s pro-Beijing leaders. Although returned to Chinese rule in 1997, Hong Kong is still administered separately under an arrangement known as “one country, two systems”. The city enjoys rights and liberties unseen on the autocratic mainland, but many residents believe Beijing is reneging on that deal. While the recent protests were initially sparked by Lam’s attempts to pass the proposed extradition legislation, the demonstrations have morphed into a wider movement against her administration and Beijing. 1 July 1997: Hong Kong, previously a British colony, is returned to China under the framework of "one country, two systems". The "Basic Law" constitution guarantees to protect, for the next 50 years, the democratic institutions that make Hong Kong distinct from Communist-ruled mainland China. 2003: Hong Kong's leaders introduce legislation that would forbid acts of treason and subversion against the Chinese government. The bill resembles laws used to charge dissidents on the mainland. An estimated half a million people turn out to protest against the bill. As a result of the backlash, further action on the proposal is halted. 2007: The Basic Law stated that the ultimate aim was for Hong Kong's voters to achieve a complete democracy, but China decides in 2007 that universal suffrage in elections for the chief executive cannot be implemented until 2017. Some lawmakers are chosen by business and trade groups, while others are elected by vote. In a bid to accelerate a decision on universal suffrage, five lawmakers resign. But this act is followed by the adoption of the Beijing-backed electoral changes, which expand the chief executive's selection committee and add more seats for lawmakers elected by direct vote. The legislation divides Hong Kong's pro-democracy camp, as some support the reforms while others say they will only delay full democracy while reinforcing a structure that favors Beijing. 2014: The Chinese government introduces a bill allowing Hong Kong residents to vote for their leader in 2017, but with one major caveat: the candidates must be approved by Beijing. Pro-democracy lawmakers are incensed by the bill, which they call an example of "fake universal suffrage" and "fake democracy". The move triggers a massive protest as crowds occupy some of Hong Kong's most crowded districts for 70 days. In June 2015, Hong Kong legislators formally reject the bill, and electoral reform stalls. The current chief executive, Carrie Lam, widely seen as the Chinese Communist Party's favored candidate, is hand-picked in 2017 by a 1,200-person committee dominated by pro-Beijing elites. 2019: Lam pushes amendments to extradition laws that would allow people to be sent to mainland China to face charges. The proposed legislation triggers a huge protest, with organizers putting the turnout at 1 million, and a standoff that forces the legislature to postpone debate on the bills. Both the protesters and the government have in recent weeks been trying to keep public opinion and attention on their side. The protesters have mostly been orderly, obeying traffic laws, cleaning up after themselves and allowing ambulances to pass even when tens of thousands are gathered. They even returned to bow and apologise to civil servants after a small-scale protest forced government offices to shut and the staff to go home early. Up until midnight police were far more restrained with their use of force, having been criticised for their actions against protesters at a smaller protest on 12 June, when they fired 150 rounds of teargas and rubber bullets, and videos of police beating and pepper-spraying unarmed protesters circulated over the internet. The UK foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, on Monday stressed “UK support for Hong Kong and its freedoms”, saying in a statement that “no violence is acceptable but Hong Kong people must preserve the right to peaceful protest exercised within the law, as hundreds of thousands of brave people showed today.” UK diplomats will be concerned that the Hong Kong executive might use the violence as a reason to impose severe penalties on protesters, including possibly reintroducing the suspended extradition law. The UK had been privately pressing for the legislation to be dropped altogether. China also reiterated its stance against what it called “foreign interference” in Hong Kong. Speaking in Beijing, the Chinese foreign ministry spokesman, Geng Shuang, said the UK’s rights and obligations under the joint declaration on the 1997 handover of Hong Kong had ended. “Britain has no so-called responsibility for Hong Kong. Hong Kong matters are purely an internal affair for China. No foreign country has a right to interfere,” Geng told a daily news briefing. “Recently Britain has continuously gesticulated about Hong Kong, flagrantly interfering. We are extremely dissatisfied with this and resolutely opposed.” Earlier in the day, Lam, had attempted to calm the mood, as during an official ceremony took place at a convention centre in WanHong Kong’s Wan Chai todistrict to mark the 22nd anniversary of the handover. In her speech, Lam referred to the protests, saying they had made her realise “the need to grasp public sentiments accurately”. She said: “I am also fully aware that while we have good intentions, we still need to be open and accommodating.” Additional reporting by Patrick Wintour