Simon Day can still remember the feeling of nausea and utter helplessness that can only be brought about by a crushing cricketing defeat. Day, now 34, was then just a six-year-old boy standing with his grandmother in the car park of Auckland’s Eden Park stadium when New Zealand lost the 1992 cricket World Cup semi-final against Pakistan. For three-quarters of the game New Zealand had looked like they were going to win. And then they didn’t. “I remember saying ‘Grandma, I feel sick’,” Day said. “I made her take me out of the ground.” That was the beginning of a journey that would bring Day passion and pain. He would quickly grow to love New Zealand cricket. “But for a long time, New Zealand cricket didn’t love me back.” Now, however, as the Black Caps prepare to enter the home of cricket for the World Cup final following a miraculous victory against India, Day has a different feeling: hope. And he’s not the only one. New Zealanders are jumping on the bandwagon. Breathless newspaper front pages bear terrible puns on team captain Kane Williamson’s name: “Yes we Kane”, “We Kane do it”, I know we Kane”. Cricket commentators who once wrote the team off are now doing an about face. The national betting agency has dramatically shortened the team’s odds. Day, who works for an online magazine called Spinoff, always had a cautious faith in the team, but this swelling national optimism is different. “It’s very exciting and unsettling. Having an expectation of success is something new.” It's very exciting and unsettling. Having an expectation of success is something new Sonia Gray, another fan who grew up listening to cricket on the radio while her mother did the gardening, is hesitant to predict anything (perhaps because her weekend job is presenting New Zealand’s Lotto results on national television). “It’s also maybe because New Zealanders sort of have disappointment embedded in our DNA,” she said. Gray loves the game. But she also knows that disappointment well. “The All Blacks are always expected to win so it’s almost a relief whenever they do. But with the Black Caps, there is just this joy at the moment.” Expectation was low at the start of the tournament and now Gray finds herself smiling at strangers in the street and seeking out conversations about cricket. “You can’t make predictions on this. I hope the New Zealand team just go out and enjoy it. In 50 years’ time they can tell their grandkids that they remember the smell of the grass at Lords,” she said. Sunil Nathu may well seek out that same feeling. His out-of-office email message is currently: “I’m at the World Cup, hopefully watching the Black Caps win.” Four weeks ago, the Aucklander flew to England in the hope of watching the team make the final four. He was in Manchester last week to watch the Black Caps beat India – perhaps the only person in the crowd of Indian descent to be celebrating the win. Now, he has also managed to score tickets to the final. “It was a huge gamble,” he said. “But I just love cricket. Being back in England, the home of cricket. It was just too good a chance.” He believes that if New Zealand does win it could open up a new era of cricketing success for the country: “The flood-gates could open.” For Day, those flood-gates could well be tears. If the Black Caps can get a win it will disperse those demons of 1992. It will be the early hours of Monday morning in New Zealand when the result is known. The game is being broadcast free-to-air but most bars don’t have a licence that runs that late. Some will send punters home whether the game is finished or not. Instead, Day will gather at his office with his colleagues and enough supplies to make a vat of espresso martinis. It may be the perfect celebration for a big year – he and his wife Millie have also just discovered they are having twins. The cycle of nausea, passion and joy will begin again.