First things first: the yellow mac has not gone for good, even if it does seem to have been usurped by a sharp blue trench coat for much of this episode. That fans have come to care so deeply about an item of practical outerwear, with the same fervour as they might once have coveted Sarah Lund’s knits, says a lot about Keeping Faith, which returns for a second series riding high on the crest of its word-of-mouth success. Filmed and broadcast in both Welsh and English, the noirish thriller proved so popular last year that the BBC were forced to extend its run on iPlayer, and it became the most-watched ‘non-network’ show on the site. So here it is, inevitably bumped to primetime BBC One, where fans might finally find out what the perplexing end of the first series meant, and newcomers might jump in and discover what they’ve been missing. Eve Myles is Faith Howells, a solicitor who lives in a picturesque Welsh village, which means we’re in for a lot of coastal driving, usually in slow motion, while everyone thinks about what’s going on. The first series saw Faith struggling with the mother of all bad weeks, when her husband, Evan, vanished after leaving for work one morning, setting off a chain of terrible events. And then, he came back, the credits rolled, and viewers were left to wonder where the hell he’d been all series. This opening episode splits its time between the present day and that night, 18 months ago, when Evan returned to explain what he’d been doing. Those frustrated by the open-endedness of series one will find great satisfaction in how Faith gets the truth out of him. She ushers him into a room, bottle of wine in hand, and you’re unsure whether she’s going to glug it or slug him with it. She doesn’t use the wine bottle, but it doesn’t turn out well for Evan, either. Myles does a knockout job as Faith, who spends much of her time glowering in the rearview mirror of her car, or behind the reflection of something else in one of many arty, blurry shots or moody montages. Her don’t-mess attitude – and the fact that she isn’t squeaky clean herself – is the main driving force behind the show. But it is also very good at building intrigue, and laying breadcrumbs, and it packs an awful lot in to an hour. Newcomers should be able to jump in cold (there’s a scene that essentially recaps the first series’ many dodgy dealings, though it comes near the end), but it helps if you have some idea why Faith is in debt, why everyone is so keen to buy an energy company at a knockdown price, and what has driven Alys to her “halfway to goth” experimentations in eyeliner and dark lipstick. Given that Evan’s whereabouts have been accounted for, and he’s currently halfway through a four-year prison sentence, there needs to be a new mystery for Faith to get stuck into. As soon as that blue trench makes an appearance, it’s clear she means business. Keeping Faith is about to go Full Broadchurch with a murder case, when local farmer Will Vaughan is found dead, having been shot in the chest, and his wife Madlen is suspected of the crime, because her fingerprints are all over the gun. Naturally, Faith steps up to offer help, even though Tom points out she’s never actually handled a murder case. “Let this be the first,” she says, gamely, which is exactly the phrase you’d never want to hear from a pilot, a surgeon, or a lawyer defending you in a murder trial. When Madlen is charged with the crime, Faith does the reasonable thing and shouts “You bastards! What is wrong with you people?” at the detective who just charged her client. I am sure it will all go well. When it comes to family, though, Faith is in charge. When she tells Evan, “I’ll sort it”, there is no doubting she means what she says. Her woman-scorned determination is what will save her, in the short run, but there’s also a worry, now, that it could eventually bring her down. This is not drama with a particularly light touch, but that really doesn’t matter, given that it rips along at an irresistible pace. In an age of cinematic telly, or literary telly, Keeping Faith is telly-telly, and it is all the better for it.