A true Cats fan always sits in the aisle during performances. A true Cats fan knows that the show is one of musical theatre’s grandest creations, as history will tell. A true Cats fan holds no truck with the haters who say that the Andrew Lloyd Webber musical makes no sense – because they know there is something that is probably quite ineffable, and more than a little bit magical, about the show. A true Cats fan won’t settle for seeing the show once, twice or even 10 times. Just ask Hector Montalvo, 62, a retired product demonstrator from New York. “I wouldn’t call myself a legend,” he says. “Just a patron who loves the show.” But before Cats ended its first Broadway run in 2000, Montalvo had seen 703 performances. Montalvo has the ticket stub from his first performance, on 11 October 1982, which he keeps at home in a clear display case that he calls the Jellicle Box. It contains other treasured artefacts, including crystal beads that once flew off a costume mid-show, two copies of the book on which Cats is based, TS Eliot’s Old Possum’s Book of Practical Cats, signed by every cast member, and a piece of the Winter Garden Theater stage floor. Montalvo was at the invite-only final Broadway performance, and attended the farewell party. “When it was all over, and I saw from the cab the theatre was totally dark, I felt as if a part of my life had died.” Montalvo is still digesting the events of last week, when the trailer for the forthcoming film adaptation of Cats was released, and the internet hocked up a collective hairball in response. Starring Idris Elba, Jennifer Hudson and notorious cat-botherer Taylor Swift, and directed by Tom Hooper – who brought Les Miserables to the big screen – the trailer featured an array of CGI-generated, anthropomorphised cats ranging from “somewhat alarming” to “full Chucky” in appearance. Hardcore fans reacted negatively to odd costume changes, such as the fact that Old Deuteronomy, played by Judi Dench, wore a cat-fur coat. And more to the point: what was with the confusingly located tails? Even if you’re not a fan of the stage show, the Cats trailer makes for discombobulating viewing. But, 38 years after it first hit the West End, Cats retains a claw-like grip on popular culture. The story of a tribe of cats called the Jellicles who gather to decide which cat will go to heaven and come back with a new life – the so-called “Jellicle choice” – Cats is one of the most successful musicals of all time. Its original West End production ran for 21 years and 8,949 performances, while the Broadway adaptation was on stage for 18 years. It made stars out of cast members such as Elaine Paige and Betty Buckley, and the musical’s most famous song, Memory, is still belted out in karaoke bars around the world. Cats fans are the most engaged of any in musical-theatre history. But why do they keep returning to the Jellicle Ball, all these years on? “To escape,” says the Australian film-maker Mark Dooley. His documentary Repeat Attenders tells the story of the musical-theatre superfans who see the same shows over and over again. “For two-and-a-half hours, you’re in another world, and nothing else – not what’s happening in your real life – matters. You can be surrounded, and entertained, and feel joyful, for that time.” There are no laboured political messages in Cats, only the horny pleasures of watching the Rum Tum Tugger hip-thrust his way through increasingly surreal dance routines. “The dancing, the costumes, the music, the concept, the story – it’s so engaging,” gushes 37-year-old mathematician Will Gosnell, from Amherst, Massachusetts. He saw Cats 23 times on Broadway. “It pulls you in, and you get hypnotised by the whole show.” Such is his love for Cats, Gosnell has written three cat-related songs, which he has uploaded to his YouTube channel. What’s the Cat Gonna Do?, Mister Man the Kitty Wears Pink Sweaters, and Horton the Extraordinary Cat are all inspired by Gosnell’s affinity for the feline species, as well as the oeuvre of Lloyd Webber. Part of the show’s appeal is that there are so many characters for audiences to relate to. Montalvo was bullied at school. Like the outcast Grizabella, he knows “what it’s like to be ostracised”. “It hurts to see Grizabella being unaccepted through most of the show,” he says, “because you could say: ‘I walked a mile in her paws.’” Carlo Castronovo, from Devens, Massachusetts, has seen Cats 80 times. The 44-year-old aviation inspector feels most like Skimbleshanks. Like him, he’s “always on the go, always double-checking everything, making sure nothing’s going wrong, and if something’s going wrong, always trying to handle it to the best of my ability”. Cats’ elaborate costumes also help. “It gives the fans an opportunity to feel like they’re part of the show, by getting little groups of friends together and knitting leg warmers and swapping wigs and going to fan conventions,” Dooley says. Castronovo has Munkustrap, Skimbleshanks and Gus costumes, which he wears to performances. Once, he dressed as Munkustrap during the matinee performance of the 2012 revival at the Gateway Playhouse in Long Island. “I had a front-row seat, and at the end of the show I’m literally nose-to-nose with the real Munkustrap,” he rhapsodises. “He gives me this look like: ‘Get lost – you’re not one of us. We don’t want you here.’” Another reason Cats inspires such loyalty is that it was the original blockbuster mega-musical. “It’s the gateway show for musical-theatre fans,” Dooley explains, telling me that the typical Cats superfan is aged 40-plus and remembers the original West End and Broadway shows. Cats was also one of the first shows to be available on VHS, creating a fanbase among those unable to catch the stage show. Millicent Thomas, 21, a student from Manchester, first saw the 1998 Cats movie when she was four. “It’s stunning,” she says. “The actors look into the camera like you’re an audience member, and they’re looking at you.” She watched Cats thrice weekly throughout her childhood, and credits it with turning her into “that musical-theatre kid”. But although Cats is now a roaring tigress, the show was once an undercat. In the early 80s, Lloyd Webber hadn’t yet built his reputation as an impresario, and the 1982 Broadway opening had mixed reviews. “It started out with nothing promising about it – people dressed up in cat costumes seemed ludicrous,” says the musical-theatre expert Prof Alyson McLamore of California Polytechnic State University. Critics were scathing about the show’s gossamer-thin plot, but McLamore explains that Cats is indebted to the theatrical tradition of a revue, rather than being driven by narrative in the manner of most modern-day musicals. The fact that Cats is heavily grounded in dance also explains why some critics were uncertain about the show. “Musical-theatre scholars tend to be dismissive of dance,” McLamore says. But it was the sheer athleticism of Cats that drew Thomas in. “What they do with their bodies is unbelievable. You forget they’re human sometimes. They really inhabit the feline aspect of it.” As a child, she would rewatch the number where Mungojerrie and Rumpelteazer do an interlocking cartwheel, over and over again. The stage show also stands out because of its strong element of audience participation. “You’re really enmeshed in it,” McLamore says. “You’re not sitting 100ft away – you’re really involved in the action and the scale of things.” The film critic Hannah Woodhead, 26, saw the Cats film at least 40 times before she caught the touring version as a child at the Sheffield Lyceum. Sitting in the aisle was as clever a decision as Mr Mistoffelees himself would have made. “The cats run through the audience and purr and nuzzle your leg. For me, as a child it was like: is theatre always like this? My mind was absolutely blown.” After seeing a show so many times, you become an honorary cast member. “It reached the point where cast members knew about and had ways of acknowledging my presence, while staying in character,” Montalvo reminisces. Some would do friendly hisses in his direction, or rub up against him seductively. “There was even a running gag going with Griddlebone [played by Nina Hennessey] in which she would swat me with her tail. That tail should be considered a weapon!” When your fanbase is this devoted, changes can make fur fly. After Lloyd Webber attempted to modernise the Rum Tum Tugger by turning him into a rapper for Cats’ 2014 West End revival, Castronovo was appalled. He set up a Facebook page called Preserve the Magic of Cats, and found an email address for Lloyd Webber. “I sent him a very friendly email, you know what I mean? Very friendly. Saying: ‘Tugger is supposed to be played this way. You’re going in the opposite direction. I’ve talked to many a fan, and no one really likes this.’” Lloyd Webber never replied, but the rapping was ditched for the show’s 2016 Broadway revival, so Castronovo is claiming it as a victory. With the film of Cats due out in December, many of the superfans I spoke with had some specific costuming grievances. Woodhead was upset that the trailer suggests Skimbleshanks has lost his pocket watch. “The costume design of the show is so iconic. You become attached to these characters when you’re a kid, so when you see that kind of change, you think: ‘I can’t believe this.’” Thomas gripes that Macavity (played by Idris Elba) is wearing a hat, which he does not in the stage show. But she is relaxed about the fact that the female cats are mostly naked, while the male cats wear clothes: “It’s strange, but that’s how it is in the show.” What about the fact that Bombalurina has breasts? “I think it would have been weirder if she didn’t have boobs. She’s meant to be the sexy cat, all the boys are after her – it feels right that she’s got that look about her.” What about the confusion over whether the cats are human-sized? “To start putting the cats in bedrooms and streets and bars is really brave,” Thomas says, explaining that issues of scale aren’t a factor in the stage show, as the cats don’t leave the junkyard set. “I think they are supposed to be cat-sized cats, because in the last show of the trailer, where they’re in the square, you can see their proportions.” As for Castronovo, he’s trying to keep an open mind, but he’s anxious. “I don’t know, honestly. I’ll say the costumes right now can look a little creepy maybe for the younger kids. It may be a little too creepy.” But Thomas think that criticism of the Cats trailer for being too freaky misses the point. “That’s the whole idea of Cats! It’s supposed to look like you’re stepping into this Alice-in-Wonderland bizarre, surreal world where nothing feels right.”