Long evenings and warm weather are a great excuse to feast with good friends; there are few better ways to have a brilliant summer. Today’s spread, paired with a green salad and fresh, crusty bread, is simple and utterly delicious. The only snag is that your guests must love garlic! This is a classic, and with very good reason. Seek out the freshest, sweetest vegetables to make this really shine, swapping in whatever is looking its best. Prep 45 minCook 5 minServes 4-6 2 red peppers, deseeded and cut into thick strips2 heads chicory, leaves separated1 bunch radishes, washed6 carrots, peeled and cut into long pieces750g Cornish new potatoes, or other waxy variety, steamed until tender1 young fennel bulb, cut into thumb-width batons4 eggs, boiled for 8 minutes, peeled and halved For the aioli2 small garlic cloves, peeled and roughly chopped2 egg yolks2 tsp dijon mustard2 tsp good-quality white-wine vinegar1-2 tsp freshly squeezed lemon juice250ml extra-virgin olive oil250ml vegetable oil For the lamb8 lamb cutlets, untrimmed1 garlic clove, peeled and crushed with a little salt½ tsp ground cumin1 tsp ground coriander1 tsp paprikaSalt and black pepper2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil Start by marinating the lamb. Put each cutlet between two sheets of greaseproof paper and bash them with a rolling pin until they are only a few millimetres thick. Put them in a bowl with the crushed garlic, spices, a few large pinches of salt and the oil, and rub together. Put in the fridge. To make the aioli, put the garlic in a tall measuring jug with the egg yolks, mustard, vinegar, lemon juice and several large pinches of salt. Blitz with a stick blender for 30 seconds, then, still blending, slowly start adding the olive oil in a thin, steady trickle. After a minute, increase the trickle to a thin stream, continuing to blend. Once you have poured in all the olive oil, pour in the vegetable oil, now in a thicker stream, until combined. Taste and add more lemon juice or salt, if needed. Transfer to a serving bowl, then put in the fridge. Prepare all the vegetables, arrange them on serving plates, and keep them under a clean, damp tea towel until you are ready to eat. Half an hour before you are ready to cook, bring the lamb out of the fridge to come to room temperature, and season well with salt and pepper. After half an hour, heat a griddle pan over a high heat and, once smoking, grill the lamb for one to two minutes on each side, until golden and caramelised. Alternatively, cook under a very hot grill. Rest for a few minutes, then serve with the crudites, boiled eggs and aioli. The aioli is delicious with almost anything: accompany with boiled globe artichokes for a lovely dinner, or dollop on a bowl of braised, soupy summer peas, shallots and lettuce; or use to accompany a salad nicoise or crisp roast chicken .