Sadio Mané scored twice after missing a penalty as Senegal reached the last 16 at the Africans Cup of Nations with a 3-0 win over Kenya. The Liverpool forward bagged a late brace to make up for seeing Patrick Matasi save his first-half spot-kick in Cairo. Ismaila Sarr opened the scoring in the second half while Philemon Otieno was dismissed for Kenya after conceding Senegal’s second penalty - which Mane converted. Senegal finished second in Group C, behind Algeria, but needed to wait until the final 30 minutes to break Kenya down. Just after the half hour, Abud Omar brought down Saliou Ciss but Mané’s penalty was weak and Matasi saved comfortably. Sarr opened the scoring after 63 minutes when he fired in from Lamine Gassama’s cross. Mané then scored his first when he capitalised on an error from Musa Mohammed eight minutes later. Otieno was dismissed for bringing down Sarr with 14 minutes left and Mané scored from the spot. Algeria’s Adam Ounas scored twice and Islam Slimani also netted in their 3-0 defeat of Tanzania as their second-string side proved far too strong. The goals all came in the last 10 minutes of the first half. The victory meant Algeria matched hosts Egypt and Morocco with a full haul of nine points in the group stage, while Tanzania finished bottom as they returned to the tournament for the first time since 1980. Algeria will face a third-placed finisher in the last 16. The Ivory Coast secured their progress from Nations Group D with a 4-1 win over Namibia. Max Gradel fired the Elephants in front six minutes before half-time when he was ruled marginally onside as he ran onto Franck Kessie’s superb lofted through-ball and fired across Kazapua. And it was 2-0 just before the hour when Serey Die let fly from 35 yards and a deflection off defender Ryan Nyambe left the keeper helpless. Namibia cut the deficit when goalkeeper Sylvain Gbohouo cleared the ball straight to Joslin Kamatuka, who shimmied past Serge Kanon before finishing. But Zaha and substitute Maxwel Cornet scored in the final 10 minutes to make victory safe for Ibrahim Kamara’s side, who finished second after South Africa conceded a late winner to group champions Morocco to lose 1-0. Mbark Boussoufa struck in stoppage time in Cairo. Achraf Hakimi had hit the crossbar for Morocco while Youssef En-Nesyri also missed a fine chance before Boussoufa pounced, which left South Africa’s hopes of qualifying from the group in the balance. Percy Tau shot wide for South Africa midway through the first half before Morocco took control of a dull game after the break. The 1976 winners almost went ahead after 64 minutes when Hakimi’s 25-yard strike rattled the underside of the bar. Five minutes later, Morocco should have broken the deadlock only for En-Nesyri to miss a golden chance when he shot wide after rounding Ronwen Williams. En-Nesyri also headed straight at Williams before Boussoufa fired in his 90th-minute winner after South Africa failed to clear a free kick.