Audiences should be wary of documentaries featuring charmingly roguish, twinkly-eyed reactionary villains who play liberal film-makers for suckers. This is what happened during Errol Morris’s feeble film about Donald Rumsfeld. And Morris’s own study of media executive and White House strategist Steve Bannon, American Dharma, was considered a failure because slippery-yet-cordial Bannon wouldn’t take the bait. Bannon, himself a dabbler in film-making who managed the US video release of Michael Moore’s Fahrenheit 9/11, knows the score. But Alison Klayman’s film does better than most, as she follows Bannon in the luxury wilderness period that followed his sacking by Donald Trump – pursuing a grisly consciousness-raising world tour of far-right media organisations, breaking bread with blandly self-pitying lite-fascists all over Europe and travelling on a handsome private jet. Who’s paying for that, you may ask? Bannon isn’t saying. And what is he on the brink of? Power? Defeat? It’s an ambiguity that is important to the American far right, so they can be excitingly on the verge of victory while nursing their trembly-lipped underdog/victim status. Bannon himself is on a permanent euphoric high from his celeb status, and uncritical media treatment, particularly among saucer-eyed Euro right-wingers. But as last year’s US midterm election results come in, his cheery manner slips and he starts shouting at people. A Brit underling fails him, and Bannon appoints his gruesome nephew Sean Bannon (Scrappy to his Scooby) as this man’s replacement in the organisation he toe-curlingly calls The Movement. What emerges from Klayman’s film is how very important Brexit Britain is as a self-vivisecting research animal in Bannon’s experimental thinking. He uses irony and satire to disarm his leftie tormentors (“What would Leni do? How would Leni cut it?” he muses out loud after watching one of his propaganda films, naturally meaning Leni Riefenstahl). Gags like these wrong-foot crybaby liberals but give a deadly serious nod and a wink to his base, as if to say, “Of course we’re extremely fascist! Isn’t it thrilling?” The heroes of this film are Guardian journalist Paul Lewis, who politely declines to be bamboozled or alpha-dogged by Bannon, and Good Morning Britain’s Susanna Reid, who directly confronts Bannon about the deadly riot in Charlottesville. The utter creep is Bannon’s slimy Brit understrapper who takes his boss on a tour of London’s Edgware Road, traditionally and uncontroversially the home of Middle East businesses. Like the less-than-speakable Katie Hopkins, he claims it as evidence of Britain recently turning Islamist. • The Brink is released in the UK on 12 July.