It is now 11 long years since Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer (right) faced each other across the net at Wimbledon, mano a mano, in a 2008 final that was the greatest match in the Championship’s history. Whisper it softly, but the two most successful male players in history look to be finally on a collision course again. Both men had Centre Court eating out of their hands on Saturday as they made light work of French opposition. First up was Nadal, the third seed, who gave a masterclass in defenestrating the two-times semi-finalist Jo-Wilfried Tsonga 6-2, 6-3, 6-2. Federer, seeded two this year, was nearly as impressive in beating Lucas Pouille 7-5, 6-2, 7-6 (4) in a match that threatened to be much closer than it proved. Sure, there is the small matter of Monday’s last 16 matches to navigate – with Nadal facing João Sousa and Federer the big-serving Italian Matteo Berrettini – as well as Wednesday’s quarter-finals. But assuming they do so they will meet in a semi-final for the ages. Nadal, in particular, looks in rude form. As another of his winners fizzed past an exasperated Tsonga in the final game of their match, and the Frenchman shook his head and looked up to the heavens, a spectator offered a pithy – but accurate verdict. “Jo, it’s not your fault,” they shouted. “He’s too good.” It was impossible to argue. Nadal has not won the Wimbledon title since 2010 but on this evidence he is a live and dangerous threat. It was not just that he hit 35 winners to 12 unforced errors, it was that his remodelled serving proved indecipherable to his opponent. Crucially it won him he won 89% of points on his first serve – and garnered 11 aces. “I didn’t face a break point,” a proud Nadal said afterwards. “That’s because my serve worked well. I have been playing aggressive, with not many mistakes and being very precise. I did a lot of things well. That’s why the numbers are positive.” Tsonga had won the only previous meeting between the pair on grass, at Queen’s in 2011, but has tumbled down the rankings to 72 in the world after requiring surgery on a knee for a torn meniscus last year. He played well enough. And time and again he hit what looked like a decent approach and moved in for the kill – only for Nadal to whip a forehand winner from around his ankles. It surely helps Nadal’s chances that the courts appear slow by Wimbledon standards, and that the ball sits up when it hits the court rather than slides through, but the Spaniard does not see it that way. “Honestly, the surface for me is the same as always,” he said. Federer also had no complaints after recording his 350th victory at a grand slam to put him through to what will be a record 17th appearance in the last 16. “It was tough,” he said. “But I’m happy that I’m able to raise my level of play. There was a great run of games midway through the second, also after winning the first. I like seeing moments like that in a match for me.” But Federer said that he would have to be wary against Berrettini, who has had a good grass court season and poses a danger with his powerful serve. The Italian used it to good effect in saving four match points in the fourth set to beat Diego Schwartzman in four hours and 19 minutes – the longest match of this Wimbledon so far – 6-7 (5), 7-6 (2), 4-6, 7-6 (5), 6-3. “I don’t know him very well, so that makes it a bit more tricky,” Federer said. “I saw him play a little bit in Halle. Saw his run, of course, in Stuttgart. Now he’s backing it up here again. That’s not easy to do, especially when you’re sort of newer on the tour.” “I’m expecting a tough one. I hope he has no energy left after today. I’m sure he’ll recover. He’s young. I’m sure we’ll see a tough match on Monday I guess it is.” For now Federer is rightly refusing to look any further ahead, so all talk of a rematch with Nadal is off the table. But as he said with a smile: “I’m very happy how it’s going so far. I hope it’s going to take a special performance from somebody to stop me.” Someone like Nadal perhaps?