Lizzie Cox Thanks to its combination of natural beauty and a widely varied landscape, Canada lends itself to a vast range of outdoor pursuits. As the world’s second-largest country and spanning 10 provinces and three territories, it really does have something for everyone. Explore the lakes of OntarioPerfect for: unwinding in the sun When the Canadian summer hits, Ontario cottage country is the place to be. Think lazy days gazing out at picture-perfect views, jumping off docks into the cool waters of crystal-clear lakes, boat cruises, kayaking, barbecues out on the deck, and above all, unwinding to the point of total relaxation. Among the many canoeing opportunities, paddling a voyager canoe on the Mattawa River stands out. Pretend you’re a fur trader by joining guides in a 30-foot craft, with the option to visit Talon Chute waterfall. Visiting Ontario is an experience you’ll want to return to again and again. With a wide choice of resorts available, you can ensure a unique stay every time, too. Mountain bike in Whistler, British ColumbiaPerfect for: thrill-seekers The Whistler Blackcomb resort may be known as one of North America’s top skiing destinations, but when spring arrives and the snow melts, it transforms into something else: a playground for downhill mountain biking. Whistler Mountain Bike Park is accessible from Whistler Village by chairlift from mid-May to mid-October, and although the network of trails – spanning 50 miles and 1,500 vertical metres (4,900 feet) – may seem daunting, the technical, tighter runs are balanced with smoother toboggan-like beginner zones, meaning you don’t have to be a pro to take on this adrenaline kick of an experience. It’s best to experience the trails yourself in June and September. When you’ve had your fill of two wheels, then enjoy a glass of wine in one of Canada’s largest wine regions. Celebrate Canada Day in Ottawa, OntarioPerfect for: fans of live music Where better to celebrate Canada Day than the country’s capital, Ottawa? Settle in at various spots around the city – Confederation Boulevard, Major’s Hill Park or the Ottawa River – and enjoy a full line-up of entertainment, including an air show courtesy of the Canadian armed forces, musical performances from the likes of the National Arts Centre Orchestra, followed by a fireworks display that’s sure to inspire Canadian pride, no matter where you’re from. There’s also free entry to national museums and art galleries. Try out cowboy skills on a ranch in AlbertaPerfect for: learning new skills Alberta may be known for its iconic national parks (Banff has to be seen to be believed), but south of Banff has just as much to offer, in the form of cowboy country. With rolling foothills, vast cattle grounds, and sunsets that’ll stop you in your tracks, experience the cowboy lifestyle at one of the numerous working and guest ranches in the region. Saddle up for some cattle driving, help with daily chores, try your hand at horseshoe tossing, or opt for one of the more hotel-like guest ranches, with experiences such as horseback camping trips or even spa services on offer. Either way, you’re guaranteed a warm welcome, a break from the fast-pace of modern life, and an unforgettable stay. There are even half-day horse rides if you’re worried about being saddle sore. Go on a polar bear safari in Manitoba (and see the northern lights)Perfect for: adventurous animal-lovers Forget the Big Five – you’re in Canada now, and safari means one thing: polar bears. To see them in the wild you’ll need to head to Churchill, Manitoba – a region perfectly placed for spotting the iconic (and endangered) white bears in their natural environment, as they wait on the shore for the Hudson Bay freeze before heading out to hunt for seals. Several tour operators offer excursions in adapted vehicles out into the Arctic tundra, with one-day trips or longer expeditions available. It’s not just polar bears that make this a once-in-a-lifetime trip either, because Churchill is also one of the best places in the world to see the northern lights. A two-for-one deal, if you will. Spend a night at the Hotel de Glace in QuebecPerfect for: stepping out of your comfort zone Drive a few hours out of the historic Quebec city and you’ll find a hotel that’s a little on the chilly side of things. Why? Because it’s made out of ice. You’ll need to time your stay within a very specific window though: Hôtel de Glace is constructed in January and melts away in March each year. Because, you know, ice. With 44 rooms, a chapel, ice bar and even slides, this construction is a work of art and engineering as well as a place to rest your head (day visitors also welcome). Don’t worry about freezing in your sleep either – while the various sofas, chairs and tables are carved out of ice, beds feature soft (and warm!) mattresses, with duvets to boot. Catch and eat lobster in Atlantic CanadaPerfect for: foodies When it comes to Nova Scotia, it doesn’t get more authentic than heading out into the waters of the North Atlantic with an experienced fisherman to catch your own lobster, before enjoying an on-board seafood boil. If fishing isn’t your thing, you can still enjoy the rewards without the work – especially if you’re planning to visit in February, which sees Nova Scotia’s South Shore Lobster Crawl festival take place along the shore each year. A lobster-lover’s dream, it includes an abundance of events, including the best lobster roll challenge. Yum. Visit Iceberg Alley on the Newfoundland coastPerfect for: lovers of the natural world Ferryland, an hour south of St John’s, Newfoundland, made headlines in 2017 thanks to a rather unique neighbour, in the form of a giant iceberg. The town is located right on a part of Canada’s east coast known as Iceberg Alley, so-called because hundreds of icebergs that break off in the Arctic float down past the Newfoundland and Labrador from spring to September. And while the behemoth that took up residence on Ferryland’s doorstep was a particularly large example, you can spot these 10,000-year-old glacial giants from many viewing points along the northern and eastern coasts of this province, by boat tour or kayak. You can even track them online. Walk on the ocean floor in the Bay of FundyPerfect for: intrepid explorers Fancy going for a walk? How about a stroll along the actual ocean floor? It may sound out-of-this-world, but that doesn’t mean it’s not possible – because in the Bay of Fundy, which lies between the provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, you can do just that. It’s all thanks to the unusual variance between low and high tide in the bay, which can exceed 15 metres. At low tide, the ocean floor at the head of the bay is exposed for around three hours, with towering cliffs and sea stacks creating a surreal backdrop to seafloor exploration – which often yields the discovery of fossils, sea glass, and semi-precious stones. Then visit a few hours later to see how fast the water returns. Fly WestJet from London to Canada’s capital cities and have your own Canadian adventure