With dexterity, decisiveness and a thwack of firm leadership, Jeremy Corbyn sacked Dianne Hayter last night as shadow Brexit minister. (She can’t be fired from her elected role as deputy leader of the Lords.) With just that same speed, he expelled Alastair Campbell from the Labour party in May, as a dead-cat distraction following Labour’s disastrous European election results. What had Hayter done? She had deployed a somewhat tired old political metaphor, “the bunker mentality”, comparing Corbyn’s inner circle to the paranoid denial of disastrous reality that defined Hitler’s last days. The same was said of Thatcher’s final hours in power, in denial over her poll tax calamity. It was said of Gordon Brown in his telephone-hurling phase, of Tony Blair’s secretive sofa government and of Harold Wilson’s kitchen cabinet. It’s never a good idea to use Hitler as a metaphor for anything else, but the claim by Corbyn’s spokesman that her words were “grossly insensitive to Jewish staff” would be laughable if it didn’t look like such a pathetic attempt to divert criticism from the party’s failure to deal with antisemitism, which Corbyn should have scotched more than a year ago. The incestuously tight little McCluskeyite group who run Corbyn’s office is responsible for fatally dilatory foot-dragging on this far-left Jew-baiting bile. Panorama’s evidence of their interference was dismissed out of hand, with no pause for reflection. This cabal is to blame for Labour’s catastrophic Brexit non-position. The only time the cabal acts fast is when their own position is personally threatened by critics: any new leader would dispense with their unhelpful services. Hayter may have taken the drop in revenge for the advert in yesterday’s Guardian published by 64 Labour peers (whose number did not include Hayter), which attacked Corbyn over antisemitism. The result of these fatal errors on Brexit and antisemitism has been a flight of members: you find grieving ex-Labour people everywhere. But they make a great mistake in leaving, as their votes and voices will be needed to haul Labour back from this exceptionally weak leadership: they should rejoin. Here’s the real tragedy of making Labour less electable. Yesterday John McDonnell made an excellent speech pledging to end “the modern-day scourge” of in-work poverty within a five-year term. That is a mammoth task, one that has grown far greater in the past decade with the rapid increase in low-paid jobs. With eight million people living below the poverty threshold in working households, this will take the heaviest lifting. The proportion of children classified as poor is more than 30%, and two-thirds of them are in working families. He lays out the path with three key elements: “a structurally different economy, a social safety net of shared public service provision and a financial safety net”. He has set out his goals as follows: “As chancellor in the next Labour government, I want you to judge me by how much we reduce poverty and how much we create a more equal society. By how much people’s lives change for the better.” There it is, in a nutshell, the reason why people vote Labour. Anything that gets in the way of that objective, anything making Labour less electable, betrays that primal mission. With eloquence, he expounded why “social mobility” is the wrong target, rejecting the idea that “poverty is OK as long as some people are given the opportunity to climb out of it”. That punctures what I heard one Tory minister at a conference fringe meeting calling for: the need to “pick the diamonds from the rough”. Social mobility is what happens in more equal societies, as in Scandinavia: it’s a useless goal, just one measurement of a society’s social success or failure. His tough new poverty-abolition is no impossibility: it was strongly backed yesterday by Claire Ainsley, executive director of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation. She said: “This significant ambition to eliminate in-work poverty is the right thing to do.” Is it possible? Setting the highest targets is the best way: Tony Blair astounded a room full of poverty researchers in 1999 when he pledged to end child poverty by 2020: at every budget that pledge forced the pace, adding to tax credits that eventually lifted a million children out of poverty. Would Labour have hit that target? Without doubt, had Labour been in power for the last decade, that progress would have continued, instead of going into screeching reverse. As with the Blair/Brown child poverty target, McDonnell has chosen a target with cunning political calculation: just as poor children touch the hearts, so poverty among the “hard-working” arouses indignation, without the fear of the “moral hazard” of rewarding the feckless. Other aspects of Labour’s cleverly popular 2017 manifesto have rattled the government. Would Ofwat be delivering its severe punishment today to the greedy, profit-sucking water companies without Labour’s good commitment to take back the utilities? Yesterday Chris Grayling grovelled in front of the transport committee, promising to rescind Northern Rail’s franchise, amid more radical talk of franchising “reform”. Would student fees be up for cutting, without Labour’s pledge? Or would Nigel Farage’s Brexit party be pledging £200bn to regenerate desolate towns without Labour’s promise for an even larger regeneration bank for similar investment? Even without power, Labour still has an impact. But being in power is what really matters. If Labour arrives in office McDonnell will have to choose between competing spending needs: what comes first, the urgent need to raise benefits, or abolition of fees mainly benefiting better-off students? Socialism is the language of priorities. But first comes actually winning an election. The strong sense is that McDonnell, along with much of the shadow cabinet, is infuriated by everything that gets in the way of that. Imagine the despair of losing an election to Boris Johnson and facing another five years of social destruction. Day after day it gets clearer that Corbyn is the chief obstacle: weak, vacillating, glum and scoring the lowest ever poll ratings for an opposition leader as he fails to grasp the severity of Labour’s crisis over antisemitism and Brexit. • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist