This production is billed as a response to the Peterloo massacre, recently commemorated in the Mike Leigh movie, but in only one of the dozen site-specific performances around central Manchester do you see a period costume. Rather than do a historical re-enactment, Ireland’s politically charged company Anu, working with the Manchester international festival, links the slaughter of 18 peaceful protesters in August 1819 to the injustices of today. In an afternoon of theatre, film and dance – plus a closing concert by the BBC Philharmonic premiering a suitably turbulent elegy by composer Emily Howard and writer Michael Symmons Roberts – the company gives voice to sweatshop employees, asylum seekers and food bank users. This makes Peterloo less a story from another time than a touchstone for a city still profiting from the exploitation of the working poor. It is in the accumulated impact of the performances that The Anvil impresses. You zigzag from pub to back alley to railway arch, taking in a police public inquiry counter, the back of an ambulance and the steps of Manchester Central Library, encountering stories of struggle as you go. It’s as if the radical spirit of the 19th-century campaigners had seeped into the city’s very bricks. The events themselves are hit and miss. The best is a side-street confrontation between a taxi driver and a cycle courier that deals with the gig economy, anti-gay discrimination, immigration and overcrowding in its 20 minutes and still manages to be witty about it. In the town hall, we find ourselves waiting for a meeting with a couple in financial crisis, their poverty tearing the relationship apart; we see more of their falling out in a pub round the corner where their argument interrupts a one-man play about a soldier commanded to shoot into the Peterloo crowd. There is an engaging monologue from an ambulance worker about the nature of caring and a lively finale from women singing songs of feminist protest. But with too many pieces expressing only one emotion – angst – or over-burdened by the weight of their own message, The Anvil is better in concept than execution and lacks the emotional impact of Anu’s best work. • The Guardian is a media partner of Manchester international festival, which runs until 21 July.