No one was much bothered by what had been leaked. Kim Darroch, the UK ambassador to the US, had only reported back what had long been obvious to the entire world: that Donald Trump was vain and inept and ran a wholly dysfunctional administration. It was the sort of email that anyone might send after watching the news headlines on American television. What mattered was that the unclassified classified information had been leaked to the Mail on Sunday, and the junior Foreign Office minister, Alan Duncan, was sent out to express the government’s disgust in answer to an urgent question in the Commons. It was utterly deplorable, he said solemnly, thrilled to have something worthwhile to deplore. MPs like deploring. The government had full confidence in Darroch – in football parlance, a clear warning to the ambassador to pack his bags – and it was the responsibility of all diplomats to give honest, unvarnished assessments. Though he did add that the government didn’t necessarily agree with what had been said. Even if Jeremy Hunt did. The word “necessarily” had been chosen with care. As in, it agreed with every word, but wanted to give itself deniability headroom. This wasn’t good enough, insisted Tom Tugendhat, the chair of the foreign affairs select committee. There had been too many leaks from government departments and many military top brass were also anxious that their reports might become public knowledge – though less so now that Gavin Williamson had been sacked as defence secretary. What was required was not just an internal inquiry into the leak, but a full-on criminal investigation. “Steady on, old boy,” Duncan replied evenly. One didn’t want to be too hasty. You could never tell where a criminal investigation might end up. Who knows, it might even turn out that the leaker was someone close to the next prime minister, and then where we would be? Far better to find a special adviser to act as the fall guy and then let the whole thing drop. Least said, soonest mended. The shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry, was also determined to be a model of statecraft. All that mattered was a point of principle and she didn’t want to get involved in any possible conspiracy theories – though many others were more than happy to do just that. The Scottish National party’s Stephen Gethins detected the dead hand of Nigel Farage in all of this. Not least because the only way Isabel Oakeshott, the journalist who got the leaked emails, ever gets a scoop is if he or Arron Banks leave it conveniently to one side for her. Duncan shook his head. Everyone should just chill out a little. Just because the story had been handed to one of the country’s most prominent Brexit-supporting hacks, one shouldn’t leap to conclusions that the leak had been intended to undermine the credibility of a UK ambassador who was understood to have misgivings about leaving the EU. Instead, we should just try to think of it as a bit of a coincidence. A piece of bad luck and crap timing. Though there was an upside to all this, Duncan went on to say. The fact that Darroch had been able to speak so freely about Trump – and it hadn’t all been nasty: he had also mentioned that the president could sometimes speak in joined-up sentences – was testament to the special relationship between the US and the UK. Just try to imagine the hard-hitting emails Woody Johnson, the US ambassador in London, might be sending back to Washington. The rubbish cartoon channels. The queues at Alton Towers. People still moaning about the penalty in the women’s soccerball semi-final. So, for a second time, please could everyone stop with the conspiracies. Some hope. Conservatives Julian Lewis and Andrew Bridgen were adamant that the leak must have come from No 10 itself, with Theresa May desperate to replace Darroch with Mark Sedwill, the head of the civil service and another remainer, in one of her last acts as prime minister. That she had resorted to giving the leak to a Brexit journalist merely illustrated how low she had sunk. Typical establishment dirty tricks to undermine those men of the people Boris Johnson and Farage. Bill Cash went further still. The fact that Darroch had even uttered a word of criticism about such a paragon of goodliness as the Donald merely proved he was totally unfit to be ambassador. A diplomat with a clear eye would surely have reported on the clarity of the Chosen Orange One’s thinking and the brilliance of his teeth. “ONE TRUE BREXIT,” he yelled. “THE THOUSAND-YEAR BREXIT.” That was too much even for many Tories. It’s long past Cash’s bedtime. And time for his medication. Duncan continued to tread a fine line between supporting Darroch in thought and deed and maintaining some objectivity. He really had no idea how many people might have received the emails. Perhaps 100 or people initially, but after Boris, Gavin, the Russians and anyone else with an interest in the Tory leadership race had got their hands on them, the figure could quickly run into thousands. Sensing he had overreached himself, Duncan begged MPs to go back to doing what they did best: go heavy on the moral outrage and forget the details. Besides, Trump would be bound to prove Darroch’s judgement right soon enough by sticking his nose in, and then the shit would really hit the fan. Sure enough, just after 7.30pm, the US president took time out from watching Tom and Jerry to tweet that May was useless, Darroch was a nonentity, and he wouldn’t have anything to do with either of them again. We were on a war footing unless the UK backed down and appointed an ambassador who knew how to brown-nose properly. Boris, Farage and Oakeshott let out a cheer. Job done for the Brexiters.