Is a return to Anfield on the cards for Philippe Coutinho? Don’t rule it out because Liverpool haven’t, say Le10Sport, a media outlet that must know what its talking about because it’s got quite the hip10ster title. Having left Liverpool 18 months ago to join Barcelona in a dream move that quickly became a nightmare, the Brazilian playmaker is being touted with a move elsewhere and the word in Spain is that his former employers might be open to taking back their prodigal son. Meanwhile in the Spanish capital, Real Madrid are prepared to offer Liverpool Marco Asensio in exchange for Sadio Mané, in a potential swap deal that should prompt no end of honking laughter in the corridors of Anfield. Manchester United are ready to welcome Wissam Ben Yedder to Old Trafford irrespective of whether the mooted move of Romelu Lukaku to Inter works out. Despite rumours linking him to Paris Saint-Germain and Barcelona, reports from Spain say the Sevilla striker has already agreed personal terms with United, who will now ramp up their interest in Sporting midfielder Bruno Fernandes. United are also being linked with a move for Aston Villa midfielder John McGinn, but will have to bid the thick end of £50m to have even the remotest chance of securing his services. Napoli could muscle in on Arsenal’s attempt to buy Kieran Tierney from Celtic, in a state of affairs that may force the Gunners to up their previous bid from 25p and a handful of Tesco petrol vouchers to a more reasonable £25m for a 22-year-old left-back who has already made 170 appearances for the Scottish champions. In other transfer hijack news, reports in France say Manchester United may try to put the kibosh on Tanguy Ndombele’s move to Spurs. Lyon are understood to have agreed a fee with Tottenham for the midfielder, but the player and his people have yet to thrash out those all important personal terms. Juventus are giving Burnley midfielder Dwight McNeil the glad eye, while Bristol City defender Adam Webster could be off to Aston Villa. No, really, Juventus are giving Burnley midfielder Dwight McNeil the glad eye, having been impressed with his performances for England’s Under-20s at the Toulon Tournament. Manchester City, Arsenal and Everton are also keeping tabs on the 19-year-old. Having consciously uncoupled from Newcastle when the clock struck 12 last night, Rafael Benítez is now a free agent and open to offers from employers who might appreciate a man of his talents. Having reacted badly to news of his imminent departure last week, the mood of Newcastle fans is unlikely to be improved by the news that Neil Redfearn is set to take over as caretaker manager for the beginning of pre-season training this week. According to The Shields Gazette, the club’s under-23 coach will put out the cones and blow his whistle while Mike Ashley mulls over a shortlist of potential new first team coaches featuring such names as Giovanni van Bronkhorst, Patrick Vieira and Gennaro Gattuso. And finally, in other managerial news, Frank Lampard’s Derby County are resigned to losing their manager to Chelsea in the coming days, but envisage a brave new dawn glorying in the moniker of Philip Cocu’s Derby County.