The Wallabies are enjoying a rare moment in the sun after their gritty 16-10 win against Argentina on Saturday night, but a long, dark cloud is drifting across the Tasman. The Wallabies almost always beat Argentina and they almost always win at Suncorp Stadium in Brisbane, so in a way their victory against the Pumas was only a perfunctory victory. But after suffering their worst season since 1958 last year and coming off a 35-17 loss to the Springboks in Johannesburg the previous week, a win’s a win for the Wallabies. With the World Cup in Japan around the corner, the Wallabies needed to experience the exhilarating feeling of victory to restore self-belief to a team that had gotten used to losing. Indeed, there was much to like about the Wallabies’ performance, none more so than that of five-eighth Christian Lealiifano, the cancer survivor who showed so much courage to resume his rugby career, let alone play Test football again. At 31 years of age, Lealiifano may not be as quick as he used to be nor as physical, but it is his beautiful mind that separates him from the other playmakers in the Wallabies squad. Lealiifano at five-eighth is like having an assistant coach on the field. He created the Wallabies’ sole try to winger Reece Hodge by executing a rehearsed move from a scrum. Using big centres Samu Kerevi and Tevita Kuridrani as decoys, Lealiifano put blind winger Marike Koroibete into a gap and, two passes later, Hodge was over. Lealiifano’s abilities as a communicator and an organiser were most noticeable after he left the field in the 51st minute, when the Wallabies’ play started to degenerate badly. But the main reason Michael Cheika should seriously consider starting Lealiifano at five-eighth in the World Cup is his style of play suits the Wallabies better than the other number 10 candidates. Lealiifano takes the ball to the line better than the other options and has the ability to execute a flat attack under pressure. It was appropriate the Wallabies’ try originated from a scrum, an area of the game they dominated so strongly. In a reversal of form from Johannesburg, the Wallabies were awarded five scrum penalties against a team renowned for its scrummaging and coached by former Wallabies scrum coach Mario Ledesma. If the Wallabies can maintain that solid platform, it will be a major plus for them at the World Cup. The other pleasing feature of the Wallabies’ game was their defence. Unlike most other major teams that employ a rush defence, the Wallabies are using an almost passive rugby league-style defensive pattern, emphasising patience and discipline, which they call “soaking”. The Wallabies managed to restrict Argentina to one try, but the Pumas are not a prolific try-scoring team. They also seemed a bit flat after going so close to beating the All Blacks in Buenos Aires the previous week and did not threaten much. After leaking so many tries last year, the Wallabies had to try something different, but their new defensive system has not yet been fully tested. It will be interesting to see how the Wallabies’ new defensive pattern works against the All Blacks in the opening Bledisloe Cup Test in Perth on Saturday week because the Kiwis will take and use whatever time and space is given to them. For all the good things the Wallabies did against the Pumas, there are areas they will need to markedly improve if they are to be successful in the Bledisloe Cup and the World Cup. While the Wallabies are heavily focused on getting across the advantage-line, they do not always seem to know what to do once they get there. The Pumas dropped a lot of ball in attack, but there was little effective counter-attack from the Wallabies. And their skills still need to be honed a lot sharper. Hodge may not have scored his try against a better defensive team because of some of the poor passing in the attacking move that led up to it. It is difficult to read too much into the form of the phony war that is the Rugby Championship. The All Blacks have not been at the top of their game, beating Argentina narrowly and drawing with the Springboks. All Blacks coach Steve Hansen has been in experimental mode to prepare for the World Cup, but the Kiwis will start to get serious in the Bledisloe Cup. The All Blacks have held it since 2003. Significantly, Hansen is departing after the World Cup. He will not want to be known as the coach who lost the Bledisloe Cup, particularly as he will not have a chance to regain it. New Zealand have to win only one of two Bledisloe Tests to retain the cup. At some point in the series, the All Blacks will produce close to their best rugby and the Wallabies will need to be ready for the dark cloud that is surely coming – or their time in the sun will be brief.