There are times covering women’s cricket when you feel that you should not be writing about Ellyse Perry. Not again, not so soon. For the outlets that give little time to the sport, Perry is their exception: she has a broader celebrity that they want a piece of, even if she finds that situation perplexing. But however firmly you decide that your focus should be elsewhere, here comes Perry taking seven wickets, Perry scoring an Ashes hundred, Perry summoning the spotlight that in large part she would prefer to avoid. On the second day of the ongoing Test at Taunton, Perry was more locked on for a century than any player who has ever held a bat. At no time through the first day had she looked like getting out. Resuming on 84 she was never going to give it away. Perry standing at the crease has a composure all her own. On a docile pitch where England’s bowlers had to rely on Australians making mistakes, they had the misfortune of running up against a player who doesn’t. In the shorter formats Perry balances her tendency for caution and accumulation with judicious moments of attack. When an occasional Test match comes along, she can push that slider all the way to her preferred side. Across those two days on her way to her second Test century, Perry punished every bad ball and defused every threat. Following her epic unbeaten 213 at North Sydney Oval two years ago, she added another 116 runs. Only in the milestone moment did things get jittery, with Rachael Haynes at the non-striker’s end provoking a couple of false starts before a single thanks to an attempted run out. “Rach just really wanted to get the single for me, and we both thought we were much faster runners than we actually were,” said Perry after play. “It was kind of fitting that’s how I ended up bringing up my hundred.” That self-deprecation was unwarranted after a masterclass of control. Perry’s unbeaten streak from her previous Test reached 329 across 655 deliveries, a record in the format on both measures. So infrequent are women’s Tests that her most recent dismissal in the format had come in 2015, a year and a half before Barack Obama left the White House. The Sydney hundred had felt like a transformative event, coming in the evening time slot of a day-night Test with huge numbers of cricket followers caught up in her march to the double ton. The current innings was lower profile while confirming the quality of the first. But along with the admiration for these performances there’s also a poignancy, that a player of this ability has so few occasions to show her skill. When Steve Smith announced himself as a generational talent, it began with his first Test century in the last Ashes Test of 2013. He made two more in the return series that summer, another to help win a series in South Africa, then unfurled his banner with four centuries in four Tests against India a season later. The four and a bit years until his fall from grace harvested 23 tons from 49 matches. Across her most recent four years Perry has played three Tests. She has more to her name than most current players, with a grand tally of eight. But she played the first of those in 2008, as a teenager. She batted as low as No 10 in those early outings, left not out on 18 when her team was dismissed in 2009, then 17 not out when Alex Blackwell pulled off one of the great declaration gambles in 2011. In 2013 Perry was 31 not out whacking declaration runs, then wasn’t required in the second dig. The following January in Perth she was moved up to No 7, coming in at 37 for 5 to rescue Australia with 71 before taking five wickets. In the final run chase on a spicy WACA pitch, it was Perry’s dismissal for 31 that was the turning point for an England win. Her next outing in Canterbury in 2015 didn’t yield runs, but her nine wickets in the match bowled Australia to victory on one of the most sluggish surfaces the game has seen. Then to North Sydney, that triumphant, joyful, unbeaten night. It’s in these last couple of years that you get the sense of Perry as a batter who has truly hit her stride. Her absurd 777 runs in the last Big Bash was a tribute to her cruising altitude. She’s ticked off a half-century 27 times in 47 one-dayers. Then come those Test outings, so isolated but so flawless. There is a great joy in all of this, the rarity of watching the very best at their very best. And running through it are those other feelings. That this is a player valued for marketability more than achievement. That this is a player circumscribed in her chance to perform at her peak. That one of the grandest talents the game has seen is so rarely given her full canvas, and instead is asked to do her best with postcards. Ellyse Perry may not play another Test. She’ll be 29 this year. Injuries happen. Unless those who control her sport change their minds, her next chance will be two and a half years away. Four years before the next in England. Even if fortune is kind, will she play two more matches? Three? How many blanks will there be left to colour in between the lines of her career? There is more to this than a picture in the paper and a smile on a Weet-Bix box. There will be so much more that we could have had, but didn’t.