Three years ago, Charley Hull’s destiny appeared clear. She spent months driving to Woburn, past a giant poster of herself, for twice-weekly practice sessions as the Women’s British Open honed into view. At Hull’s home club, the sense prevailed that this golden child of British golf was primed for major glory. A tie for 17th in 2016 was hardly a disastrous finish but it fell way short of expectations, primarily her own. From the same generation, it was Georgia Hall who tasted major success first, in the British Open of 12 months ago. Neither is Hull the top-ranked British player in the world rankings, a position claimed by Bronte Law. It was little surprise, then, to hear Hull play down the significance of this major’s Woburn return. The backdrop will be serene when she tees of shortly after 7.30am on Thursday morning, just the way she wants it. “Before, I’d play the golf course a lot,” Hull said. “I’d be down here a lot and feel like a lot of the pressure was on me but it’s not really [now] at all. There’s loads of golfers in the field that are in it to win it and I just feel I’m just going to go out there and enjoy the whole experience. “I’ve not been here as much. In fact, I took Monday off and didn’t come down, and I’m only playing nine holes today. I’m just trying to get my work done and go back to the hotel. I like the way they’ve set the golf course this year. They’ve actually set it up a lot longer than last time, which is nice.” Hull admitted Hall’s success “made me work harder” but denied any element of professional jealousy. The pair are friends. Hull is open about a desire to win a major but the concept will not consume her. “It would be great,” she said. “But I’m just going to go out there and enjoy it. I’d love to win a major, especially on home turf, I think it would be great. But I’m just going to go out there and enjoy it and the more I enjoy it, hopefully it gives me a chance to win out there. “I can’t put too much pressure on myself in golf because sometimes I feel like I do actually. I would really love to win this event, especially on home turf but again, I’m not going to say it’s my be-all and end-all because I don’t want to put pressure on myself.” Hull has recovered from a bout of food poisoning that affected her performance at last week’s Evian Championship. Lexi Thompson left her passport in her golf bag when exiting that event, causing a delay to the arrival in England for 40 players’ equipment. Thompson’s luggage had to be traced in a van which was carrying multiple sets of clubs. “I didn’t realise that I was going to cause so much delay in the bags for all the players, and I’m very sorry about that,” Thompson said. “I would be upset, too, if I was the other players. I can’t apologise enough.” Another awkward moment arrived on Wednesday when Royal Porthcawl was confirmed as the Women’s Open venue in 2021. While clearly excited, the club’s captain Rhys James insisted this could be a precursor for the men’s equivalent heading to Wales. “The club is certainly interested in the potential for bringing the Open to Royal Porthcawl,” he said. “I think we all saw what a massive success the activities at Portrush have been in the last 10 days and I think working closely with the R&A, with the Welsh government and other related organisations, it is certainly something that we would like to consider.” This was news to the R&A’s Johnnie Cole-Hamilton, who from two seats away landed a knockout blow Andy Ruiz Jr would have been proud of. “We have no plans to take the Open Championship to Royal Porthcawl,” he said. “They’ve hosted the Senior Open, they’re about to host the Women’s British Open. But currently the Open Championship is not in the discussions. We’re very happy with the 10 venues we have at the moment.” Ouch.