Australia’s best chance of winning an Ashes series in England since 2001 lies in the hands of their bowlers. It is Josh Hazlewood, though, rather than Pat Cummins, Mitchell Starc or James Pattinson who perhaps will play the most significant role once the first Test starts at Edgbaston on Thursday. The 28-year-old is more of a craftsman than a speed merchant, the most skilful bowler in a squad containing six seamers, but one still capable of breaking 90mph. Hazlewood was left out of Australia’s World Cup squad following a serious back injury sustained in January. He could have played in the tournament but was rested specifically for the Ashes. To say he is ready to get stuck into England’s fragile batting lineup would be an understatement. Good news for Australia. Bad news for Jason Roy, for whom Thursday will mark the opener’s second Test appearance following his debut against Ireland at Lord’s. Hazlewood was at pains to point out he has specific plans for a batsman who terrorised Australia’s bowlers during the World Cup semi-final at Edgbaston, Roy scoring 85 in 65 balls as England eased to an emphatic victory. The Surrey batsman was less dynamic against Ireland, dismissed for five in a first innings where England were bowled out for 85 before scoring 72 in the second. That knock showed promise but it came from No 3 after Roy opted for a nightwatchman in Jack Leach late on the first day. Even then Leach outshone the 29-year-old – and every other England batsman – by top-scoring with 92. Edgbaston and Australia will be a completely different prospect for a batsman who has spent the majority of his first-class career in the middle-order. Hazlewood knows it and he has a specific plan for Roy. “He’s only played one Test match and it’s a lot different opening the batting in a Test than a one-day game, that’s for sure. In England opening is probably the toughest place to bat. We’ll see how he goes in Test cricket.” Aaron Finch, Australia’s one-day captain who, like Roy, is one of the best one-day openers in the world, played five Tests last year but will not be involved in the Ashes after struggling to cope in cricket’s longest format. “Finchy found it a big step up,” Hazlewood said. “He found the ball swung and seamed around and the wickets were a lot different to a one-day wicket. To play attacking cricket in those conditions is tough. “He’d played a lot of his four-day cricket at five or six and I think Roy is the same at Surrey. It’s hard to bat five at a level below and then open in Test cricket.” Hazlewood took 16 wickets at 25.75 during Australia’s last Ashes series in England four years ago. “If I compare it to 2015 I’ve played a lot more cricket now, I have a bit more confidence in my own ability and am a bit more seasoned,” he said. “I’m excited and a bit nervous too.” England have their own bowler capable of testing the outer limits of the speed gun in Jofra Archer, who is unlikely to make his Test debut at Edgbaston because of a side injury. However, Hazlewood is not convinced pace will prove key during this Ashes series. “It’s great to have air speed but it’s more important where you bowl,” he said. “We saw with Ireland, in the right conditions those guys create havoc. Over here it’s more where you bowl.”