Tropical Storm Barry strengthened into a hurricane on Saturday as it neared the Louisiana coast, threatening millions with heavy rains and storm surge. The storm was expected to weaken after it moved inland. In a morning update, National Hurricane Center (NHC) director Ken Graham said Barry was gathering “a big slough of moisture” just off the central Louisiana coast, meaning “a lot of rain is on the way”. Delivering his update using Facebook Live from the NHC, Graham pointed to a screen showing a big swirling mess of airborne water. “That is just an amazing amount of moisture,” he said. “That is off the chart.” He said the storm was moving so slowly that heavy rain will likely continue throughout the weekend across Louisiana. The highest tornado threat was on the east side of the storm, along the Mississippi coast and Mobile Bay. Graham also said the already swollen Mississippi was not the only waterway to worry about: other rivers and creeks are expected to overflow across several states. Graham reminded viewers that “83% of fatalities from these systems have been from inland rain. So let’s stay off the roads. Let’s prevent these preventable fatalities.” Authorities said water was flowing over the tops of a few levees in areas south of New Orleans. Officials said the levees were in lower Plaquemines Parish and were not the main levees protecting the Mississippi. Plaquemines Parish emergency workers told news outlets they were getting crews to check the levees and make any repairs. Louisiana Lt Gov Billy Nungesser told WVUE-TV anyone south of Myrtle Grove should evacuate from the finger of low-lying, flood-prone land that follows the Mississippi to the Gulf of Mexico. Much of Plaquemines Parish has been under an evacuation order since Thursday. The US coast guard said it was rescuing more than a dozen people stranded on a remote island. Petty Officer Lexie Preston said some people were on rooftops on the Isle de Jean Charles, about 45 miles south of New Orleans. Preston said four people and a cat had been taken out on a helicopter. She said a boat was also heading to the area. She did not know the condition of those rescued. The island is the home of the Isle de Jean Charles Band of Biloxi-Chitimacha-Choctaw Tribe and is part of the southern Louisiana bayous threatened by rising sea levels. The storm was moving north-west at about 5mph and a turn to the north was expected late on Saturday or early on Sunday. Forecasters said Barry could dump between 10in and 20in of rain over south-central and south-east Louisiana and south-west Mississippi. Donald Trump declared a state of emergency for Louisiana, for the first Atlantic hurricane of 2019. Nearly 50,000 people were without power on Saturday morning. City officials warned New Orleans residents to secure their homes, stock up on supplies and prepare to stay indoors. While authorities refrained from ordering evacuations, tourism officials reported an exodus of hotel guests. Some airlines, including British Airways, cancelled outbound flights on Saturday. A performance scheduled for Sunday by the Rolling Stones at the Mercedes-Benz Superdome, which was an emergency shelter during Hurricane Katrina in 2005, was postponed until Monday. The storm was widely seen as a key test of flood defences put in place after Katrina, which inundated much of the city and killed about 1,800 people. New Orleans is virtually surrounded by rising waters. Benjamin Schott, a meteorologist, said: “Tropical Storm Barry is a dangerous and life-threatening storm.” Authorities were keeping a particularly watchful eye on the levee system built to contain the lower Mississippi, which winds through New Orleans and was already well above flood stage from months of heavy upstream rainfall over the midwest. A coastal storm surge into the mouth of the Mississippi is expected to push its crest to 5.8 metres in New Orleans, the highest level since 1950 and dangerously close to the top of the city’s levees. LaToya Cantrell, the city’s mayor, said 48 hours of heavy downpours could overwhelm pumps designed to purge streets and storm drains of excess water. “There is no system in the world that can handle that amount of rainfall in such a short period,” Cantrell said on Twitter. New Orleans was already saturated after thunderstorms drenched the city with a foot of rain on Wednesday.