Even before Boris Johnson had been to Buckingham Palace on Wednesday afternoon to accept the Queen’s invitation to form a government, some very senior Conservative colleagues with whom he had once sat in the same cabinet were already plotting with Labour’s high command on how to stop the new prime minister taking the UK out of the European Union without a deal. In the early afternoon of that day, after he had formally handed in his resignation as chancellor of the exchequer, Philip Hammond met Labour’s Brexit spokesman, Keir Starmer, in the House of Commons. Former political foes made common cause. They discussed the need for a cross-party plan of action that they agreed would have to be finessed and thrashed out throughout August to thwart no deal, using parliamentary votes and devices to stop it in its tracks. For some time, Starmer had been in talks with other senior Tories, including former ministers Oliver Letwin and Dominic Grieve, on how to prevent the UK crashing out without an agreement on 31 October, an outcome Johnson says he does not want but is prepared to see happen, if that is what it takes to deliver the will of the British people. Now, released from collective responsibility, Hammond was free to take part too. The fact that a just-resigned Tory chancellor could start working with the opposition against the new Tory PM almost before the ink was dry on his own resignation shows how destructive Brexit has become of traditional party loyalties. The Observer understands that Starmer, Hammond, Letwin and Grieve will form a core group planning the next moves. But they are expected to work with others including Greg Clark and David Gauke, who both also quit the cabinet before Johnson could fire them, and the Labour benches by the likes of Yvette Cooper. Plenty of MPs would like to see some form of Remain alliance The cross-party group knows they have not just to discuss – but to agree – their joint strategy in detail across the summer. They realise they cannot afford to return to the Commons in September floating different propositions, when the party conferences are approaching and 31 October is getting ever nearer. There are three main ideas they have as to how they can stop no deal. The first is to try to build parliamentary majorities behind plans to amend Brexit-related bills that are passing through parliament, introducing clauses into them that would mandate the prime minister to seek an extension beyond 31 October if a Brexit deal had not been agreed before then. This was the method used by Cooper and the former Tory Nick Boles in the spring, but their plan never came into effect as by then Theresa May had already extended the Brexit deadline herself. There are five bills that still have to pass, they say, before Brexit could happen: on trade, agriculture, fisheries, immigration and financial services. All could be amended to mandate the new PM to ask for an extension. Following Johnson’s ministerial purge of Brexit non-believers last week, there is a view that many more Tories will now be willing to back such amendments to block deal. A second option being considered is to try again to seize control of the parliamentary timetable and pass a private member’s bill that would also oblige the prime minister to seek an extension, if a deal with the EU had not been reached. Starmer travelled to Brussels last week and spoke to EU officials who suggested that, if requested, another extension would be agreed if for a specific purpose, such as a general election or another referendum. The third option that is being discussed is that of backing a motion of no confidence in the government that would be put down by Labour if a no deal looked on the cards. Hammond and other Tories, including Kenneth Clarke, have already indicated they could support such a vote, though it would be a last resort. If a no-confidence vote were to be passed and to lead to a general election, there are now increasing calls from Remainers in all parties to go much further than just co-operating over parliamentary votes. Plenty of MPs would like to see some form of Remain alliance, in which parties which oppose Brexit would agree not to stand candidates against each other in an election. Today, writing in the Observer, Jo Swinson, the new leader of the Liberal Democrats, suggests she is willing to explore all ideas to stop Brexit. “To build that liberal force our country needs I will work with whoever shares our values in whatever shape or form,” she says. The arrival of Boris Johnson may have increased talk of a No Deal Brexit, but it has also spurred cross party discussions on how prevent the new Prime Minister foisting such an outcome on the country.