Senegal, regular producers of remarkable players, have been champions of Africa exactly as many times as Djibouti, Andorra, Burnley, Richard Keys, Danny Mills and Weird Uncle Fiver. So when Senegalese fans look at their international trophy cabinet, all they see is Ali Dia’s gong for top b@ntz and a certified letter from El Hadji Diouf in which he confirms he is the greatest sportsman who ever lived. But all that could be spittle under the bridge if the Teranga Lions do the business in Cairo on Friday, when they take on Algeria in the 2019 Africa Cup of Nations final. Algeria’s record in the tournament is only slightly better than that of their opponents: their only win was back in 1990, when, as it happens, they ousted Senegal in the semi-final. So if history has any role to play in this match, which only a fraud trying to fill space would claim it does, then it’s definitely in favour of Algeria, who have never lost to Senegal at that Afcon. They even beat Senegal earlier in this one, prevailing 1-0 in a group-stage clash after the referee interpreted a two-man take-down of Sadio Mané in the penalty box as a textbook tackle that would not even have Sir Harry Kane hitting the ground. If only the referee in Senegal’s last match had been as lenient, then Kalidou Koulibaly would not have been shown a yellow card when the ball ricocheted on to his helpless hand, leaving him suspended for Friday’s final. Senegal’s manager, Aliou Cissé, is undaunted and foresees his team ending years of hurt for his country. “Senegal has always had great players,” he lectured as Diouf passed around photocopies of rankings excreted by Pele in 2002. “This may not be the best ever generation but we have the desire.” But which team have the legs? Players from both sides have been locked into a sort of time-travel, still finishing last season while their clubs are well into preparations for the next one. “Both teams will be quite tired,” conceded Atal. “So I think the match is going to be played in the head. We are going to be lucky enough to have a lot of supporters there so may that will give us the boost we need to finish our adventure beautifully.” “I can only apologise to our fanbase for putting them through that. But out of the darkest hour comes the lightest moment” – Huddersfield commercial suit Sean Jarvis admits that the new kit will not have a publicity-hungry betting company’s name across it, sash-style, after all, because it was just badly-judged b@ntz. “While not as well put together as Paul Buller’s Newcarsenal, I can’t help thinking that Arsecastle more comedically sums up a merger of the super-whinger clubs. I am only thankful that Bournemouth wasn’t suggested in place of Newcastle, as that would surely leave a bad taste in the mouth” – Paul Dixon (and many others). “I didn’t take the bait and I didn’t google HHAGTFABM. In other news I’ve just retired from international football” – Ian Henderson. “Can I just send my appreciation for your very clever reference to Lindisfarne’s classic Fog on the Tyne. Being the kind of person that, for some reason, remembers lyrics to songs I listened to ages ago, you really raised the bar from the already high level you operate on on a daily basis. More please!” – Magnus Nell. “Re Daniel Sturridge’s football suspension for betting: perhaps the nation’s favourite dog-lover could consider having a flutter on himself not to score this season. He might well get a payout” – Marc Meldrum. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’the day prize is … Paul Dixon, who wins a copy of Here We Go: Everton in the 1980s – the players’ stories. Matthijs de Ligt says his move to Juventus was to do with Catenaccio, not cash. “It is the country that loves defending the most in the world,” blathered De Ligt, while leafing through a copy of Michele Tossani’s Zonal Defending The Italian Way. “If you talk about Italian players, for me the most common names that come up are the defenders.” “I am not Rafa Benitez.” Steve Bruce solves one of the great mysteries of the world. Ole Gunnar Solskjær has been speaking about Fred – remember him? “He is one that we hope is going to take another step this season,” he fantasised. “Hopefully missing 10 days of pre-season won’t affect him.” Amazingly, Pep Guardiola is now happy with the most expensively-assembled squad in football history, and is no longer desperate to upgrade his back four. “We have three incredible central defenders,” he said. Jürgen Klopp is a happy man. “The owners like what I do, he said. “I like what the owners are doing. I love the team, they are brilliant. Melwood is sensational. I’m looking forward to going to [the new training ground in] Kirkby and all these things. There is always a step forward.” Yes, it’s quiet. And Antonio Conte has been not talking about Romelu Lukaku. “You know very well I like this player,” he said. “But I repeat, today Lukaku is a player of Man Utd … for this reason it’s right I don’t talk about Lukaku. I have great respect for United ... I consider him an important player for us to improve.” “The last Burnley game I missed in any competition was on 10 April 1974: Newcastle United away.” Burnley fan Dave Burnley on his unbreakable bond with, yes, Burnley. Patriotism and soft power: how Egypt sought to gain from Afcon. Ruth Michaelson and Nick Ames investigate what has mostly been a month to forget for the host nation. Bad news for Kieran Trippier, reports Sid Lowe. At Atlético Madrid, he will be working with Oscar Ortega, the coach who makes players run until they vomit. How gambling giant SportPesa made waves in Africa – and the Premier League. Proper journalist David Conn, in tandem with Lionel Faull and Atanas Tchobanov, finds concerns that Everton’s sponsor, a Kenyan-Bulgarian firm, profits from an online gambling craze.Paul Doyle on Ray Freeman, the ‘madman’ manager and trailblazer coach who enjoyed such success in Norway with Brann in the 1970s that he was awarded honorary citizen status. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! 