A key Bank of England policymaker has warned that interest rates could be slashed to almost zero if the UK’s next prime minister opts for a no-deal Brexit. Gertjan Vlieghe, a member of the rate-setting monetary policy committee, said that interest rates could be dramatically cut from the current levels of 0.75% in order to cushion the blow of leaving the EU without a transition agreement. “On balance, I think it is more likely that I would move to cut [the] bank rate towards the effective lower bound of close to 0% in the event of a no-deal scenario,” Vlieghe said during a speech at Thompson Reuters in London. He cautioned that it could take some time to reverse those interest rate cuts, depending on how the economy recovers from the shock of a no deal and a potential spike in inflation caused by a slump in the value of the pound. “It is highly uncertain when I would want to reverse these interest rate cuts,” he said. Vlieghe’s comments go further than other Bank of England policymakers. Some have signalled that interest rates would need to be trimmed in the case of a no-deal Brexit but have stopped short of indicating how far they could drop. The probability that Britain will leave the bloc without a transition agreement has grown since Theresa May announced she would be stepping down as prime minister. Jeremy Hunt and Boris Johnson, the Tory leadership candidates, have said they are prepared to opt for no deal if necessary. In a ‘no deal’ scenario, the UK would leave the single market and the customs union immediately with no ‘divorce’ arrangement in place. The European court of justice would cease to have jurisdiction over the UK, and the country would also leave various other institutions including Euratom and Europol. The UK would no longer be paying into the EU budget, nor would it hand over the £39bn divorce payment. There would be no transition period. Free movement of people into the UK from the EU27 would stop. Trade between the UK and the EU would be governed by basic WTO rules. The UK government has already indicated that it will set low or no tariffs on goods coming into the country. This would lower the price of imports - making it harder for British manufacturers to compete with foreign goods. If the UK sets the tariffs to zero on goods coming in from the EU, under WTO ‘most favoured nation’ rules it must also offer the same zero tariffs to other countries. WTO rules only cover goods - they do not apply to financial services, a significant part of the UK’s economy. Trading under WTO rules will also require border checks, which could cause delays at ports, and a severe challenge to the peace process in Ireland without alternative arrangements in place to avoid a hard border. Some ‘no deal’ supporters have claimed that the UK can use article 24 of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) to force the EU to accept a period of up to ten years where there are no tariffs while a free trade agreement (FTA) is negotiated. However, the UK cannot invoke article 24 unilaterally - the EU would have to agree to it. In previous cases where the article has been used, the two sides had a deal in place, and it has never been used to replicate something of the scale and complexity of the EU and the UK’s trading relationship. The Director General of the WTO, Roberto Azevêdo, has told Prospect magazine that "in simple factual terms in this scenario, you could expect to see the application of tariffs between the UK and EU where currently there are none." Until some agreements are in place, a ‘no deal’ scenario will place extra overheads on UK businesses - for example the current government advice is that all drivers, including lorries and commercial vehicles, will require extra documentation to be able to drive in Europe after 31 October if there is no deal. Those arguing for a ‘managed’ no deal envisage that a range of smaller sector-by-sector bilateral agreements could be quickly put into place as mutual self-interest between the UK and EU to avoid introducing or rapidly remove this kind of bureaucracy. Martin Belam However, if Britain manages to dodge a hard Brexit, Vlieghe said the Bank of England may be prepared to raise interest rates to 1.0% in one year, 1.25% in two years and 1.75% in three years’ time. But those increases would likely depend on the state of the global economy, he said.