Boris Johnson has been urged to “stop playing Russian roulette” with the sheep and lamb industry by threatening a no-deal Brexit ahead of a visit to Wales, where he will promise farming has a bright future. The new prime minister said he would “always back Britain’s great farmers” and promised to “make sure that Brexit works for them”. “That means scrapping the common agricultural policy and signing new trade deals – our amazing food and farming sector will be ready and waiting to continue selling ever more not just here but around the world,” he said. “Once we leave the EU on 31 October, we will have a historic opportunity to introduce new schemes to support farming – and we will make sure that farmers get a better deal.” Johnson is expected to visit a farm, meet Mark Drakeford, the Labour first minister of Wales, and possibly go to Brecon and Radnorshire, where the Conservatives are expected to lose a seat to the Lib Dems on Thursday in a byelection. But ahead of his trip, he was warned that 40% tariffs on meat exported to the EU could lead to the mass slaughter of sheep. The first task of any new PM involves rewarding some loyal allies and disappointing more. Several Johnson loyalists have had their eye on the post of chancellor, but only one can do it. A complete clearout of May’s remain-minded ministers provided plenty of opportunity to reward the Brexit believers though. The issue that will define a Johnson premiership. He has promised to rapidly renegotiate almost all of May’s departure deal, ditching the Irish backstop border guarantee policy – something that would seem a huge task over any timescale, let alone little more than 12 weeks, a fair proportion of which is taken up by a summer break. If this fails, he will be set on a no-deal departure for 31 October, and a likely huge clash with MPs. If Brexit wasn’t enough, a new Johnson government must immediately take steps to make sure he doesn’t begin his time in No 10 with a slide into war. The situation in the gulf is complex, fast-moving and hugely dangerous. Johnson did not cover himself in glory as foreign secretary, especially over Iran. It will be his task to prove he has learned. Johnson will start as PM with a working Commons majority of four, thanks to the DUP, but within weeks it is likely to be down to three if as expected the Liberal Democrats win in the Brecon and Radnorshire byelection. If this wasn’t tricky enough, a small but significant section of Tory MPs openly detest Johnson, and will not want to help him out - and with his cabinet sackings, the ‘Gaukward squad’ of former senior cabinet members set on blocking a no-deal Brexit swelled in ranks. Such was the fiscal largesse on display from both Johnson and Jeremy Hunt during the hustings process that much as he will seek to kick any decisions towards an autumn budget, voters – especially Tory members – will be expecting both tax cuts and more spending on areas such as education and the police. This might sound glib, but there is a lot to consider – during the three-plus years of Brexit introversion May’s government failed to properly grasp any of a series of long-term, pressing national problems: the crisis in social care; the future of the NHS; a climate emergency; the increasingly insecure future of work; a broken housing market; rampant poverty, including among many working people. This is a huge workload for any new administration. Critics might say this is Johnson’s single biggest challenge. The leadership process has shown that while he endlessly harked back to supposed successes as London mayor – an often ceremonial role with relatively few powers – Johnson was notably quieter about his period as foreign secretary. Being prime minister is like the latter, to a factor of 10 – a never-ending succession of red boxes containing vital documents, of urgent briefings, of a whole system hanging on your decisions. Johnson has a tendency to ignore advice, pluck statistics out of the air and rely on sudden, cheap glibness. Curbing these long habits will be a daily struggle - his adopting the acronym 'Dude' in his victory speech shows just how hard it is for him. Peter Walker Political correspondent Helen Roberts from the National Sheep Association in Wales said it would be “absolutely catastrophic” to leave with no deal and could lead to civil unrest among sheep farmers. “I’d want him to stop playing Russian roulette with the industry,” she said. Roberts said she did not want to see a mass slaughter for welfare reasons so the government needed to get cold storage in place and talk about public procurement of lamb meat. Asked about civil unrest among farmers such as tractors being used to block roads, she said: “I think they will. It is time to stand up for ourselves ... I suspect there will be protests.” Minette Batters, the president of the National Farmers Union, said there would be no market for 40% of the UK’s lamb meat in the event of a no-deal Brexit. “You would be in oversupply because you wouldn’t be able to get over the barrier of a tariff to Europe,” she said. She said a mass slaughter was the last thing the union wanted but to avoid that the government would need to look at forcing hospitals, schools and other public bodies to buy lamb meat. Alun Cairns, the Welsh secretary, agreed that farming was a winner from having access to EU markets but said there was potential for exports to new markets. Asked for his response to threats of civil unrest, he claimed UK farmers could export their meat to Japan rather than Europe. “I would say we are working to get a deal and the European market is important to us but there are markets around the world,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. He added that it was not clear how civil unrest would take place. “The context is that Wales has voted to leave the EU … we have an obligation to leave and of course we would much prefer to leave with a deal.” Last week research commissioned by the Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board and Quality Meat Scotland found that combined beef and sheep meat exports to the EU could decline by 92.5%, with the lamb export trade “almost completely wiped out”. In a no-deal scenario, the 37,000 carcasses a week that are usually sent to Europe would be stopped overnight under strict EU import rules that require de facto licensing for all farm exports. This has led to suggestions of a mass cull of animals as well as the need for state aid to support farmers, some of whom earn as little as £13,000 a year. The head of Meat Promotion Wales, Kevin Roberts, told the Royal Welsh Show “the impact would no longer be seismic – it would be off the Richter scale and produce a fault-line fissure right through Welsh farming’s immediate future”.