The Edinburgh festival fringe is facing the loss of a $25m (£20m) five-year investment by a big US circus company owing to uncertainties over Brexit. Spiegelworld, one of Las Vegas’s biggest variety producers, is staging an extravaganza in Edinburgh this week before transferring back home to a purpose-built theatre in September. Its Atomic Saloon Show, a circus-variety show “set in a wild west neon disco” and featuring acrobats and dancers in gravity-defying acts, was meant to have been the first of five annual productions created and premiered in Edinburgh, but its producers are now having to consider relocating their European base to Berlin or Paris. Ross Mollison, Spiegelworld’s circus impresario, said: “Uncertainty is the enemy of strategic planning. Our business at light entertainment already has so many uncertainties. Are people going to buy tickets? Are they going to like it? How are we going to build new shows? “To add to that, this whole Brexit thing. The uncertainty of what is the law, what is the visa situation, what happens with visas next year if you’re not part of the EU? I have no idea. It’s just another thing we have to worry about. It’s very disappointing that, on the eve of us launching this show, this debate is still going on.” He added that, while the circus had done shows in Edinburgh for 20 years on and off, this was the first created in the city ahead of a big Las Vegas run: “With the uncertainty, I doubt that we’ll come back next year unless everything is resolved and we know exactly what we’re buying into. “This is a show built for Vegas in Scotland. But if we don’t know what the rules are, we can’t come back and do it because these investments are insane amounts of money,” he said. Spiegelworld is an adult-themed circus, burlesque and vaudeville extravaganza inspired by 19th-century European cabarets. Its previous show, Absinthe, has played for more than eight years in Las Vegas, where it draws half a million people a year. It has also toured worldwide. Atomic Saloon Show’s world premiere is in Edinburgh on Thursday. Its producers promise “the most abnormally sexy but sensationally amoral troupe of entertainers on Earth”. If Spiegelworld cancels its plans, there will be financial losses for Scotland. In bringing a company of 40 to Edinburgh for four weeks of rehearsals before its month-long show opens, it spends money on accommodation, set construction, rehearsal space, and local specialists. It is described as one of Edinburgh’s biggest shows of the past 20 years. Productions on this scale are too expensive for most British producers.