Boris Johnston repeats ad nauseam that the Irish backstop is unacceptable and that he is willing to leave the EU without a deal (Brussels rejects Johnson’s plans for a new Brexit deal over summer, 26 July). Clearly he has not taken account of the EU Withdrawal Act 2018, which paves the way for the UK’s departure from the EU and is the law of the land. Section 10 of the act states that nothing in it may “diminish any form of north-south co-operation provided for by the Belfast agreement”. An official mapping exercise identified well over 100 areas of north-south cooperation, many of which relate to the operation of the north-south ministerial council established under the Belfast agreement. Removal of the backstop, or a no-deal Brexit, would be unlawful under the act. I appreciate that breaking the law would be a mere bagatelle to this prime minister but I look forward to finding out precisely how he intends to do it. Mike Pender Cardiff • Boris Johnson and his shadowy advisers long ago war-gamed all options for this autumn. The most likely outcomes are: losing his majority; failing to get an agreement with the EU; and parliament blocking no deal. Thus he ends up looking weak. So, his strategy is to say he will rule out calling a snap election, while making impossible demands on Europe, so that he can claim to be forced into an election, to protect this plucky little nation facing an overbearing enemy (Johnson sets UK on collision course with EU over backstop, 27 July). A khaki election without a war. We’ve rumbled you, Mr Johnson.Dr Nigel MellorNewcastle upon Tyne • In July 2018, Donald Trump heaped praise on Theresa May, calling her an “incredible woman”. This tribute followed a shocking interview with the Sun, in which he slammed her Brexit strategy, arguing that it threatened a UK-US trade deal – the perfect example of this president’s erratic nature guided by self-interest and narcissism. As Johnson and Trump embark on their honeymoon, let us recognise this love-in for what it is: temporary. Trump has repeatedly called for a trade deal with “unlimited potential”, where everything is on the table, from chlorinated chicken to the NHS. And if there’s one thing we know to be true of Johnson, it’s that he will say or do anything to quench his thirst for power. Let us not forget that being “pro-Europe, pro-immigration, pro-cycling, anti-Trump” secured him the keys to City Hall. Just a few years later, completely reversing this position propelled him into No 10 with the backing of less than 0.1% of the electorate.Catherine West MPLabour, Hornsey and Wood Green • Now that Johnson has spoken the reality is clear: there were always two Brexits. There is the Brexit for business and the moneyed middle class, gilded by the imperialist fantasies of Jacob Rees-Mogg and Johnson. This is the Brexit where tiresome regulations that protect workers and the environment are ditched and replaced by rock-bottom corporation tax. This is the Brexit of high immigration and guarantees to EU citizens that will ensure a supply of labour to service the ruling classes: willing kitchen-fitters and cleaners, knowledgeable waiters and, more expensively, multilingual staff for the world of finance. This is the Brexit where controls on food sourcing and hygiene are abandoned. This Brexit is a world away from the one envisaged by leave voters in Labour heartlands who felt ignored, oppressed and marginalised. Having seen wages at the bottom end squeezed and increased pressure on the NHS and housing, they thought Brexit would mean less immigration and a better life. Johnson says that not implementing Brexit would be a betrayal of democracy. It will be a far greater betrayal when his massive deception is foisted on the nation.Teresa AdamsBromley, Kent • The great thing about Boris Johnson becoming PM is that he promised that the NHS would receive an extra £350m every week when we have left the EU. At least, that was how he persuaded lots of people to vote leave during the referendum campaign. Now he is PM he will be in a position to make good on that pledge. Of course he will.Peter BolwellHastings, East Sussex • And so begins another Tory cycle: splash out on deprived towns, increase national debt, tighten austerity.Ulf DantanusBrighton • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition