Ben Stokes: remember the name. This World Cup was always billed as a moment to refresh and start over, a chance to straighten the mistakes of the recent past. It is a process that works on the micro as well as the macro level. For a long time Sunday’s final at Lord’s was an occasion looking for a shape to fit, a genre to follow. As England restricted New Zealand’s batsmen it must have felt for the home crowd like a summer comedy, a jaunt destined for the inevitable happy ending. As England fumbled and stalled in mid-afternoon it seemed like something else: a saga, an epic, perhaps even, as wickets began to fall, a horror story. By the end it had changed again. Enter Stokes, pursued by the past. Watching that inked and grizzled figure at the crease, crouched low, bat raised like a polo mallet, it was clear even through the fog of endless turning points that we were watching something else. This was instead a redemption story. Sport loves a grand storyline, loves to cast itself as a swooping operetta, when often it is little more than bad art in coloured clothing. But for Stokes a performance that involved straining every fibre of muscle and talent and will, capped with a medal and a man of the match award, represents a genuine catharsis. This is a cricketer who has suffered in the public eye, excessively so. It will be a year next month since Stokes was cleared of affray after being involved in a late- night brawl outside the dreaded Mbargo while on England duty. It was a witless, graceless moment of folly. But Stokes has paid a price. These, his peak years, have been shadowed by that incident. For a while, a careworn Stokes emerged, so desperate to repay his team that he seemed to suppress the spark of violent elan that makes him so captivating. He is at his best when he is at his most physical, when it seems his entire body is caught up in the moment. That vital six over midwicket off Trent Boult in the final over at Lord’s was a brilliant snapshot of a man feeling the moment in his limbs, his tendons, his blood. As Boult released the ball Stokes was already down hugging the ground, front foot shuffled on to off stump, bat coming through in the full arc and almost touching between his shoulder blades in his follow through. Some players address the ball with their bat face or with their wrists. Some throw the kitchen sink at it. Ben Stokes throws Ben Stokes at it. It is an instinct that would repay him later in that flukish deflection as he dived to make his ground. And the same quality was there in Kolkata too, the night Stokes just kept trying to bowl a yorker to Carlos Brathwaite and Brathwaite just kept on hitting him over the rope. No pulling back, no quarter. This has been a Stokes theme. Probably expectation always hung a little heavily. Aged 14, Stokes was already a schoolboy star, hobnobbing with Joe Root at the Bunbury festival and rising through the levels with thrilling assurance. Aged 21, he already had five first-class hundreds, the first Englishman to do that so young since Denis Compton. That startlingly brutal 258 in Cape Town; the more brilliant century at Perth against one of the great Australian pace attacks: these were glimpses of a genuine A-list talent. Fine moments but there were others, ones that left him bruised. It felt as if Sunday was coming. Stokes had already had a fine World Cup. He ended up with the ninth-highest run total. He bowled briskly. He fielded with righteous fury and took that bravura catch in the deep on the opening day at the Oval, a catch that also seemed to involve reaching back into the past, behind him, plucking the ball out of some other timeline. Lord’s can be a heavy kind of place and batting was tough. In the early morning Henry Nicholls, a fine Test player, had looked as if he had won a raffle to open in a World Cup final. Later, Jofra Archer bowled a series of vicious bouncers at Colin de Grandhomme, who took the ball bravely on helmet, shoulder and chest. A sure sign summer is here: the sound of leather on De Grandhomme. It lasted through the day. Some bowlers make the ball talk. Boult had it burbling in fluent Etruscan as England’s innings began. It was time to bat with some heart and soul, to bat in the deeper gears, something Stokes has been working on all year as though in silent preparation. Jos Buttler was more fluent as England’s two most explosive batsmen produced a vital, hard‑bitten partnership, but he also hit one up in the air just as they got close. And really it had to be Stokes. Another end note, another moment of jeopardy. There were two dot balls at the start of Boult’s final over. Suddenly England needed 15 off four. Not again. Stokes wandered away and thrashed at the air with his bat, frustrated but not raging. Then came that full-body launch over midwicket. Then came the moment that settled the tournament. Again Stokes was all in, throwing himself at the crease as he hared back to make his ground for a second run. Again something comical and even quite cruel happened. Except this time it happened to somebody else. The deflection off Stokes’s bat to take the ball to the pavilion boundary was a moment of outrageous luck. But not quite dumb luck. Stokes knew where the ball was coming from. He was quick enough and brave enough to throw himself full length, not stopping, not taking a breath, taking England with him towards that glorious end. What happens from here is wide open. Stokes will be 32 when the next World Cup comes round. Before then there is a chance to make a little more Ashes impact and to become a founding star of that strange new beast The Hundred. He has his moment now. Something has lifted: Bristol, Kolkata, the sense of a player with a long dark cloud following him. Stokes 3.0, the post-redemption years, might well be the best bit of this story.