It was a decision, said Mississippi state representative Robert Foster, made out of “respect for my wife”. The politician and gubernatorial candidate had said that a female journalist, who had interviewed him many times before, would be allowed to spend the day on a campaign trail “ride-along” with him only if she brought along a male chaperone. His own campaign director acknowledged that it was a “weird” thing to ask. The journalist, Mississippi Today’s Larrison Campbell, refused and called it sexist. The ride-along did not happen. The inevitable outrage dissolved into an inevitable liberal left and religious right bunfight. No wonder: everything about this story, bar Campbell’s ability to argue with an articulate conviction that Foster’s decision barely deserved, is terrible. During his many interviews, Foster tried various methods of justifying his refusal to be alone with a professional woman doing her job. (It made me wonder if he has the same stringent policy when it comes to dentists, doctors, plumbers, even. Does he ask for a new cab if it arrives with a female driver? Manufacturers take note: religious extremists may now be an untapped market for driverless vehicles.) Foster has said that he will not be alone with a woman who is not his wife – the infamous, deplorable “Billy Graham rule” – because of the way any picture taken of him and a woman, any woman, might be perceived. By this, he is implying that potential voters are at best stupid, and at worst perverts who can see only a sexual relationship when two people of the opposite gender are seen together. (Last weekend’s London Pride would have made him very confused indeed.) He has said: “I think a lot of people believe in this day and time – and I’ve heard people say that in this post-MeToo movement – men just can’t be too careful,” insulting women, half of his electorate, by implying that they might falsely accuse any man they are alone with of assaulting them, which is a well-known hobby us gals like to take part in, along with baking and buying shoes. He has said that it is his Christian faith to require a woman in his truck to have a male chaperone, which is something Jesus must have said off the record, or in a secret code to which only fundamentalists have the key. One of the more depressing elements of the story is the speculation that it will give his campaign to be governor a boost. If that is the case, then he has made his job more possible by making it impossible for another human being to do hers. We all have our off days at work. I have forgotten customers in restaurants, made terrible, undrinkable coffees, made terrible, undrinkable cocktails, given myself serious burns in a bain-marie incident, and I thought Broadchurch was, after its first episode, a bit silly and probably wouldn’t do very well. So when Johanna Konta gave her post-match press conference after losing in the quarter-finals of Wimbledon to Barbora Strýcová, having been 4-1 up in the first set, I understood why she might not be in the mood to chat about it. That is the brutality of a post-match interview, particularly for the loser. It’s usually a series of questions that rephrase the same issues – “Why did you lose?” and “Why weren’t you good enough?” – with ever-piercing requests for more and more detail about what went so very wrong. Usually they are bland, if a little awkward, affairs, as polite as they are strained. But Konta had had enough. When a journalist asked if she could have done better at key points, she asked curtly: “Is that your professional tennis opinion?” To which he said no, but the answer should, more accurately, probably have been yes, since it was the biggest tennis tournament in the world and he was asking a quarter-finalist about her performance during a tennis match. More than the debate about whether she was right to challenge the journalist, or the journalist was right to challenge her, though, it goes to show the limits of the “think positive” approach. She didn’t tank the match; Strýcová just played better. In that moment, on that stage, Konta simply reached her limit. Now, please direct all correspondence on “why can’t this column be better” and “what do you think you could have done to improve that sentence” to the press room, SW19. Shirley Manson was almost 30 when Garbage became one of the biggest rock bands in the world. She is on my mental list of incredible women who made it when they weren’t squeaky teens: Patti Smith releasing Horses in her late 20s, Deborah Harry becoming a superstar with Blondie in her 30s. Last week, Manson spoke to told the Evening Standard that coming to success late, having already grafted her way around the music industry, gave her a more solid foundation for dealing with it. “I earned my keep and had already been in the music business for 12 years before I stepped on to the world stage. Which is what helped me keep it together,” she said. She also said that compared with younger, straight-from-stage-school stars, she was better prepared for an industry that is “unforgiving, highly competitive, it’s nasty, it pits people up against one another”. She’s not wrong, on any count. I’ve interviewed plenty of famous people over the years, and it has usually stood as a firm and fast rule that the older a person was when they became well-known, the less ruined by it they were. The campaign to ban all celebrities from the public eye until they have passed a maturity test starts here. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnist