Trent Boult. If it had to be anyone to stand at the top of his mark, watched by millions but all alone in the moment, holding New Zealand’s World Cup fate in the literal palm of his hand, it would always be Trent Boult. One of the best two bowlers his country has produced, one of the best two players in his side his whole career. Left arm, slight of build, deliverer of the perfect shape. The in-swing, the disguised bouncer, the slower ball, the unhittable full length. So he bowls. Curving in-swing, the yorker. Like a star tenor, perfect pitch. Ben Stokes, not out on 83 and swinging for the hills, hits the last ball of the match. Dug out for a single, like so many Boult deliveries before it. A run out coming back for the second. A tie. Then under the new rules, Boult has to come back and do it all again. New Zealand are the most condescended-to team in world cricket. Through the tournament previews we heard the phrase “dark horse” so often that you might wonder whether the upcoming event was a cricket World Cup or a midnight race meeting. There is a constant and recurring amnesia about the fact that New Zealand stormed to the previous final in 2015, or made the semi-finals in almost every iteration before that. Bangladesh and Afghanistan still get the condescension of praise for being competitive, but they are recent enough in their development to partially warrant it. New Zealand teams have been good for decades. Then there is the persistent “nicest guys in cricket” narrative, which is partly based in admiration but would not lead the line so much if people held their ability in higher regard. On Sunday, that team made England – the team and the nation of supporters – sweat on a cool and breezy afternoon. They jiggled every knee, jangled every nerve, reanimated every dormant anxiety. They killed Lord’s softly, rocked it gently, battling their way to a mid-range score, squeezing the air out of the chase, then once Stokes and Jos Buttler looked to have taken the game away, came back with fierce bowling and fearless fielding to force a tie. A tie in a World Cup final. As if that wasn’t absurd enough, the tournament now uses the Twenty20 invention of the super over as a decider. Any previous year the teams would have shared the trophy, and after the quality of the match on Sunday no one could have argued with the fairness of that. But the rules have changed, probably with no one imagining they might actually be used. And so the super over went down to its very last ball as well. And was tied again. After New Zealand’s seamers smashed up Sri Lanka in their first match of the tournament, they never dominated. They battled past modest sides thanks to a couple of Kane Williamson specials with the bat, but were beaten badly by Pakistan, Australia and England in the group stage. Come the semi-finals, though, New Zealand were able to play at their level. On slower pitches they batted first to build half-decent scores, then bowled and fielded like demons. First to knock off India, then nearly England. Never have the margins been finer in a race to the finish. With nine deliveries to go, Boult catching Stokes before stepping on the boundary to concede six. With three balls to go, Martin Guptill nearly running out Stokes, only for the ball to deflect off the diving batsman for four. This was England’s day. And a super over could not have been designed better to suit their big-hitting style. Stokes, still warm. Buttler, the perfect machine for this. Boult had done it once but couldn’t again. But then Jimmy Neesham, one of those useful all-rounders, smashed England’s Jofra Archer in reply. If it had to be anyone with New Zealand’s World Cup fate in his hands, you probably didn’t want it to be Guptill. The opening batsman is one of the cleanest strikers in the world when on song, but lost his voice at this World Cup. For five balls it worked, as Guptill ran fiercely to get Neesham on strike. But in the grossly unfair situation of having one ball to face, Guptill couldn’t find a gap. Another single, another despairing lunge, and a run out with New Zealand on the receiving end. These teams share a bond. It was after watching New Zealand’s bravura 2015 World Cup that England vowed to discard their own hesitant way. It was a series against New Zealand in mid-2015 that saw that approach borne out on the field, with both teams flying to huge scores. Now this: a match that can knock off Australia and South Africa in 1999 as the most frenetic, transcendent, remarkable match in the history of the World Cup. It’s a bond that two cricketing nations will share for ever. This was not New Zealand punching above their weight. This is their weight. They are the only side to go home without the trophy despite not losing a World Cup final. What they do have is a place, and this history. They should never be described as anyone’s dark horse ever again.