Listen very carefully tonight at 10pm, and you’re likely to hear a distant wail of anguish floating on the breeze. The cause of this will be a Channel 5 documentary entitled Million Pound Handjobs. I mean, you’d watch that, right? Million Pound Handjobs. It sounds incredible. It sounds sordid and expensive and ever so slightly oligarchish. And it’s on Channel 5 too, so you know it has to be filthy. Imagine, a million pound handjob. If nothing else, it’s perfect fodder for a watercooler game at work tomorrow: would you rather have one million pound handjob, or a million one pound handjobs? Oh the depravity. The amazing high-end depravity. Except no. Because Million Pound Handjobs isn’t about what you think it’s about. In a monumental instance of false advertising, it turns out that Million Pound Handjobs is actually about the world of hand modelling. And unless you have a very, very, very, very, very specific kink, hand modelling is not in the least bit sexy. Oh, sure, it’s a competitive business, getting to hold things in adverts, and the programme promises to reveal ‘what it takes to keep models’ nails in tip-top condition’ while simultaneously showing models ‘holding a piece of fruit for hours’. But, god, imagine the disappointment if you tuned in to Million Pound Handjobs looking for some sexy fun only to be met with the sight of some berk listlessly cradling a pomegranate. We should know better by now. We’re surrounded by such a constant unconquerable glut of television all the time that documentaries have long since been forced to adopt a clickbait strategy when it comes to titles. But at least, for the most part, they haven’t been outright misleading. Channel 4’s Bodyshock series of documentaries about extreme medical conditions might have all had trashy, borderline exploitative titles – Turtle Boy, Girl Who Cries Blood, The Boy Who Gave Birth to his Twin – but at least they gave you a broad idea of what to expect. When you sit down to watch Born With Two Heads, you know you’re going to see a film about someone who was born with two heads. Similarly, if The Man with the 10-Stone Testicles had been about anything other than a man whose testicles weighed 10 stone, people would have torched the streets. Same goes for Channel 4’s Sex Toy Secrets and WTF is Cosplay. Same goes for Channel 5’s Botched Up Bodies, Britain’s Ugliest Models, The Man With Another Man’s Arms, Student Sex Workers and My Facial Disfigurement. They’re not exactly elegant titles, but at least they were accurate. In fact, titles like these are actually doing us a favour. They’re a red light, warning us that these documentaries have all been made exclusively for the purpose of rubbernecking, and you’ll probably feel bad for watching after about 20 minutes.But Million Pound Handjobs feels like the dawn of a new horizon. It’s a boring-sounding documentary that is actively tricking people into watching. And what if hand modelling is your biggest point of interest, but you also harbour inherently anti-masturbation beliefs? You’ve been waiting all your life for a big terrestrial documentary about your greatest passion, but you’re going to miss it because the EPG makes it sound like a show where a woman in a mink coat overcharges billionaires to bring them to completion. Ever think of that, Channel 5? It’s nothing short of a tragedy. That said, it has worked. Even though I know it’s primarily a documentary about nail care, I’m still going to watch Million Pound Handjobs tonight. Maybe I’d watch more Channel 5 documentaries if they all followed this blueprint. I have no interest whatsoever in Secrets of the National Trust with Alan Titchmarsh, for instance. But Alan Titchmarsh’s Big Bushes? Count me in.