Laura Muir, Zharnel Hughes and Beth Dobbin seized the occasion of competing in London’s former Olympic stadium to delight the crowds and deliver impressive personal performances on the opening day of the Anniversary Games. An unusual event, in that it both looks backwards and throws forward in time, the Muller Anniversary Games is part of the legacy of London 2012 and also an important staging post on the way to the World Championships in Doha in September. The risk is that the event itself lacks consequence but, as personal and season’s best times were consistently adjusted over the course of the day, it did not feel that way inside the London Stadium. The headline act from a British point of view was Muir, who announced herself on the international stage at this event three years ago when she broke Dame Kelly Holmes’s British record in the women’s 1500m. Now 26 and a European champion, Muir had been expecting to race against the Olympic champion Faith Kipyegon but the Kenyan withdrew late on with an adductor strain. In her absence Muir took it on herself to dominate the race, sitting just behind the pacemaker from the off and holding her position without ever seeming to exert herself. Her finish was more impressive than her start, however, as Muir covered the final 300 metres in 43.14 seconds and blew away the field to win by several lengths in 3min 58.25secs. “It may have looked easy, but it wasn’t,” Muir said afterwards. “I didn’t realise I ran a 57-second last lap and I’m so, so happy about that. The girls are really strong and I know that my advantage is in that kick, so I just sat in there and tried to take it easy. It was all about winning today and I did that. “London is a really fast track and it’s always a great atmosphere. The conditions are usually pretty good – it was a little bit windy today but the whole vibe of the place is really special and it makes athletes raise their game. My goal now is to win a medal in Doha.” Expectation also surrounded the 100m sprinter Hughes who, like Muir, won gold in Berlin and last summer also posted a personal best of 9.91sec. Excitement surrounding the 24-year-old only increased on the day after he breezed through his heat in a season’s best 9.96. It was a race that also featured his fellow Briton James Ellington, who was making his first competitive appearance since a serious motorbike crash in 2017. The final promised more as Hughes went up against a field that not only included the Canadian Olympic bronze medallist Andre De Grasse but the Jamaican legend Yohan Blake and current African champion, Akani Simbine. Hughes could finish only second, however, as the South African went on to win in 9.93. Hughes bettered his time from the heats as he edged past Blake in a photo finish but it was a more awkward run and contributed to a slight sense of anticlimax. “There’s a long season ahead and I’m taking my time to get sharp,” said Hughes, who had raced four times in 2019 before this weekend. “I’m happy to get a season’s best and I’m happy with the music that was playing before the race started, it got me fired up. Looking forward, I trust in my coach and I trust in myself as well. As I go forward I get more confident.” Hughes is a native of Anguilla, one of the British Overseas Territories, and chose to represent Britain. Dobbin, meanwhile, was born in Doncaster but competes for Scotland and broke a Scottish record in finishing third in the women’s 200m. With Dina Asher-Smith sitting this race out in favour of the 100m on Sunday, this was an event dominated by the Jamaican Elaine Thompson. The double Olympic champion won easily in 22.13. But Dobbin’s 22.5sec finish shaved 0.09sec off her personal best and deservedly won the acclaim of the crowd. “I usually start the season slowly and I didn’t expect it would come good today”, she said. “It’s a really great feeling.” Elsewhere there were some marquee performances and not every one came from a Jamaican. That said, Danielle Williams probably delivered the most impressive of them as the sprint hurdler ran 12.32, the second fastest time in history and a Jamaican record, in the 100m hurdles final. Interestingly, the fastest ever time in the event was also recorded at the Anniversary Games, in 2016, when the American Kendra Harrison’s 12.2 broke a record that had stood for 28 years. There was also notable success for the Norwegian Karsten Warholm, who ran a personal best, European record and fastest time in the world this year with 47.12 in the 400m hurdles. The charismatic 23-year-old was also one of the few athletes not to play down his success in favour of looking forward to Doha. “I don’t know if I want to win [the World Championships]. I like it here,” he said.