The Proms have a slightly uneasy relationship with Big Themes. Former director Nicholas Kenyon used to love them – grand overarching narratives designed to hold the otherwise unwieldy two-month music festival together. But his successors have been more circumspect, recognising that Proms-goers for the most part attend single concerts rather than a group of performances linked to, say, death or sex – or this year’s theme, nature, and our part in destroying it. That big theme, admits current Proms director David Pickard, stole up on him almost unawares. “You don’t always start with a theme,” he says. “Pieces come in and it emerges. You start to see a theme emerging from what people are wanting to write. That was what happened with this. None of these things should be forced.” The two initial building blocks were In the Name of the Earth, John Luther Adams’s large-scale choral work, which will receive its European premiere; and the Lost Words prom, which Pickard calls “a family concert about something that matters very much to young people”. The latter is based on writer Robert Macfarlane and illustrator Jackie Morris’s glorious 2017 book of poems and paintings of the same name, celebrating nature and bemoaning the fact that children are losing the language that allows them to inhabit it. With those two concerts in place, Pickard started to think more generally about music’s relationship with the natural world. “When you ask someone to write about nature now,” he says, “they are not necessarily writing about it in a romantic way, in the way Beethoven did. They’re writing about the danger of loss.” The season will offer a fascinating juxtaposition of old and new views of the natural world, of innocent celebration and present-day fear and anger. Haydn’s Creation, Beethoven’s “Pastoral” Symphony, Sibelius’s Fifth Symphony (with its finale inspired by the sight of 16 swans passing overhead), Richard Strauss’s Alpine Symphony, Messiaen’s From the Canyons to the Stars, and other canonical nature-inflected works will sit alongside contemporary or new pieces. These include Judith Weir’s Forest, Stevie Wishart’s The Last Dance?, Alexia Sloane’s Earthward and Hans Zimmer’s Earth. Zimmer’s piece features in a prom marking the 50th anniversary of the moon landing – another theme this year – but because Zimmer has chosen to portray Earth as seen from the moon it becomes part of the underlying musical preoccupation with our precious planet. Master of the Queen’s music Judith Weir’s orchestral piece Forest dates from 1995. It has been programmed alongside Sibelius’s Fifth Symphony in a concert on the same Sunday as In the Name of the Earth – a kind of de facto Nature Day. Weir’s piece is a fairly lateral response to nature, inspired in part by the German Romantic idea of the enchanted wood and the fairytales it engendered. The piece, like much of her work, has a strong, multilayered intellectual underpinning. It is not a visceral response to threat, though audiences who have spent the past year participating in or reading about Extinction Rebellion might interpret it as such. I suggest that if she wrote it today it would most likely be a concerto for orchestra and 12 buzzsaws. “I didn’t see it as a political piece,” she says, “but I completely agree with you. If I sat down to write a piece called Forest now, I couldn’t not write about Brazil and all that stuff.” She worries that the audience will come with expectations of picture-painting. “The piece which I call Forest may not sound anything like trees or nature. It’s a busy, dense piece and you might not have that view of a forest at all.” John Luther Adams, who has spent much of his life in Alaska being inspired by and defending its wilderness, has no such qualms. His award-winning orchestral piece Become Ocean, premiered in 2013, doesn’t just represent the sea, or use it as a metaphor for human struggle in the way that composers of the past might have done. As the title makes clear, it seeks to become the ocean, to capture its power and movement in sound. Haydn is celebrating God in The Creation, while Beethoven is seeking to capture the interplay of nature and the creative spirit in his “Pastoral” Symphony. But Adams is trying to encapsulate nature itself, in all its brutal energy, with mankind removed from the picture. It’s nature as the protagonist. Nature is not just the source of everything I do, it is the ultimate source of everything we human animals do “My work has always been deeply rooted in personal experience of wild places,” Adams says. “I can’t imagine how it could be any other way. Nature is not just the source of everything that I do, it is the ultimate source of everything we human animals do. Everything we imagine we create comes from the world we inhabit – the very shape and substance of our minds, our intelligence.” Adams believes it is essential for artists to confront the climate crisis and the mass extinction of species now taking place. The innocence of composers who wrote about nature in the past is no longer feasible. “This is a serious business that informs what it means to be a thinking person here and now. It would not have been possible for earlier composers even to imagine.” He does not, however, want to be simply labelled as an activist, even though there have been times in the past when he was exactly that – on the frontline of the environmental struggle in Alaska. “I like to think I can have it both ways,” he says. “I write, I speak, I give interviews, it’s no secret that in my 20s and 30s I was a full-time environmental activist and that these concerns are at the heart of my life and work. “However, I am a composer and I believe profoundly in the intrinsic power and value of music as music. If my music does not move you strictly as music, then anything else I may write or say about it means nothing. The music must come first. Music is how I understand the world and this is my best gift to a troubled planet. It is informed by all these things we’re talking about, but it damned well better be good music, too.” Stevie Wishart has also composed a piece with an unambiguously environmentalist subtext: The Last Dance?, a new movement appended to a Bach suite, an inventive way of smuggling polemic into the tightest of commissioning briefs. Her short work is a baroque tango drawing on birdsong, which she tells me she has been increasingly using while holed up in a remote village in Belgium. Her tango mimics the dance of the Argentinian hooded grebe, which is a critically endangered species. The piece uses the song of the grebe, which Wishart says happens to be in the same key as the Bach suite. It’s a delightful conceit. Art returns to the sense of wonder. Only then can we have meaningful activism Wishart believes using birdsong and writing nature-inspired work has reconnected her with her audience. “Contemporary music can be rather exclusive and self-referential. I feel that as composers we have lost sight of our audience. Nature is a way to rewild listening and to bring music back into an inclusive way of thinking about sound, but without any sense of dumbing down.” Young, blind composer Alexia Sloane, whose Earthward will be premiered at a Cadogan Hall chamber prom, feels even more strongly about environmental issues and is proud to call themself an activist composer. “I am very interested in the idea of engaged music and engaged art,” they say. “I’m fairly introverted and I don’t find it easy to be on the frontline, but we are losing our emotional connection with nature and art is a crucial way to reconnect.” Sloane calls it “creative activism against the extinction crisis”, contrasting it with the cold, rational response of scientists and statisticians. “Art returns to the sense of wonder. Only then can we have meaningful activism.” In the Lost Words prom, Jackie Morris will paint a red fox live on stage as she recites a poem by Robert Macfarlane; beatboxer Jason Singh, working with poet Caleb Femi and dancer Thomas Carsley, will interpret two of Macfarlane’s other “spells”, Raven and Starling; there will be extracts from Vaughan Williams’s The Lark Ascending and Einojuhani Rautavaara’s Cantus Arcticus, a “concerto for birds and orchestra” which uses birdsong recorded near the Arctic Circle. And Jocelyn Pook has written a new piece that sets words from speeches by environmental activist Greta Thunberg to music. “Her voice, a lone teenager, making such a difference is very heartening,” says Pook. “I found her speeches and her TED talk so inspiring. I found it extraordinary that she could stand up and do that, with that level of articulacy. But the one that no one can be unmoved by was her speech at the Strasbourg convention, where she almost breaks down as she describes all the environmental catastrophes that are happening.” Roll over Beethoven, Greta Thunberg is in the house.• The First Night of the Proms is at the Royal Albert Hall, London, on  19 July and  broadcast live on Radio 3 and BBC TV. The season runs until 14 September.