The huge expansion in the number of university students must be a significant factor in the shortage of affordable housing (Editorial, 22 July). Student loans and the willingness of students to share rents in multiple occupancy housing has driven the conversion of many affordable homes into highly profitable buy-to-let premises. Just look at the cost of buying a first home in any university town. Unfortunately, it is the students themselves who have driven this market through their student loans, thus making entry into the housing market unaffordable when they have graduated and begun employment. The unfairly high interest rates on loans compounds this effect. The universities have added to the problem by investing heavily in student accommodation, largely for first-year students, which encourages students to live away from home and drives up market expectations. Much of this investment again is funded by the students through both their tuition fees and high rental costs. This further example of transfer of resources away from millennials to the baby-boomers is surely not sustainable. Interest-free loans and grants sufficient to cover fees and accommodation are urgently needed.Stephen YoungBirmingham • Every time the Guardian mentions “affordable housing” (Report, 20 July) it should adopt the same policy it does with Tommy Robinson, “real name Stephen Yaxley-Lennon”, so that it is clear what this means. To afford affordable housing, I believe, a household income of £60,000 upwards is required. The average salary is below £30,000; so, in the way of averages, the majority earn less than that. This housing is of limited affordability and this should be clear. We need built a huge amount of low-rent social housing. The unquestioning repetition of this phrase disguises how little is being done and how much developers are getting away with.Gerard BellLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition