Four years ago, a football club from a tiny village in Yorkshire went to Wembley and won the FA Trophy. The following season they earned promotion to the National League, the fifth tier of English football, where they would rub shoulders with former Football League clubs such as Lincoln City and Tranmere Rovers. A lot has changed since then. While Lincoln and Tranmere are gearing up to face Sunderland and Ipswich Town in League One, North Ferriby are preparing for a season in the Northern Counties East League Division One – seven tiers lower down the pyramid – where they will be up against sides such as Harrogate Railway Athletic and Nostell Miners Welfare. North Ferriby’s fall began as soon as they reached the National League. Playing so high up the pyramid was always going to be a struggle for a club that represents a village of just 3,893 people. With games held further afield, players had to take time off from their full-time jobs and the club’s resources were stretched. As Richard Watts, the club’s finance director, pointed out at the time: “We will have the smallest budget of all 24 clubs in the league by a country mile. It would be absolutely remarkable if we stayed up but, if we go down, we’ll be fine. This is not a boom or bust club, like many at this level.” Watts’ words came back to haunt him. North Ferriby were indeed relegated, but they were anything but fine. That relegation was the start of their three-year journey from the fifth tier to the 10th tier. The team were struggling on the pitch and problems were mounting behind the scenes. Former player Jamie Waltham took over as North Ferriby owner from Steve and Eman Foster in November 2017 and replaced manager Steve Housham with another ex-player in Chris Bolder, who brought his brother Adam back to the club. However, the old boys act did not work out. The club’s second successive relegation was confirmed in March 2018. Few tears were shed when Waltham announced his departure a couple of months later. He had incensed fans with his plan to relocate the club and change their name to East Hull FC. And his bizarre idea of generating £2,461 a week by housing travellers on the pitch did not win over locals. Local builders Terry and Carl Chadwick took over from Waltham last summer, becoming the club’s third set of new owners in six months. The rot continued, however, and they sacked Bolder before Christmas. With the club slipping towards another next relegation and the ground falling into a state of disrepair, a winding-up petition was issued in February 2019 as the club owed £7,645.25 to the company that had laid their pitch two years earlier. These were not the only monies owed, as chairman Carl Chadwick admitted openly. “When I took on the club I was under the impression it was debt free and we just had to survive from sales,” said Chadwick. “The debt has come from before I came to the club and we managed to stay afloat with sponsorship and season ticket sales until five weeks ago when that money ran out.” With the club at a low ebb, ex-chairman Les Hare started to rekindle his interest in their fortunes. Hare had been chairman for more than 22 years before bowing out after their victory in the FA Trophy final in 2015. He was shocked at how far the club had fallen in four short years. “My reaction was one of total dismay,” Hare says. “It was agonising watching a lifetime’s work crumble. When my wife and I came back to the ground and witnessed the carnage, we both wept uncontrollably. That sadness soon turned to anger as the realisation of the enormity of the neglect became apparent.” Hare witnessed the ultimate humiliation for his beloved club when it was liquidated on 15 March 2019. They were bottom of the table at the time, having won just two of their 33 games all season. Things looked terminal. As long-suffering supporter Jack Salt put it: “I was thinking to myself: ‘Who would want to take over a dead village club?’ But as soon as there was a sniff of Les’s name, I knew it was going to be fine.” Fortunately for Salt and his fellow Ferriby fans, Hare set about putting together a consortium and re-forming the club. He says the main lesson he has learned over the last few years is “that you can’t commercialise a community asset.” From the outset, Hare insisted the phoenix club be run as a non-profit organisation with three short-term aims: rescue the club, protect the 200-odd youth players and ensure that North Ferriby stay within the non-league structure. “Restoring the culture and ethos of the club will ensure our local community can again be proud of ‘their asset’,” Hare says. “The heart had stopped beating. Without youth there is no future.” Renovating the dilapidated Church Road ground was a cornerstone of the resurrection. The club needed £42,000 to undertake the work and they have nearly hit that figure thanks to various sponsorship deals, voluntary work, donations and fundraising appeals. Hare successfully steered the club through the process of reapplying to the FA and they have been relaunched as North Ferriby FC, with Chris Bolder re-appointed as manager. Quite a few of the squad who played for the club in its death throes are returning and, with four promotion places up for grabs, they are back on the long road to where they were only a few years ago. Appropriately enough, 2019 marks the 100th anniversary of North Ferriby having a football club. A host of commemorative events are planned, with local street artist Andy Pea donating a hand-painted mural in the ground. For a club where the writing on the wall has been a dark foreboding of what was about to happen, this will be a symbol of their renaissance. The positivity of the rebirth was further emboldened by their first match as North Ferriby FC on Friday night, when they beat the Sheffield United Under-23s team 1-0, with Dan Nichols scoring the only goal of the game. Football writer Simon Peach was at the Dransfield Stadium for the game. “North Ferriby may never scale the heights of the fifth tier again,” he says. “But the fact that the village was facing life without a club was unacceptable. I understandably feared the worst, but I had underestimated the will of those that dug so deep to launch the phoenix club. There was no self-congratulatory vibe on Friday, just a relief that football was back in the village.” Richard Foster’s book From An Acute Angle is out now and you can follow him on Twitter.