Captain. Leader. Legend. Next Middlesbrough manager? John Terry could be off to the Riverside Stadium, says Talksport, which reports that the former Chelsea stalwart has held talks with a view to becoming the Championship club’s new manager. In the market for a gaffer following the departure of Tony Pulis, Boro have a few candidates in mind and the man who earned his coaching stripes as an assistant at Aston Villa this season is among them. Despite being strongly linked with an alliterative summer swoop for the Crystal Palace right-back Aaron Wan-Bissaka, Manchester City are this close to securing the scrawl of the Juventus defender João Cancelo, who plays in the same position. Along with Barcelona, City are also keeping tabs on the Benfica midfielder João Félix, who Tuesday’s Rumour Mill led everyone to believe was off to Manchester United or Real Madrid. Hell, it’s almost as if no one is quite sure what’s going on. Following a less than stellar season with Tottenham that could still end with him pogoing up and down on a presentation rostrum in Madrid with a Champions League winner’s medal round his neck, Kieran Trippier will leave White Hart Lane. Atlético Madrid and Napoli are being mooted as possible destinations. Meanwhile, Jack Clarke of Leeds is on the verge of becoming Tottenham’s first signing since Lucas Moura rocked up well over a year ago. Having spent the season on loan at Derby, with whom he has unfinished business in Monday’s Championship play-off final, the 22-year-old Liverpool winger Harry Wilson is up for sale and has turned heads at Newcastle, Southampton and Brighton. Meanwhile in Italy, the soon-to-be-appointed Internazionale manager Antonio Conte will attempt to lure Romelu Lukaku from Old Trafford to San Siro. The Italian side play Empoli in their final game of the season on Sunday and need a win to guarantee Champions League football next season. The Bournemouth manager, Eddie Howe, is walking around with a Victorian ear trumpet protruding from the side of his head, all the better to hear any offers he might get for the 23-year-old winger Jordan Ibe. Elsewhere on the coast, the new Brighton manager, Graham Potter, is hoping to bring young Chelsea right-back Reece James to the Amex Stadium on a season-long loan, but will probably have to wait until the Court of Arbitration for Sport announces whether Chelsea’s two-window transfer ban will be frozen before discovering if he has any chance of getting him. Marseille’s midfielder Kevin Strootman is available to anyone who wants to borrow him from the Ligue 1 club and Manchester United, Everton and West Ham have been mentioned as potential suitors. Meanwhile Wolves are hoping to add the £30m-rated Porto striker Moussa Marega to their player portfolio but will have to fend off interest from Roma and West Ham to land the Mali international. And finally, in what is quite possibly a media conspiracy to make the Mill look even more gullible than usual for reproducing such implausible nonsense, assorted news outlets are saying Burnley are plotting a club record £15m bid for the 29-year-old West Brom defender Craig Dawson. No, really.