What were you hoping for?A fun evening, good story and memorable experience. First impressions?Tall, punctual, friendly, confident and open. What did you talk about?Beer, wine, yoga, Morocco, family, climate change, plastics, Bali, India, bad dates and marriage. Not in that order, though. Any awkward moments?I did have to check my blood sugar before dessert, but she was not put off by it. In fact, she asked to have her blood sugar level tested, too, after which, I explained the rules of the “blood, sugar, bingo” drinking game… Good table manners?Impeccable. Even when she lunged for my apple crumble dessert: she did it most gracefully and warned me it was going to happen. Best thing about Grace?Direct, honest and open about what she wants and her expectations. She values a work-life balance and doesn’t take herself too seriously. Would you introduce her to your friends?Yes. A few would be awed by her knowledge of and enthusiasm for craft beer. Describe Grace in three wordsHippy, passionate, fun. What do you think she made of you?A posh aristocrat – she told me as much, despite my attempts to dissuade her from that illusion. Did you go on somewhere?A pub around the corner. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I would have asked if we could have shared her burrata. Marks out of 10?8.5. Would you meet again?As friends, yes. What were you hoping for?Someone a bit fit with similar interests to me and a right laugh. First impressions?“He is very posh! Looks like he works in finance…” I actually said before I went that blue suit, brown brogues would be my worst nightmare – and he was wearing just that. But he was welcoming and relaxed. What did you talk about?Family, yoga, his time in Bali (I joked about people who go to Bali to do a yoga course and find themselves: it transpired he had done that). Any awkward moments?When he said he worked in finance. When I said I was vegetarian and he said his philosophy was: “Meat a day keeps the doctor away.” When he took out his insulin needle and asked if I wanted “a little prick”. Good table manners?Absolutely. He was incredibly polite, a proper gentleman. Best thing about Marcin?Easy to chat to. Great taste in wine! Would you introduce him to your friends?I think we move in different circles. Describe Marcin in three wordsKind, intuitive, regal. What do you think he made of you?I think he thought we got on well, but could tell we had little in common. Did you go on somewhere?Yes, to a pub opposite the station. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?We should have ordered more booze. Marks out of 10?6. Would you meet again?No, afraid not. • Grace and Marcin ate at The Jones Family Kitchen, London SW1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.