Allrounder Glenn Maxwell is confident former skipper Steve Smith and ex-deputy David Warner will overcome illness and play in Australia’s World Cup warm-up matches against a New Zealand XI in Brisbane. Smith and Warner have been hampered by viruses as they return to the national team since their well-documented 12-month bans. However, Maxwell is tipping the duo to feature in the World Cup squad’s three unofficial games against the Kiwis starting on Monday. In another encouraging sign, the high-profile pair emerged for training with the Australian squad on Sunday at Allan Border Field. “I assume so. They have been sick the last couple of days so, hopefully, they are up and running,” Maxwell said. “But I am pretty sure most of the guys will be ready to go.” Maxwell said the pair had been welcomed back into the squad with open arms, denying there had been any awkward dressing room moments after the infamous ball tampering scandal. “It’s been business as usual. Everyone has slotted straight back in,” he said. “The way they came in [to the dressing room], we wanted to hear how they had enjoyed the IPL; wanted to hear how Davey enjoyed his time opening the batting with [England’s Jonny] Bairstow [for Sunrisers Hyderabad]. “And they are both superstars. I watched both of them go about it [in IPL] and they were both absolutely brilliant over there. There will be no worries about them coming back into the team. “Everyone had their stories from where they had come from over the past month and we just wanted to hear what everyone had been up to.” Maxwell looked forward to what Smith and Warner could produce in Australian colours after successful IPL comebacks for Rajasthan Royals and the Sunrisers respectively. Smith was impressive in India, scoring 319 runs in 10 innings that included three half-centuries but Warner was the standout. He departed the IPL as the league’s leading run scorer with 692 at 69.20 for the Sunrisers, including eight 50s and a ton. Asked if he had seen Warner in better form, Maxwell said: “You rarely see him out of form – he is such a good player. You look at his stats over there (IPL) and what he has done for Hyderabad, I think he has scored more than 500 runs every time he has been over there which is amazing consistency. “Hopefully, that continues with the one-day stuff for us.”