With the sacking of Israel Folau has come an urgent need for Rugby Australia to re-engage with its largest and most important minority playing group, the Pacific Islanders, or risk a split which could tear the game apart. Last Friday RA terminated Folau’s $4m, four-year contract for repeatedly posting anti-gay comments on social media. The 72-hour window for Folau to appeal the decision expired on Monday afternoon and the matter is now expected to head to the courts. Folau’s comments were motivated by his religious beliefs, a key element of Pacific Islander cultural values, but that did not mitigate the severity of his punishment. Many of Folau’s former Pacific Islander teammates at the Wallabies and Australia’s four Super Rugby teams share his conservative Christian beliefs and may well feel distressed at the way he has been treated. Pacific Islanders make up about 40% of the Wallabies squad and 20% of professional players around the world. They are a significant and distinct playing group – one which the game can ill afford to alienate. Since Folau’s sacking several high-profile Pacific Island players have expressed support for him on Instagram. Prior to the interstate clash between the New South Wales Waratahs and the Queensland Reds in Brisbane last Saturday night, the Wallabies and Queensland centre Samu Kerevi posted: “Tomorrow night won’t be the same without you there mana. God’s in control, always.” The Wallabies and Waratahs prop Sekope Kepu said he would miss his “Toko”, which is Tongan for close friend. Kepu also reposted a comment from the former Wallabies prop Pek Cowan, who said: “No matter how you see it, good or bad, Aus rugby has lost a good person and player.” More pointedly, the Wallabies and Waratahs centre Curtis Rona quoted a passage from the Bible referring to persecution. “If the world hates you, be aware that it hated me before it hated you. If you belonged to the world, the world would love you as its own. Because you do not belong to the world, but I have chosen you out of the world – therefore the world hates you. Remember the word that I said to you. ‘Servants are not greater than their master.’ If they persecuted me, they will persecute you; if they kept my word, they will keep yours also.” After the Melbourne Rebels-Bulls game in Melbourne last Friday night players from both teams joined in a prayer circle. This is not uncommon, but seemed more poignant in light of Folau’s sacking. RA has expressed confidence the Folau issue will not create any divisions in team dressing rooms, but administrators will still need to deal delicately with Pacific Island players going forward. With a mass exodus of players from Australia and New Zealand already heading to Europe and Japan after the World Cup later this year, RA must be careful not to do anything that would influence more players to leave this country. If Pacific Islander players are uncomfortable playing in Australia for whatever reason, it could lead to a migration overseas, diminishing the strength of the Wallabies and the Super Rugby teams. It will take “awareness” and “appreciation” of Pacific Island culture to ensure the Pasifika players are fully integrated into Australian rugby. The New Zealand Rugby Union recently commissioned a report, which was titled Navigating Two Worlds: Pacific Island Experiences and Contribution to Non-Playing Participation in Rugby. An “overarching theme” that emerged from the research was Pacific Island people constantly “navigate two worlds as Pacific Island New Zealanders, living a life with Pacific Island principles and Kiwi practices”. It would be surprising if Australians of Pacific Island heritage did not also feel they navigated two worlds. The report recommended moving forward towards greater awareness and appreciation of Pacific Island culture, which encompasses the importance of the family, the significance of church and the strong service orientation of Pacific Island people. Australian administrators and coaches would argue they already attempt to understand Pacific Island culture. The Wallabies and the Super Rugby teams have all had Pacific Island liaison officers over the years so it would be wrong to suggest they have done nothing to try to understand the culture. But has enough been done? What more can be done? At this very sensitive time RA must reach out to Pacific Island players to ensure they do not feel alienated by the Folau issue. The Two Worlds report recommended the establishment of a Pacific Island advisory group. Maybe RA and the Super Rugby franchises could look at something similar to deal with issues that involve Pacific Island culture. Such a body could play a role in maintaining harmonious relations with Pacific Islanders if contentious cultural issues arose in the future. Rugby is not just a game for all shapes and sizes, but for all colours and creeds. RA has moved with the times to adopt a policy of inclusiveness, but it defeats the purpose if a large and important group feels excluded.