Late-night hosts focused on Donald Trump’s trip to Japan, his activities during his visit, as well as the comments he made about Kim Jong-un while he was there. On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah noted that the president’s Japan trip was semi-successful as Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, was able to get Trump to delay his tariffs, but Trump disagreed with Abe and his own security adviser on the threat presented by North Korea’s missile tests. Noah simplified Trump’s words for his audience: “I feel so bad for Japan. President Trump basically just said, because North Korea’s missiles can’t reach the US, that’s Japan’s problem, not his.” But this isn’t the only abnormal comment Trump made on the behalf of “the Pillsbury dictator”, who said former vice-president Joe Biden was a “fool of low IQ”. Trump agreed, calling him a “low IQ individual”. Noah pointed out the obvious: “I don’t like to do the whole ‘can you imagine if Obama did this’ thing, but can you imagine if Obama did this?” The host then imitated Barack Obama to mock the situation: “Uh, the Ayatollah says that, uh, Mitt Romney is so white, mayonnaise spreads him on bread!” While Trump watches sumo in Japan, the world wrestles with what to do about his continued support for Kim Jong-un. pic.twitter.com/HpkcRnP336 During his visit to Japan, Trump also attended a sumo wrestling match. It was reported last week Trump would not view the match traditionally; he was seated away for his safety. “You have to admit that’s a smart decision. Can you imagine if the American president was killed because a sumo wrestler fell on him?” laughed Noah. “Like, let’s be honest. If that happened, America would just have to close up shop after. You can’t be a superpower any more if your president was assassinated by a butt cheek! It’s over.” The host then closed his monologue by figuratively patting Trump on the back, but not without taking shots at the the vice-president, known homophobe Mike Pence. “I do think it’s cool that Trump participated and I think we should give him a little credit for attending the event. Because you know, Mike Pence would never be caught dead in that room. Yeah think about it, it’s two naked guys in thongs rubbing their bodies together. Yeah, forget a trophy. Pence would be giving them the Bible, trying to convert them out of sumo.” Jimmy Kimmel summed up the results of Trump’s visit favorably: “The trip was a success, in that now, we are not currently at war with Japan as a result of it.” The host then noted Trump once suggested Obama bring up the attack on Pearl Harbor when the former president visited during the holiday weekend, but quickly pointed out Trump did not take his own advice. “Needless to say, Trump opted not to bring it up either while he was there.” During the trip, Abe and his wife also hosted Trump and his wife for dinner at a robatayaki restaurant, where the food is cooked directly in front of the customer. Showing a clip where he implied Trump’s hair was likely to catch on fire, Kimmel said: “It’s a dangerous move for someone who uses that much hairspray.” Kimmel summed up the weekend to his audience: “It was quite a weekend. Abe took Trump to play golf. They had cheeseburgers together, they went to the wrestling match. It was like a divorced dad spending the weekend with his teenage son.” The host then pivoted to the comments of Kim Jong-un on Biden, suggesting it would have been presidential to be offended by Trump’s comments on an American, but Trump took a pleasure in the insult. Kimmel quipped: “Oh no, he ate it up like a bucket of extra crispy chicken.” Trump later tweeted that the insult towards Biden was a signal to him. Kimmel took aim at this, saying: “The signal is he knows how to spell Biden and you don’t.” Afterwards, when Trump tweeted he tried to soften the words of Kim Jong-un by saying Biden was a “low IQ individual” rather than a “fool of low IQ”, Kimmel exclaimed the distinction was slight and inane to the central statement: “Hard to argue with that because it’s completely insane.”