In March 1971, Philip Glass played one of his first UK concerts, leading a programme of music at Kensington’s Royal College of Art. In the audience, attending separately, were two curious 23-year-old fans: David Bowie and Brian Eno. By the end of the decade the pair were citing Glass’s hypnotic minimalism as an influence on the trilogy of albums they recorded together in Berlin, and by the end of the century Glass would be repaying the tribute, starting a series of symphonies inspired by Bowie’s Berlin trilogy. Tonight the London Contemporary Orchestra perform all three symphonies, including the European premiere of the third and final part, Glass’s Lodger symphony. The symphonies for Low (1992) and Heroes (1999) find Glass alighting on key riffs from the original albums and using them as the basis for stately meditations, putting each through a distinctly Glass-ish prism of sawing cellos, shimmering violins, arpeggiated flutes and chugging brass. They still sound fresh and certainly shed new light on the original material. Disappointingly, the final part of the triptych doesn’t draw from any of the melodies on Bowie’s poppier 1979 LP Lodger. Instead, Glass simply resets the lyrics from seven Lodger songs to his own identikit minimalist backings. Angélique Kidjo – who appeared on this stage a year ago, imperiously reinventing another Eno-related release, Talking Heads’ Remain in Light – here sounds awkward as she recites Bowie’s lyrics to Glass’s disjointed, meandering melodies. Glass himself is in the audience tonight and it’s tempting to grab the great man by his lapels and ask him what is the point of this symphony. Apart from anything, it’s an insult to Bowie’s original themes: Glass could have had fun orchestrally exploring the angular intervals in Boys Keep Swinging or Yassassin or the disorientatingly woozy rhythmic accompaniment of African Night Flight and Repetition. Where his mutilations of Low and Heroes show a respect for Bowie’s melodies, Glass’s Lodger symphony is the work of an arrogant high-art composer who believes he has nothing to learn from pop songcraft. The irony, of course, is that Bowie himself would probably have loved it.