In 2017, I was part of the team that assembled the broadest electoral coalition Labour had achieved for 20 years. Alarmingly, the European elections have seen that begin to unravel, as Nigel Farage and Vince Cable have divided the country into leavers and remainers. The reason for Labour’s poor showing, it’s claimed, was our lack of clarity. If we had had an unambiguous policy, we would have done better. And, in a sense, this is true. In 2017, our manifesto was crystal clear: we accepted the result of the referendum and promised to work for a Brexit that protected trade and rights. Increasingly, over the period since, the positive message that a new, mutually beneficial relationship with the EU is possible has been lost in the noise generated by pressure for us to campaign to reverse the 2016 decision. Labour’s conference in 2018 adopted a policy that referred to a second vote as an option to prevent a bad deal or no deal. But amid the deadlock of the last six months, that has been subject to so many different interpretations that it has looked like triangulation. The 2017 manifesto’s unambiguous policy allowed us to win back leave voters who deserted us in 2015 and to reassure remainers of our intention to stay close to the EU and prevent the race to the bottom desired by hardline Brexiters. It’s been argued that remain supporters “lending” us their votes was the main reason for Labour’s electoral advance in 2017, but there isn’t any conclusive evidence of this. On the contrary, the campaign’s private polling on Labour voter motivation found that Brexit was not a significant factor. And in a 2017 YouGov poll, Brexit did not even feature as a top 10 reason voters gave for supporting Labour. For most people, Brexit had been settled 12 months earlier and issues such as the NHS, tuition fees, housing and living standards were more pressing. Some tactical voting is always a feature of a first-past-the-post system, but the idea that Labour’s vote could go up from 9.3 million to 12.9 million primarily for that reason beggars belief. All the evidence I’ve seen suggests that three major factors fuelled our 2017 advance: Labour attracted the votes of a large proportion of the 3.3 million who deserted Ukip; our success in increasing voter registration among young people by 51%; and an inspirational manifesto that was cited by 28% of Labour voters in one poll as being decisive for them. The coalition we built in 2017 produced a roughly even increase in Labour’s share of the vote across England and Wales, but our chances of building on that to win outright in the next election are now in jeopardy. Moving from accepting the result of the referendum to campaigning for remain would be a huge gamble, putting at risk a once-in-a-generation chance to radically transform Britain. If we’re going to take that path, we need clarity from its advocates. “Remain and reform” seems to be the new mantra. But, as Marine Le Pen’s adoption of the term demonstrates, it can mean just about anything. A version of it has been mooted by Tony Blair. In an interview last December, he said he had been talking to European leaders for a year about a deal on free movement because “one important component in [a] refought referendum will be whether Europe is prepared to meet what are not just British concerns around issues to do with immigration, but European-wide concerns”. The prospect of “reform and remain” meaning ditching free movement of people will, no doubt, horrify most Labour members who want to reverse Brexit. Reform for them, I assume, would mainly be about changing the EU treaties and legislation that could impede progressive social change in Britain. A paper published by Another Europe is Possible, which advocates remain and reform, admits that concerns about EU state aid rules preventing member states from “proactively providing economic support to industry” are “not entirely unjustified”. A separate study of Labour’s manifesto by two academics argues that, of 26 specific economic measures in Labour’s manifesto, while 17 would not fall foul of EU rules, seven were “likely” to be covered by block exemptions and two “might have to be notified”, making them dependent on approval from the European commission. The trouble is that, first, these two are biggies – the national/regional investments banks and state-funded regional energy suppliers – and, second, anything borderline is bound to be challenged in the courts by big companies with deep pockets. So EU reform is undoubtedly needed, but every rule change will require all member states to agree, and the chances of that are receding as Europe moves to the right. The alternative, which seems more realistic to me, is our existing policy of looking to negotiate exemptions from state aid rules as part of a new post-Brexit relationship with the EU. All this is, of course, hypothetical given the current parliamentary arithmetic. But those who want us to do a U-turn on our 2017 manifesto should clarify exactly what “reform” means. And they should explain how trying to win the largest part of the 48% who voted remain is a better path to a Labour victory than building a coalition across this false divide as we did in 2017. • Steve Howell is author of Game Changer: Eight Weeks that Transformed British Politics. He was deputy director of strategy and communications for Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn in 2017