Name: Sonic the Hedgehog. Age: 27. Birthplace: Tokyo, Japan. Appearance: Disturbing. Really? I always thought Sonic was quite cute. Yes, everybody thought that. He was designed to be a lovable mascot for Sega in its battle against Mario in the 1990s. But now we know the horrible truth. What truth? He’s just a video game character, isn’t he? He was. But now he is also the hero of a live-action movie, so we get to see … Sorry. It’s hard for me to talk about. Pull yourself together. This is journalism. In a way. So Paramount Pictures and Sega have made a movie called Sonic the Hedgehog, which comes out in November. The first trailer appeared on Tuesday, and it has not been well received. Isn’t that to be expected? Sonic is a much-loved character from people’s childhoods. It’s hard to be faithful to the original when you adapt a story for the big screen. You don’t understand. Paramount has stayed very true to the original. Sonic still rolls into a ball and collects rings with that same devil-may-care attitude. Jim Carrey plays his nemesis, Dr Robotnik. Sounds great! When I watch this I am certain to feel the same boundless excitement of childhood – just like every time they make a new Star Wars movie. Um, yeah. Sure. It’s just … What? A furry human body with chunky trainers and Sonic’s head looks hideous in real life. Like an adult squeezed into a child’s onesie. Oh. That does sound wrong. The legs and teeth, in particular, are just grotesquely human. The creator of Sonic the Hedgehog, Yuji Naka, was critical of the character’s missing gloves, reported in translation as: “It is shocking that bare hands are white.” That is far from an endorsement, I take it. Naoto Ohshima, the artist behind the first Sonic, has also suggested that the film has got him wrong. “Sonic is a fairy of hedgehog [sic],” he said after the first posters were released in December, “so he doesn’t need to be designed closer to a real hedgehog. Mickey doesn’t become a mouse in live action, does he?” Never mind. Maybe the film will turn out to be good anyway? Well, if the Super Mario Bros, Street Fighter, Lara Croft, Hitman, Tekken, Prince of Persia, Doom and Max Payne movies are anything to go by … Hmmm. Yes. That’s not what I’d call “a list of good films” either. Still, Sonic’s disgrace may be good news for another childhood critter. Which? Detective Pikachu, out this month. Next to the Sonic movie, it looks like a masterpiece. Do say: “Why are movies made from video games always terrible?” Don’t say: “They’re not always terrible. Just in every single case so far.”