There have certainly been some significant games in the recent history of Leeds Rhinos but arguably none has been as important as next Saturday’s game with London Broncos at the Magic Weekend following another demoralising night here for the eight-times Super League champions. On the night Leeds’ multi-million pound redevelopment of Headingley was fully opened for the first time, there is a certain sense of irony that while the impressive off-field developments make this perhaps the premier place to watch Super League, the on-field performances are so poor that the Rhinos are now in a relegation battle. The five tries Castleford scored was always likely to be enough to inflict an 11th defeat in 15 league games on Leeds and keep them only two points clear of bottom-placed London. Without a permanent coach, and looking bereft of leadership, several years of stagnation may finally have caught up with Leeds. “Our lack of quality in certain areas is hurting us badly,” said the club’s interim coach, Richard Agar, who is likely to remain in charge for some time, with no permanent successor for David Furner in sight. Leeds, who were humiliated by the Championship side Bradford in the Challenge Cup last Saturday, led 2-0 early on but by half-time they trailed by 10, courtesy of tries from Jesse Sene-Lefao and Greg Eden. They quickly fell further behind after Sene-Lefao’s second and it was hard to see a way back for a home side shorn of confidence. Matt Parcell’s try to reduce the gap to eight briefly inspired hope but that was soon snuffed out. “We’ve lost four on the spin and I was a bit nervous but I told the players to play with confidence,” said the Castleford coach, Daryl Powell. They certainly rediscovered their try-scoring touch and after Jordan Rankin’s kick found its way to James Clare to kill the game off, the Tigers scored a magnificent breakaway try through Jake Trueman. By then many of the crowd who had assembled for what was supposed to be a night of celebration had left. Defeat here was bad enough but defeat by the Broncos at Anfield and the unthinkable may well become a serious possibility for one of Super League’s most successful clubs. Leeds Lolohea; T Briscoe, Watkins, Newman, Handley; McLelland, Myler; Singleton, Dwyer, Peteru, Smith, Merrin, Sutcliffe Interchange Seumanufagai, Oledzki, Donaldson, Parcell Try Parcell Goals Sutcliffe 2 Castleford Mata’utia; Clare, Minikin, Blair, Eden; Trueman, Aston; Millington, McShane, Watts, Sene-Lefao, McMeeken, Massey Interchange Milner, Cook, Clark, Rankin Tries Sene-Lefao 2, Eden, Clare, Trueman Goals Mata’utia 5 Referee Chris Kendall Attendance 13,286