Lewis Hamilton believes both he and his Mercedes car can only improve as the Formula One season progresses. Hamilton has won four of the six races this season, but after victory in the Monaco Grand Prix he rated his performances thus far as only average and argued that, despite the success, he had not managed to exploit the best from his car. The British driver won in Monte Carlo after a testing race, during which he had struggled to make it to the finish on deteriorating tyres while Red Bull’s Max Verstappen chased him relentlessly to the flag. In doing so Hamilton extended his lead over his teammate Valtteri Bottas, who was third, to 17 points and to Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel, who was second, to 55 points. Mercedes have now won all six races this season and Hamilton has not finished outside the top two – but he believes there is more to come. “I definitely feel that it’s been quite an average performance from myself – maybe above average but generally quite average for the first six,” Hamilton said. “I feel like I’ve got the best I could get. I’ve arrived prepared but, in terms of extracting the true performance from the car, I feel like I’ve struggled a little bit in these six races.” Hamilton has in the past started seasons slowly before becoming truly comfortable with his car. “Without doubt it’s going to improve with the knowledge you gain over the season race by race,” he said. “I do anticipate things will get better as it will be for all of us. I hope, at some stage, that I’m able to crack the issues that I’ve had and get back to the form that I have within me. Whether that’s the next race or 10 races from now, I can’t really say but I am very, very focused.” His advantage over Vettel already looks almost insurmountable and Monaco was the first race this season in which Ferrari have managed to put a driver into second place. They trail Mercedes by 118 points in the constructors’ championship. But the team principal, Mattia Binotto, was optimistic after Monaco that they remained in the fight and that the next round in Montreal would not be decisive. “The race in Canada is not the last [hope] this season,” he said. “It is necessary to keep getting better with each grand prix. We have developed a programme that will solve problems that have arisen this year.” Vettel highlighted the problem facing the Scuderia was the elusive “grip guy” but did not expect any major advance in Canada. “Looking forward for the next three, four, five races, obviously we need to make sure we improve the car,” he said. “Put more grip on to the car so that we can go faster, simple as that. But that guy seems to hide fairly well. I don’t know exactly where he is right now, so if you find him, or if you’ve got a number of that grip guy? But we’ve been looking for him for a while. I don’t think there are any secrets we will be able to unveil.” Hamilton and Mercedes, however, will expect to be stronger at the next round. They will bring their first upgraded engine of the season to Canada. “I know the guys back at the factory are working on developments,” Hamilton said. “So obviously at the next race I think we will probably have a new engine, so the car will continue to move forwards as we will.”