It may seem an obvious point but Scotland’s best chances of success lie in their players being available for selection. It was one of many troubling aspects of Alex McLeish’s tenure that call-offs arrived by the barrowload. The new regime must incentivise players by making the Scotland setup appealing and making it plain that those who want to pick and choose when to appear will not be indulged. The fixtures fall in June, when holidays will inevitably have been booked by potential squad members, and that means the extent to which a fresh regime can carry appeal faces an instant test. That the Scottish FA cut a deal to retain Hampden Park as its home was lauded by traditionalists. Yet, in modern-day terms, attending Scotland home fixtures has become a routinely energy-sapping, dismal business. Vast swathes of empty seats form the backdrop to international ties. Results dictate so much, of course, and Scotland’s absence from a major tournament stretching back to 1998 hardly means spirits are high. There is, though, a general apathy in Scotland towards the international side. Bad results are met with shoulder shrugs. Somehow Scotland has to learn to fall in love with its national side again. It is freakish bad luck that two of Scotland’s best players, Andy Robertson and Kieran Tierney, are left-backs. That Robertson was named as the captain by McLeish means the Liverpool man is a guaranteed starter. Managers are paid to make decisions, it makes no sense to continually fudge this issue. Recent attempts to play either at wing-back, left centre-back or right-back have dodged the issue. Scotland must choose a left-back and get on with it. For all the whining – legitimate in part – about Scotland’s lack of playing resource, there is the obvious scope to deploy – and retain – a 4-2-3-1 formation. Scotland’s strength is in midfield. John McGinn and Scott McTominay can easily play in front of the defence. James Forrest, Callum McGregor (or Stuart Armstrong) and Ryan Fraser provide a “three” that many international teams of higher standing than Scotland would gladly field. Steven Fletcher’s Scotland career has never truly got started but his ability to hold the ball up makes him an ideal lone striker. Finding an acceptable centre-half pairing and a right-back remains a conundrum but further forward the side should pick itself. Experimentation is needless. This may be a controversial point. Gordon Strachan left people in little doubt he didn’t think much of Scotland’s domestic scene – Celtic aside – and routinely looked to the Championship when taking in matches or, more importantly, seeking fresh blood. Nobody north of the border should delude themselves that the SPFL is of high standing but it is surely incumbent on the Scotland manager to make international squads a legitimate aspiration for players in that league. Such a policy would benefit Scottish football as a whole and, perhaps, change the attitudes of board members who are far too obsessed with club matters to concern themselves with what the national team is doing.