It was an afternoon 1,745 days in the waiting for Bradford Bulls and the celebrations at full-time underlined that it was worth every single second on a day they, and the Challenge Cup, will remember for quite some time. For nigh on a decade, one of rugby league’s most famous clubs have been in decline, featuring financial crises and, in 2017, eventual liquidation. But since reformation two years ago, the foundations for a path back to Super League have been steadily laid by John Kear. Kear has no shortage of history when it comes to Challenge Cup upsets guiding Sheffield’s legendary win against Wigan in the final of 1998 and Hull’s triumph in the 2005 final. It may be an exaggeration to place this day among those, but when a Championship side knocks a Super League team out – irrespective of recent form – you have a story on your hands. Throw in the fact that this was the first time Bradford and Leeds had met in five years, on a day when the world was watching to assess the Bulls’ Super League credentials, and there was perhaps nobody better-placed than Kear to sum it up. “They’re a good, young team, there’s plenty of local lads in there and this is a very special day for everyone,” he said. “There’s something special when it comes to cup games. You’re in sport for days like today.” That Bradford fought back from a 12-4 deficit midway through the first half, following tries from Tui Lolohea and Callum McLelland for Leeds with an unconverted score in reply from Dalton Grant, made this win all the more impressive. Eighteen unanswered points from Bradford followed, as tries from Jake Webster, ex-Leeds youngster Sam Hallas and Mikey Wood put the hosts in control. Leeds’s recent frailties were all-too evident. “We got what we deserved,” said their interim coach, Richard Agar. A week that began with the Rhinos sacking coach Dave Furner ending in this manner underlines the mood surrounding the eight-times Super League champions, with this result the nadir of a season that is spiralling out of control. A penalty from the boot of Liam Sutcliffe reduced the gap just before half-time and when Harry Newman brought Leeds back into contention after 50 minutes, it looked as though the Rhinos would manage to avoid an almighty upset. However, Rowan Milnes’s penalty not only calmed Bradford’s nerves, but ultimately proved decisive. Leeds huffed and puffed in the final quarter, but looked as though they were about to force extra-time when Tom Briscoe touched down in the corner. Sutcliffe, however, missed the conversion and following a frantic few minutes, the Championship side hung on with the desire that underlined not only their spirit, but that they were worthy winners.