Today’s recipe is inspired by one of my favourite chocolate bars of all time: Twix. I’ve gone for four layers instead of three, to give loads of different textures... and it’s going to be huge. OK, so there may be a few differences between a Twix and my ultimate chocolate bar, but as soon as you take a bite, you’ll know what it’s meant to be. Note: you will need a sugar thermometer, and you can buy liquid glucose from most larger supermarkets. Prep 45 minChill 2 hr+Cook 2 hrServes 10 For the biscuit base70g unsalted butter250g shortbread biscuits, crushed For the filling400g full-fat cream cheese3 tbsp dulce de leche115g golden caster sugar2 tbsp plain flour½ tsp vanilla extract160g soured cream2 large eggs For the miso caramel90ml double cream½ tsp vanilla bean paste 185g caster sugar30g liquid glucose150g salted butter, in small chunks2 tbsp miso paste140g chilli peanuts, roughly chopped For the chocolate coating400g milk chocolate, chopped400g double cream Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Put a baking tray in the freezer, then grease a 2lb loaf tin and line it as smoothly as you can with clingfilm. For the base, mix the melted butter into the shortbread, tip the mix into the loaf tin, and gently press into the base. Bake for 15 minutes, then turn the heat down to 140C (130C fan)/275F/gas 2, and bake for 35-40 minutes. Make the cream cheese layer: in a large bowl, beat the cream cheese, dulce de leche and sugar until creamy. Mix in the flour, vanilla and soured cream, then the eggs, one at a time. Take the tin from the oven, pour the cream cheese mix on top of the biscuit base, and bake for another 40-50 minutes, until set. Turn off the heat and leave to cool in the oven with the door ajar for half an hour. Cover with clingfilm, then transfer to the fridge and chill for two hours – ideally overnight. For the caramel, put the cream and vanilla in a saucepan and bring to a boil. Heat another saucepan on a medium heat and, once hot, add a third of the sugar and the liquid glucose. Cook until the sugar crystals dissolve and you have a light-coloured caramel. Add the remaining sugar, and continue to cook until the caramel turns amber – about 15 minutes. Slowly add the vanilla cream to the caramel, mix, take off the heat, then stir in the butter in small chunks. When melted, add the miso paste, stir, then return to the heat and bring up to 120C. Take the baking tray from the freezer, pour over the caramel and give it a good stir – this will help with the cooling process. Fold the chopped nuts into the caramel, carefully transfer to a piping bag. Take the loaf tin out of the fridge, then evenly distribute the caramel layer over the cream-cheese and biscuit layers. Now put the loaf tin back in the freezer until the caramel is set to the touch – 20-25 minutes. Meanwhile, put the chocolate in a large mixing bowl. Put the cream in a saucepan, bring to a gentle simmer, then pour over the chocolate and whisk until the mix is melted and smooth. Gently take the chocolate bar out of the loaf tin, peel off the clingfilm liner, and put on a board. Slowly pour over the chocolate bit by bit, and, using a small palette knife, smooth over, making sure that the top and sides are covered. Refrigerate for a few hours to firm up, then slice into bars.