The head of the European Central Bank, Mario Draghi, will step down later this year after the most turbulent period in the history of the single currency bloc. Credited as the man who saved the euro in 2012 by declaring he would do “whatever it takes” to preserve the single currency amid the sovereign debt crisis, replacing the Italian in one of the EU’s most powerful jobs comes at a crucial political time for the bloc, with economic growth also faltering across the single currency bloc in the past year. Germany has never had an ECB president, although Angela Merkel is believed to be pushing for a German head of the EU commission, one of the other top jobs up for grabs, which could have implications in the race to replace Draghi. Here are some of the favourites to replace him: The president of Germany’s Bundesbank and chairman of the Bank for International Settlements, the umbrella group for the world’s central banks, is viewed as the most hawkish of the potential candidates – with a reputation for taking a hard line against loose monetary policy. He was the only one of 25 ECB board members to object to Draghi’s policies in 2012 when the Italian set to save the single currency. His hawkishness could, however, unsettle financial markets after years of low interest rates and quantitative easing to support the eurozone economy. Germany has never held the presidency of the ECB since the launch of the currency union 20 years ago. He could find support from some countries. In the horse trading around ECB appointments, Spain could back a German candidate after the former Spanish economy minister Luis de Guindos was named ECB vice-president last year. The Bundesbank vice-president is among the most senior female central bankers in Europe, a profession that tends to be dominated by men. Europe’s leaders have not appointed a woman to the ECB’s governing board for half a decade, while 13 men in the past year alone have been appointed, but could look to redress the imbalance by appointing a woman to the ECB presidency. Other top female economists that could take the role include Sylvie Goulard, the deputy governor of the Bank of France, and Margarita Delgado, the deputy governor of the Bank of Spain. The governor of the Bank of France is viewed among the favourites, placing top in a recent poll by economists at the Japanese bank Nomura. Villeroy has stuck closely to Draghi’s line, backing continued stimulus, which means he would be likely to stick to the status quo to help encourage growth across the euro bloc. As a German speaker from the border region of Alsace, he could represent a reasonable compromise for Germany should the country manage to appoint a head of the EU commission. His candidacy may, however, be disadvantaged by the fact that France has already had an ECB president, Jean-Claude Trichet. Villeroy has taken a leading role battling the climate crisis facing the banking system, alongside Mark Carney, former governor of the Bank of England, throwing the weight of the Bank of France behind the central bankers’ Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS). The French economist, who currently sits on the executive board of the ECB, could get the nod should Emmanuel Macron not throw his weight behind Villeroy. Cœuré has a strong background of dealing with financial markets, as the architect behind the ECB’s €2.6tn quantitative easing bond buying programme. He is seen as one of the favourite candidates of central bank officials, while his markets knowhow may come in helpful given the potential for turbulence after Draghi’s departure. The former Bank of Finland governor is considered a potential candidate should a compromise between France and Germany prove difficult to find. Seen as moderately hawkish, Liikanen was named the most likely winner of the race to replace Draghi in a poll of 50 economists surveyed by Reuters. However, at 68, he is among the oldest candidates for the job, which comes with an eight-year term. The current Bank of Finland governor is seen as a potential outsider who could push for a revamped mandate for the ECB. He was the EU commissioner for economic and monetary affairs during the depths of the sovereign debt crisis, meaning he has vast experience of the problems that have ravaged the single currency bloc.