British Steel has entered insolvency, putting 5,000 jobs directly at risk and endangering thousands more in the supply chain after talks with the UK government failed to reach an agreement on emergency funding. The business secretary, Greg Clark, issued a statement on Wednesday following confirmation that the court has granted an application by the directors of British Steel to enter an insolvency process. Control of the company will pass to the official receiver – an employee of the Insolvency Service – who will run a compulsory liquidation. EY has been lined up to assist with the liquidation. The official receiver, David Chapman, said the company would continue to trade and supply its customers as it tries to find a buyer. Sources with knowledge of the process said they expected the government to stand behind the process for as long as it takes to find a new owner. Theresa May told parliament on Wednesday the Treasury had “agreed an indemnity for the official receiver to enable British Steel to continue to operate in the immediate future”. “We will be working with the company and the official receiver in the days and weeks ahead to ensure that we pursue every step to secure the operations at Scunthorpe, Skinningrove and Teeside,” she said. Rebecca Long-Bailey, Labour’s shadow business secretary, said: “The government must act quickly to save this strategically important industry and the livelihoods and communities of those who work in it, by bringing British Steel into public ownership.’’ The company has not announced redundancies, and staff have been paid their salaries for May. British Steel employs about 5,000 people in total, of whom more than 3,000 are at its Scunthorpe steelworks. Clark said the government had been willing to act to secure British Steel’s future, following a previous loan, but was not able to agree terms with its owner, the private equity firm Greybull Capital. “The government can only act within the law, which requires any financial support to a steel company to be on a commercial basis. I have been advised that it would be unlawful to provide a guarantee or loan on the terms of any proposals that the company or any other party has made,” he said. The collapse of the company, which blamed its woes partly on Brexit-related uncertainty, will add to pressure on the government in the run-up to the European parliament elections on Thursday. Greybull said in a statement: “The turnaround of British Steel was always going to be a challenge, and yet the business overcame many difficulties, and until recently looked set for renewed prosperity. “The workforce, the trade unions and the management team have worked closely together in their determination to strengthen the business. However, the additional blows dealt by Brexit-related issues have proven insurmountable.” British Steel counts Network Rail, Liberty Steel and Caterpillar among its major customers. A Network Rail spokeswoman said it had increased orders and brought orders forwards, as well as paying invoices quicker, in an attempt to help its ailing supplier. The company’s insolvency also puts at risk at least 20,000 jobs in its supply chain. One of the company’s major suppliers, Durham-based logistics firm Hargreaves Services, warned on Wednesday morning that 170 jobs could be affected. The firm manages the transport of raw materials to Scunthorpe from the Immingham bulk terminal on the Humber, loads it into the furnaces and moves finished product into British Steel’s warehouses. Hargreaves said it faces a £9m hit this year if British Steel cannot be saved, while next year’s revenue would fall by a further £11m, reducing pretax profit by £1.5m. The UK’s second-largest steelmaker had sought £30m in government support after Greybull and lenders agreed to inject £30m. The company had initially sought £75m from the government. Greybull Capital bought the business from Indian-owned Tata Steel in June 2016 and within a year appeared to have completed a rapid turnaround as it reached profitability. Unions called for Greybull, which is understood to be a secured creditor to British Steel, to leave the company. Unite’s assistant general secretary, Steve Turner, said: “We are clear that the government must now step up and step in and bring British Steel into public ownership until a buyer can be found to avoid an economic and industrial catastrophe.” Roy Rickhuss, the general secretary of Community, another union representing steelworkers, said the official receiver should allow enough time for an alternative buyer to be found. “While the coke ovens keep burning and the steel assets remain there continues to be hope both for steelmaking at Scunthorpe and for its downstream operations. What is needed is the right ownership.”