The Tories don’t agree on much these days. Some even want a general election now as a way to deliver what they view as a true Brexit. However, they can all get behind some good, old-fashioned John Bercow bashing. Ministers report that the only good cabinet meetings these days are those where they can go around slagging off the House of Commons Speaker over his latest – aggravating – decision on Brexit. So Bercow’s announcement that he has no plans to step down this summer – or in the foreseeable – will be generally ill received in the Tory party. When it comes to the challenges any Conservative leader faces delivering Brexit, the Speaker ranks in the top three – alongside a hung parliament and Brussels’ reluctance to renegotiate. In the past few months, Bercow’s decisions on Brexit – at times seemingly inconsistent – have been blamed by the government for making an uphill task of delivering Brexit even harder. His ruling that MPs could not vote on the same thing twice – but could vote on the same amendments repeatedly – meant the government’s timetable for bringing the various meaningful votes had to be redrafted. Members of government believe that this meant they lost momentum at a crucial juncture. Now Bercow looks set to cause Theresa May’s successor problems, too. Speaking from the US, he told the Guardian that he had no plans to stand down this summer as previously reported. “I do feel that now is a time in which momentous events are taking place and there are great issues to be resolved and in those circumstances, it doesn’t seem to me sensible to vacate the chair.” On the prospect of a no-deal Brexit, Bercow used his speech that night at the Brookings Institution in Washington to say the idea – as some Brexiter candidates have mooted – that the government could force through a no-deal Brexit without parliament having a say was “for the birds”. “The idea that parliament is going to … be evacuated from the centre-stage of the debate on Brexit is unimaginable. It is simply unimaginable.” This throws a spanner in the works of the leadership pitches of Brexiter candidates Dominic Raab and Boris Johnson. Both have said they believe they can push through a UK exit from the EU on World Trade Organization terms without parliament’s say if it was necessary. They know that parliament is opposed to no deal, so if there is a vote it won’t pass. Bercow’s latest intervention plays into the hands of candidates like Jeremy Hunt and Matt Hancock – who have warned pursuing a no deal would be stopped by parliament and would therefore lead to an early election, which could be catastrophic for the Tories. Given that the vast majority of MPs – and nearly all Labour MPs – are opposed to a hard Brexit, don’t expect to see Bercow’s latest move leading to him coming under any Commons pressure. The role of Speaker is meant to be an impartial one, yet the perception that Bercow is partial on Brexit is what is currently keeping him in more secure employment than most of his colleagues can dream of. The Speaker is the chief officer and the highest authority in the House of Commons. They chair parliamentary debate to call MPs to speak, to keep order, and to instruct when votes should be taken. The speaker is expected to remain politically neutral on all issues, and to continue this even in retirement. On appointment as speaker, they resign from their political party. They continue to stand for election as an MP, but by tradition they are unopposed in their constituency by the major parties. The speaker has the power to compel MPs to withdraw remarks, to suspend individual MPs, or to suspend the whole sitting of the House of Commons in case of serious disruption. The current speaker is John Bercow, who was elected into the role by MPs on 22 June 2009. Despite the neutrality required in the role, Bercow revealed that he voted remain in the EU referendum. Critics have subsequently accused him of using his position to undermine Brexit. In January, Crispin Blunt, a Brexit supporter, told him: “Many of us will now have an unshakeable conviction that the referee of our affairs, not least because you made public your opinion and your vote on the issue of Brexit, is no longer neutral.” Despite facing serious bullying allegations in the past year, Bercow remains in place. A report, led by Dame Laura Cox, found the current leadership in parliament were incapable of changing a widespread culture of bullying and harassment. It concluded that officials including Bercow should consider standing down. Usually this type of conclusion would be something the Labour party would go on the attack on – standing up for the junior staff who have suffered harassment in the workplace from figures in positions of authority, including comments about their appearance, inappropriate touching and bullying behaviour. Only, many Labour MPs took a different view of the report’s finding in light of Bercow’s perceived stance in favour of the EU. As Margaret Beckett put it, “the most difficult decision we’ve made for hundreds of years trumps bad behaviour”. But before the likes of Beckett celebrate Bercow’s extended reign and the trouble it could cause the Brexiters, they would be wise to consider the longer implications of keeping Bercow in a role that was meant to be neutral. After all, there’s a chance that this new tradition sticks. While pro-EU MPs may reap the benefits for now, they may well hum a different tune if it eventually leads to a Speaker who leans the other way. • Katy Balls is the Spectator’s deputy political editor