Rob Kearney Mr Reliable under the high ball and it was his break down the right that eventually led to his side’s try. Subdued after the break. 6 Jordan Larmour Elusive. Gave Billy Vunipola the slip down the right but could not quite gather his kick ahead. Poses a threat with his quick feet but starved of possession as Saracens fought back. 7 Garry Ringrose So often Sexton’s go-to man as a second playmaker but wasted an overlap in the second half. Another who could not find any space in the face of such bruising defence. 5 Robbie Henshaw Not many frills but gave his all on both sides of the ball. Found himself in wide channels which is probably not where he is most effective. 6 James Lowe Left out last year due to limit on number of overseas players and was determined to make amends. Always looking for work off his left wing. 7 Johnny Sexton (captain) Kept on coming but found it increasingly difficult to prise open this relentless Saracens defence. Not quite out of dip in form. 6 Luke McGrath On the money with his box-kicking and made an excellent tackle on Goode in the first half. Always under pressure, from Saracens’ forwards though. 7 Cian Healy Some shift, legs always pumping away, making an impact in the loose and forcing turnovers at the breakdown. Held his own at scrum-time too. 8 Seán Cronin A fitness doubt in the week but started like a train, making tackles and hard yards in midfield. Could not add to his try tally but still ends the tournament as the top scorer. 7 Tadhg Furlong  Had been quiet until barrelling his way over the line for his side’s try. Slightly off the boil compared to the remarkable level he was playing at a year ago. 6 Devin Toner  His early dummy yielded a penalty for offside and made Saracens think twice about flying off the line thereafter. Great lineout tussle with Kruis. 6 James Ryan Has a remarkable engine and left everything on the field, even his jersey in one five-minute spell. Topped his side’s tackle and carry count. Relentless. 8 Scott Fardy Part of a huge counter ruck and an early statement. Won a key turnover too but in similar circumstances to Itoje was sent to the sin-bin and it proved costly. 7 Seán O’Brien Desperate to finish his Leinster career with another European title but unable to affect proceedings in the way that he once could. 6 Jack Conan Among Leinster’s better forwards and, though he was outshone by his opposite number, there is no shame in that. 7 REPLACEMENTS James Tracy (for Cronin, 51) First lineout was not straight 5; Jack McGrath (for Healy, 62) 6; Michael Bent (for Furlong, 70) n/a; Rhys Ruddock (for O’Brien, 62) 6; Max Deegan (for Toner, 74) n/a\ Alex Goode Could not squeeze through the kind of gaps he normally does but that is to Leinster’s credit more than anything else. Organised well from the back. 7 Liam Williams Dropped the first high ball that came his way but his mazy running style always makes him dangerous. Crucial tackle on Ringrose stopped a certain try. 8 Alex Lozowski Made early ground up the middle and is much more physical than his frame might suggest, as key tackle on Conan showed. 8 Brad Barritt (captain) Gave away two early penalties – one deep in Leinster territory – but made a staggering amount of tackles. Led a remarkable defensive performance. 9 Sean Maitland Not a great first half – Leinster had most joy down his wing but on hand to score Saracens’ first try to make the half-time team-talk that much easier. 7 Owen Farrell A rusty start but the way he stepped things up as soon as his side fell 10-0 behind and orchestrated an emphatic response was hugely impressive. 7 Ben Spencer A nervous start in which he flung one pass straight at the unexpecting Farrell. Improved but with England coach, Eddie Jones, in the stands it felt like an opportunity missed. 6 Mako Vunipola Made way after half an hour with a worrying looking hamstring injury. Had not quite been himself up until then but did produce one lovely no-look pass. 6 Jamie George Made a huge hit on Kearney. Wasn’t error free but, like Farrell, he rose to the task when Saracens fell behind. England’s leading hooker without question. 8 Titi Lamositele Ankle heavily strapped and while he tried to soldier on he was withdrawn during the first half at the same time as Mako Vunipola. 6 Will Skelton A brute. Arrived in considerable form and continued in the same vein. What a job Saracens have done by getting him in this condition. 8 George Kruis Such an important part of this side and was an increasingly disruptive presence at the lineout. Remarkable 27 tackles including telling hit on Sexton. 9 Maro Itoje Sent to the sin-bin for being offside twice when Leinster were camped on the Saracens line. A nuisance throughout, always sailing close to the wind. 7 Jackson Wray The only uncapped member of the side but never looks out of place. Made the linebreak that eventually allowed Saracens to take the lead. 8 Billy Vunipola Booed as he came off but colossal all match. Scored the decisive try – he had no right to – but he is a hard man to stop. Back to the peak of his powers. 9 REPLACEMENTS Richard Barrington (for M Vunipola, 30) No complaints 6; Vincent Koch (for Lamositele, 30) Made a big difference 8; Nick Isiekwe (for Skelton, 52) 6; Richard Wrigglesworth (for Spencer, 56) Brought more control 7; Schalk Burger (for B Vunipola, 75) n/a