Rudy Giuliani has said his controversial planned visit to Ukraine will not go ahead, because of concerns about who he would be meeting. Earlier this week, the former New York mayor who is now an attorney for Donald Trump said he planned to push Ukraine to pursue investigations he hoped could benefit the president politically. But on Friday night Giuliani told Fox News he would not go to Kiev after all, because he would be “walking into a group of people that are enemies of the president ... in some cases enemies of the United States”. Citing “a person familiar with the conversations”, the New York Times said the Ukrainian president-elect, Volodymyr Zelensky, was urged by advisers not to meet Giuliani. Giuliani told Fox he was “convinced from what I’ve heard from two very reliable people tonight that the president is surrounded by people who are enemies” of Trump. Earlier, Giuliani used Twitter to seek to explain his rationale for a trip in which he said he would push for two investigations. One regards the origin of special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 US election, under which Trump was not found to have conspired with Moscow but which left to Congress the question of whether he obstructed justice. The other regards the involvement of Hunter Biden, son of the 2020 Democratic hopeful Joe Biden, in a gas company owned by a Ukrainian oligarch. Democrats denounced what they said was an overt attempt to recruit foreign help to influence a US election. Speaking on Friday to the New York Times, Giuliani said: “They say I was meddling in the election – ridiculous – but that’s their spin.” Under the Logan Act of 1799, private individuals are barred from conducting diplomacy. The act is frequently brought up in political argument. Trump cited it this week, in saying former secretary of state John Kerry should be prosecuted for his actions in regard to the Iran nuclear deal. No one has ever been convicted under it. In the Times’ original report about the Kiev visit, Giuliani said: “We’re not meddling in an election, we’re meddling in an investigation, which we have a right to do.” Giuliani also told the Times he thought there would be “nothing illegal” about the trip. “Somebody could say it’s improper,” he said. “And this isn’t foreign policy – I’m asking them to do an investigation that they’re doing already and that other people are telling them to stop. And I’m going to give them reasons why they shouldn’t stop it because that information will be very, very helpful to my client, and may turn out to be helpful to my government.” On Friday, Giuliani asked Democratic senator Chris Murphy, a fierce critic, to “explain to me why Biden shouldn’t be investigated”. He also accused Democrats of “interfering”. Jerrod Nadler, the Democratic chair of the House judiciary committee and a prominent figure in investigations of the Trump administration, said US politics must be in “a sorry state” if the president’s lawyer was seeking foreign help.