Even when the weather is beautifully mild, I still want food with a bit of substance, especially after a busy day. Jersey royals and their deliciously waxy flesh are ideal for this most alpine of dishes. I have recently discovered Nettlebed Creamery’s organic Highmoor cheese, which is wonderful here, as is its hay-aged Witheridge. Serve with a green salad and a bottle of crisp white wine. You can also make this with the more traditional reblochon or taleggio, and you could leave out the pancetta to make it meat-free. Prep 15 minCook 40 minServes 6 1kg jersey royals, scrubbed100g butter2 medium red onions (about 250g), finely chopped2-3 bay leaves, preferably fresh1 small handful fresh thyme150g smoked pancetta, cut into chunks or lardons2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped1 glass white wine200g creme fraiche200g Highmoor, Witheridge, reblochon or taleggio Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Cut the potatoes into small, similar-sized pieces. Add to a pan of salted water, bring to a boil and parboil until tender but firm – about eight to 10 minutes depending on size – then drain. While the potatoes are cooking, melt the butter in a medium pan over a medium-low heat. Add the onions, bay, thyme and pancetta, and fry gently for 15 minutes, adding the garlic after 10 minutes, until everything is soft and sweet. Turn the heat up a little and pour in the wine. Simmer until you only have a little liquid left, then stir in the creme fraiche, followed by the potatoes. Season well, fold everything together, then transfer to a baking dish. Slice the cheese thickly and lay across the top of the potatoes. Bake for 10-15 minutes, until the cheese has melted and is bubbling. Serve immediately. If you track down some Witheridge cheese, melt it on toast for a quick supper fix. Leftover jersey royals are a wonderful addition to salads – a current favourite is one of crisp, golden slices of black pudding, baby gem lettuce and a poached egg with lots of peppery watercress. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.