A Ukip MEP candidate being investigated by police for speculating about whether he would rape the MP Jess Phillips has become the latest rightwing activist to be targeted with a milkshake. A fight broke out in Truro, Cornwall, on Friday after two protesters tried to throw the drink over Carl Benjamin, known online as Sargon of Akkad, while he was canvassing for European elections. Protesters also threw fish at him. It is the third milkshake throwing incident involving a rightwing activist in just two weeks after the former English Defence League leader Tommy Robinson was covered twice in two days at the start of the month while he was campaigning in the north-west. Robinson, real name Stephen Yaxley-Lennon, is standing as an independent in the European elections. Although the protesters missed Benjamin with the drink while he held a gathering with the far-right activist Milo Yiannopoulos, other Ukip MEP candidates have expressed fears that they could also be targeted with milkshakes while campaigning. Posting on social media after Friday’s incident, Mark Meechan, who was fined £800 last year for breaches of the Communications Act after teaching a dog to give a Nazi salute, said: “Anyone that comes at me with a milkshake will need the straw to eat their meals for the next few months.” Footage taken by BBC Cornwall shows the moment Benjamin’s supporters pulled a man to the ground following the incident on Friday. Dramatic scenes in #Truro - scuffles break out after two protestors tried to throw milkshakes at UKIP EU Election candidate Carl Benjamin. @DC_Police are thereFull reports to follow from @tamsinmelville @BBCSpotlight @johnnyoshea BBC Local live feed ➡️ https://t.co/CrWdhHfEAt pic.twitter.com/JxG3wv4U6l Devon and Cornwall police told the BBC: “A milkshake was reportedly thrown over a member of the public by a man wearing black clothing and a white mask. “Police carried out inquiries but the ‘victim’ did not make themselves known to officers. No official complaint has been received.” Broadcaster and columnist Julia Hartley-Brewer has called on protesters to stop throwing milkshakes at politicians, urging people to debate instead. You probably don’t like Carl Benjamin. And neither do I. But if YOU think it’s okay for a protester to throw a milkshake (or anything else) at HIM, there will also be people who think it’s okay to throw milkshakes over the politicians you agree with. Are you okay with that too? https://t.co/NyhrqszND6 The Ukip MEP candidate for south-west England is being investigated by police after he released a video suggesting he might rape Phillips. He had previously come under fire for a social media message in which he said he “wouldn’t even rape” the Birmingham Yardley MP, but later posted a video online suggesting that “with enough pressure I might cave”.