Born in London, Kate Nash, 31, attended the Brit school in London. In 2007, she had a hit with her single Foundations and her debut album, Made Of Bricks, went to No 1. In 2008, she won best female artist at the Brit awards. Her acting credits include the films Syrup and Powder Room, and she stars in the Netflix series Glow. Last year she released her fourth album, Yesterday Was Forever, and this year she tours the UK. She lives in Los Angeles. When were you happiest?British summers give me a really happy feeling. My bedroom at our family home in Harrow looks out on to our garden and a cricket field, and you just know when it’s the first day of summer. What is your greatest fear?I have really bad anxiety and OCD. I get afraid of everyone I know dying. Which living person do you most admire?My mum, because she’s been a nurse for over 40 years. She works in a hospice, and there’s no bullshit with her. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Rudeness. What would your superpower be?To be able to kill with my eyes. Who would play you in the film of your life?Lindsay Lohan. Which book changed your life?Animal Farm. It opened up political thinking for me as a teenager. What is the worst thing anyone’s ever said to you?I once got asked in an interview: “Does it annoy you that the majority of your fans are teenage girls?” I was insulted and angry because it was sexist and ageist. What is top of your bucket list?To see a walrus in the wild. To whom would you most like to say sorry, and why?Everyone I ever met in 2007, because I was definitely about two hours late. What was the best kiss of your life?Kissing my dog when I was a kid. My nan would get annoyed because I never wanted to kiss grown-ups. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party?Al Pacino. On New Year’s Eve we had a Godfather dinner. Everybody had to wear suits and fancy dresses. My Italian friend cooked, we listened to the soundtrack, and then we watched the film. If we could recreate it with the actual Godfather, that would be sick. What has been your biggest disappointment?That all the cliches about people in the music industry are true. How often do you have sex?Not very regularly, which is, thankfully, about to change because my boyfriend just got his visa and we are going to move in together. What is the closest you’ve come to death?I had heart surgery when I was 17. The other time was when I fell off my piano. My head was an inch away from a metal step. What do you consider your greatest achievement?Surviving the music industry. I think it’s been responsible for killing a lot of musicians. Lots of us have mental health issues, and drink and drug problems, and the industry doesn’t really care. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?Life shows you the gifts that you already have.