What to make of the reigning Super League champions? Not even the most optimistic Wigan supporter would claim this looks anything like a side capable of defending their title but after a third successive win – albeit an uninspiring one – the Warriors are steadily clawing their way up the table. How different the story could have been here, though. At half-time, Wigan were booed off following another substandard half of rugby and the prospect of a second defeat to London Broncos in 2019 was all too real. However, Elliot Kear’s error when London led 8-6 early in the second half would prove to be a decisive moment. Chris Hankinson scored from it and, eight minutes later, a rare moment of quality from the hosts saw George Williams kick through for Morgan Escaré. Suddenly Wigan were 18-8 ahead and, while London certainly battled on in the final quarter, the hosts’ defence did enough of a job at the other end to move them level on points with the play-off places. “It wasn’t the prettiest game, but we expected it,” Adrian Lam, the Wigan coach, said. “We’ve had four games in 14 days but that’s two weeks where we’ve conceded only once. That’s impressive.” Indeed it is, and it is certainly worthy of a mention – though the focus remains on their attack, which stuttered all evening. Before the second-half turnaround, Jake Shorrocks’ solo try was all they had to show for their efforts. London deserve credit for the way they repelled a labouring Wigan side during the first half and the manner in which they kept battling after falling behind. “We’ll keep fighting to the end,” said the London coach, Danny Ward. That fight was evident in Jay Pitts’ try, coupled with two goals from Kieran Dixon, putting them 8-6 ahead at the break. This will go down as a missed opportunity for the Broncos to claw those around them further into the mire and they even had chances late on to set up a thrilling finale. But despite defeat it is by no means a foregone conclusion that London will be bottom. As for Wigan, they are slowly beginning to pull away from trouble – even if their performances are still some way off.