The quietest voices are often the most interesting and so when Jason Holder, the understated captain of the West Indies, talks about the World Cup it is significant that he considers the wider impact a successful tournament would have on the Caribbean. The West Indies might be regarded as mavericks or outsiders but, before they won the 2016 T20 World Cup , they were dismissed by cruder clichés. They won that tournament with intelligence and style and Holder is hoping his team might replicate their victory in the 50-over format, which begins in London on Thursday. “It would mean a lot to us if we were to win it,” Holder says on a breezy day in Northampton. “It’s something we’ve won before [in 1975 and 1979] and it’s always said in the Caribbean that if West Indies cricket is doing well then the West Indian people are happy. You saw it in the recent England [Test] series. Everywhere we went in the Caribbean, people were full of high praise for our efforts and winning performances. Success on the cricket field puts a smile on West Indian faces. Seeing us succeed and even dominate again gave the whole region a huge lift. Hopefully we can continue to bring the people of the region closer.” The West Indies’ resurgence under Holder, who has led the team since early 2015 when he became their youngest-ever captain, was underlined earlier this year. They outplayed England and won the first Test by 381 runs as Holder hit a majestic and unbeaten 202. The West Indies were as superior in the second Test, winning by 10 wickets. Test cricket is no measure of form in the 50-over game – even if the West Indies were lifted by those results and drew the subsequent one-day series with England. Perhaps a more relevant statistic before the World Cup is that the West Indies have not won an ODI series since 2014. They were also relatively fortunate to qualify for the tournament when they beat Scotland by just five runs in a rain-affected match decided on the Duckworth-Lewis-Stern method last year. Yet Holder believes their improving one-day form is built on Test match confidence and the return of Chris Gayle, the Universe Boss himself, who offered some ferocious reminders of his hitting power against England. His 162 off 97 balls in the fourth ODI was another blistering assault. England still won the match, after Jos Buttler struck an equally explosive 150 off 77 balls, but the sight of Gayle and Holder at the crease together was a sign of the fire and the calm the West Indies can summon at their best. “Chris is an excellent individual,” Holder says. “Prior to the England series, I said I’ve never batted with him in a one-day game. Lo and behold I went in and he was at the crease. He gave me a big hug, and that meant a lot personally. He was an outstanding man of the series. I batted with him when he got that 162. I’m sure the many batting partners Chris has had over the years would say it’s a great spectacle to see him flay bowlers all over the park. He can really fire us to the heights in this tournament.” Against Scotland, in that qualifying decider played in Harare, Gayle was out first ball and the West Indies looked twitchy while defending a modest 198. Scotland were 105-4 in the 32nd over when Richie Berrington was given out lbw, wrongly, for 33. The scores remained close until heavy rain helped the West Indies avoid humiliation by that narrow margin. “I never once thought it could slip away,” Holder insists. “We felt in control most of the games but, yes, it was a different dynamic. We had never played a qualifier tournament to reach a World Cup before. Adding to the competition we had furious opposition who wanted to take us down. We also didn’t know much about them and it was a different challenge. Credit to our boys for coming through some high-pressure situations. We held our nerve and the cricket we’ve played this year gives me real confidence.” Does Holder believe that the West Indies, who play their first match against Pakistan at Trent Bridge on Friday, might even win the World Cup? “Yeah. But I’m sure every team believes they can win it. The Test series earlier this year – when Sri Lanka won in South Africa and we beat England – had the lower-ranked sides coming out on top. It shows how competitive this World Cup will be. “You need more of these contests to make cricket attractive globally. That series win Sri Lanka had in South Africa was significant for world cricket. We need more of those series to keep the public enthused. In the West Indies we are on the rise and if we can be more consistent in all three formats then world cricket’s perspective on us will improve.” The 27-year-old has often addressed wider issues in the game and he led the call for players to be paid a minimum salary as a way of securing their long-term commitment to Test cricket. “Many cricketers share this view,” he says. “It’s about finding ways to make the international arena more attractive to players who have limited time at the highest level. Certain players are signing Kolpak contracts and we’re losing others to domestic T20 leagues. The common denominator is monetary. I believe if you have a significant minimum wage then players would not be tempted to give up playing for their country. “But it’s an ongoing process. It’s not just me having discussions with FICA [the Federation of International Cricket Associations]. We’ve got to come up with something substantial enough for players to want to do it. We won’t reach this overnight but, eventually, we will find common ground. Test cricket is gruelling and when you’re putting your body on the line you should be properly rewarded.” Holder has had to deal with the machinations of West Indies cricket and, somehow, bridge the divide between his players and the administrators. There have been times when it has seemed as if he alone has pulled the West Indies up by their bootstraps – a fact he acknowledges with a wry smile. “Captaining the West Indies obviously entails pressure and when I started at 23 I didn’t know the full dynamic. I try to play my role as best I can but my first priority always is to play cricket. I feel my best performances lift the team and guys tend to fall into line and follow. But obviously there are issues in West Indies cricket I’ve had to deal with as skipper.” Many of the problems in recent years have centred on disputes between the players, from past giants of the game to current-day cricketers, and administrators led by Dave Cameron, the former president of the West Indies board. Cameron was accused of focusing financial resources on administration instead of the game’s infrastructure and their players. The region’s Test cricketers were earning less than the administrators and there was justified acrimony. The replacement of Cameron in March with the more popular Ricky Skerritt has helped – although there continues to be instability with one interim head coach, Richard Pybus, having been replaced by another interim appointment in Floyd Reifer. Amid the controversy, Holder turned the West Indies into a winning team again in the Test arena. “I tried to control what I could control,” he says. “The things I couldn’t control I put behind me. The guys in the dressing room really helped me and if hadn’t been for my close friends and family I probably wouldn’t be sitting here talking to you today. But it’s been an interesting road. I’ve had my ups and downs but I see myself as one of the most fortunate people in the world. To play professional sport is a privilege. You look around and see so much poverty in the world. I don’t think I should complain.” Instead, as he proved in late January, Holder is one of world cricket’s most inspiring leaders. His double century against England in front of his home crowd in Barbados was exhilarating. Coming in at No 8 he and Shane Dowrich, the wicketkeeper, compiled an unbroken stand of 295. England were then bowled out for 77 in the last innings. “It meant a lot,” Holder says. “I didn’t expect a double hundred but I was scoring at a pretty good clip. Shane’s a close friend of mine, also from Barbados, and when I got to 50 I flew past him. My goal was to stay with him, to ensure he got his hundred. When he got it I was on 170 with the chance to go for a double hundred. I stepped on it and got there.” Holder hit eight sixes with the kind of power hitting that will help in the World Cup – and he smiles when asked if that innings represents his proudest achievement. “Absolutely. For me it was probably the best moment as a player. But the best feelings were actually in the next Test. We had played a next-to-perfect first Test and everybody has criticised us for not being consistent. So to repeat it in the second Test was phenomenal. As captain that was even sweeter. “Winning the Test series also set us up the ODIs against England. We gained confidence and played pretty good cricket in that tournament. We had a few areas where we let ourselves down – particularly fielding. If we had taken a few more chances we would have won that series. It ended 2-2 so it showed we can definitely beat the No 1 side in the world.” Holder is also a link to the region’s magnificent cricket history. It seems apt that footage of him playing cricket on the beach as a young boy should open the 2011 documentary Fire in Babylon, which captured the political force and cricketing supremacy of the West Indies in the 1970s and 80s. “I thought it was meant to be an advertisement,” Holder remembers. “My dad’s friend was a famous calypso singer called Mighty Gabby and he knew the people who came to do the advert and they wanted a young cricketer. He put my name forward and it turned out to be a clip in the movie. “It’s definitely important for me to have this bond with the history of West Indies cricket. Clive Lloyd was obviously the captain of that great team which won the World Cup in England. I phoned him yesterday as he’s one of the people who really pushed and inspired me. So to have the opportunity to pick his brain before the World Cup is phenomenal. “Another guy I’m really close with is Desmond Haynes. We chat a lot about cricket and sometimes, talking to these giants, I have to pinch myself. There is such a rich history of West Indian cricket and hopefully we can add to this legacy and have another movie come out. But we have a lot more progress to make – and doing this in the World Cup will be another big step forward.”