Here we are again, then. Five out of six episodes into a series of Line of Duty and nothing to show for it but a handful of gory scenes burned on our retinas and multitudinous questions filling our heads. And they had better be answered before the last 84 minutes – it’s an extended finale! – are up, lest we explode under the strain. Leaving aside the pressing but extra-narrative issues (are we on board with Steve’s beard? What am I to do with the ongoing theory vocalised by my extended Catholic family that Ted must be a bad ‘un because he is a Catholic “with a Protestant face”? Can Polly Walker alone carry off a fuschia satin blouse and pencil skirt with such aplomb?), here are the matters in which we most desperately require resolution: This is the source from which all Line of Duty rivers flow and to which they will return, ever since corrupt Dot ‘The Caddy’ Cotton redeemed his morally worthless life by saving Kate’s at the end of series three and making a dying declaration that the network of corrupt officers AC-12 has been pursuing is headed by someone whose name begins with “H”. It wasn’t, like, a quiz, you understand. He was riddled with bullets and had to communicate by blinking. The initial letter was as far as he got before he died. So far it’s been not Roz Huntley, not Tommy Hunter, maybe not ACC Derek Hilton, not the late, unlamented Detective Chief Inspector Hargreaves, and Gloria Hunniford has been neither ruled in or ruled out. So – hjust hwho hcan hit hbe? I’m afraid we must turn our heads slowly, and with ineffable pain and reluctance, to the next question that inexorably arises … Come on now, you wee gobshites. How can you think that of the fella? Well. Well. Taken in roughly chronological order: There’s the Masonic handshake witnessed by Steve and Kate in series three. Not saying all Masons are corrupt, just that if you’re going to be, a lodge can be a handy place to meet. There’s his rush to crown the dead ACC Hilton as the kingpin last season, before the rest of the team felt there was enough evidence. There’s his tendency to kill – or issue Fahrenheit orders regarding – members (or embedded UCOs pretending to be members) of OCGs who have the potential to reveal H’s true ID. There’s his spelling of “definately”, which matches the spelling used by the OCG’s head who communicates only by laptop. There’s his going to the Flickr nightclub and acting as H with consummate ease. There’s the fact he has had increasing money and marital troubles since he lost the Hastings family’s life savings in a dodgy Irish land deal in series two. On the other hand, why would he have money troubles and be living in a fleabag hotel if he was a corrupt officer on the take? Again, my extended family has theories: he’s a real Catholic after all. He feels so bad about them that he never uses his ill-gotten gains. But even if he’s not H, we are still left with the question – He’s agreed – if only almost by omission – to get involved with a scheme to recoup his investment. Mark Moffatt, former police rep for Roz Huntley, is now working for a company that has acquired the property scheme and is eager to track down all those who lost money and offer them loans to invest in the reincarnated version against the profit they will surely make this time round. If Ted is not bent and thinks this is legit, Ted should not be in charge of his own hair, let alone an elite anti-corruption police unit. But it also looks like there is something murky in his past as an RUC officer in Northern Ireland connecting him to John Corbett’s largely-murdered family. And it would be just SO 2019 for our hero to be shown to have feet of bloodied clay. Getting Ted to take delivery of a bundle of used notes sets him up very nicely for looking like he’s taking bribes, should anyone wish to place Ted in the position of looking like he’s taking bribes. Hey, apropos absolutely nothing – Very. Very. On the grounds that you don’t keep Polly Walker around for this long without unleashing her in the end. On the grounds that she forced Ted to give her his non-marital virginity. On the grounds that she once gave Hastings a doctored file as evidence, that she was always suspiciously pro-Dot, and is very comfortable with the idea of maintaining a certain level of coverup so as not to damage public trust in the police. And on the grounds that malevolence and corruption seem to emanate from her in nearly visible waves. I would not bat an eyelid if the finale had her ripping off her face to show the reptilian horror beneath and beginning a bloody colonisation of the earth forthwith. Her reactions to some of the horrors she sees suggest she is not a fully hardened criminal, but if she is an embedded officer – well. Throatslitting’s going a bit far, even if she does feel bad about it. To such a degree that it ultimately harms rather than enhances the realism with which it is intended to infuse the work? Yes. Also yes. Because I would. All to play for, mates. All to play for.