Leinster were a year ago hailed not only as the best team in Europe but potentially the best ever after winning the Champions Cup. Saracens were among their victims, but it is a tournament in which the best dare not stand still. Its history shows clusters of teams who have held sway for a while – Leicester, Toulouse, Munster, Leinster and Toulon – but it is not difficult to see Saracens becoming its most dynastic club. Leinster do not lose many games and hardly any when they have a 10-point advantage just before half-time, but Sarries have this decade become versed in the art of winning on the big occasion, learning through failure. Part of the reason why Saracens and Leinster were above the rest by some distance this season was their strength in depth, and the presence of Clermont Auvergne in the Challenge Cup which the Top 14 side duly won on Friday. Replacements played a significant part in Saracens’ victory: the props Vincent Koch and Richard Barrington were both on the field before the half-hour mark, Richard Wigglesworth appeared at the moment Leinster were struggling to find their second breath and the likes of Nick Isiekwe and Schalk Burger had cameo roles. Sarries’ achievement is all the more remarkable given the struggles of their fellow Premiership sides in the tournament, and if there are salary cap questions to be answered, they also have a bond that is as tight as tight can be. The final was a Test match in all but name, and not just because most of the players who took the field were full internationals. It was a match likely to be decided by a few plays, and for all Saracens’ dominance in the final 25 minutes, Leinster created openings that were quickly shut. A feature of Ireland’s Six Nations campaign was that they struggled when chasing a game: on Saturday, Leinster looked at their least effective after they fell behind, jettisoning their systems in increasing desperation. England were also ineffective playing catch-up, but Saracens carried on regardless after falling 10-0 behind. They had leading internationals, but it was the likes of Koch, Alex Lozowski, Brad Barritt and George Kruis – a Lion back to his best – who were involved in key moments. They were not reliant on their big names. Saracens’ victory means Ospreys will take on the Scarlets this Saturday in a play-off for the Pro14’s final place in next season’s Champions Cup. Wales may be grand slam champions, but their record in Europe is – compared to that of England, Ireland and France – dismal. They have never won the Champions Cup and their only finalist was Cardiff in the inaugural season in 1995 when teams from England and Scotland did not take part. The tournament has grown somewhat since then but Wales’s contribution to it has diminished, even when nine clubs were reduced to four regions. Finance plays a part, as can be seen on benches, but it has also been a failing of coaching, with the exception of the Scarlets last season. Wales should, as Ireland did from 2000, use Europe to boost interest in the game below international level, but Saturday’s result means they will only have one team involved next season, the same as Italy. Are Saracens outgrowing the Premiership? They are at Worcester next Saturday in the final round of the league campaign; not quite a world away from St James’ Park but it is a clash between two clubs with markedly different ambitions. If Europe is a bridge between club and international rugby, no other English club can get beyond halfway, even Exeter. With Super Rugby growing weaker every year through players leaving for Europe and Japan, a tie-up between the hemispheres gains traction. The travelling and the cost are factors against, but St James’ Park was so markedly different to what Sixways this weekend will be that a question to be asked is whether the three professional leagues in Europe act as a drag on ambition.