Lee Bowyer was the last man standing in the Charlton technical area as his backroom staff and substitutes emptied on to the Wembley turf, flying down the touchline to join the pile-on after the captain, Patrick Bauer, snatched victory to seal promotion with just five seconds of second‑half stoppage time to play. Dillon Phillips had filed a late entry for blooper of the season, gifting Sunderland an early lead but the goalkeeper ended the day holding the winners’ trophy aloft drenched in champagne and confetti. “I don’t know why Pat and Pearcey [Jason Pearce] were up there, both on the far post but thankfully they were,” said Bowyer, who permanently took charge of his boyhood club in September. “You need someone to be calm and get focused. I wanted to speak to the fourth official and see how long was left because I might have needed to change formation or shape, and he said there were only five seconds to go. I just wanted to try and stay in the zone.” For Sunderland, whose players crashed to the floor at the final whistle, it was a sickener, another heartbreaking finale to another haunting trip to the national stadium; they have not won on any of their past seven visits – they last won here in the 1973 FA Cup final. The chilling words “the league just turned into a cup” greeted supporters above the underpass on Wembley Way, a message that rang true for both sets of players at full time. Victory only partially veils the instability behind the scenes, however. The despised owner, Roland Duchâtelet, was absent here but Bowyer confirmed he spoke to the Belgian on Saturday. The contracts of Bowyer and his assistant, the former Charlton captain Johnnie Jackson, have days to run. “He rang me to wish us luck and then he said we will speak very soon,” Bowyer said. “I’m sure he will probably call me over the next couple of days.” Asked if he expects to still be in charge next season, Bowyer candidly replied: “I can’t see why not. I don’t think I’ve done much wrong. I am sure we will come to an agreement. I hope we do. I got a bit emotional walking out on the pitch. This football club gave me a chance as a kid, coming through the youth ranks and then the first team. To come back to the football club that gave me my chance, to manage them at Wembley was so special for me.” Bowyer went on to do a decent sales pitch for Duchâletet, who formally put Charlton up for sale more than 18 months ago. “I think this is a great football club and I can’t understand why no one has bought it, if I’m honest. Now we are in the Championship it’s even more attractive. If I was looking to buy a football club – it’s in London, you’ve got the fanbase, we’re one league away from the Premier League. Everyone knows the rewards you get there.” Despite the joyous scenes at the final whistle, Charlton could not have endured a more calamitous start. In years to come, when broadcasters raid the archives for play-off footage, the moment when, with four minutes on the clock, Naby Sarr’s blind backpass trickled under Phillips’ dangled right boot will be a shoo‑in for inclusion, along with Michael Gray’s penalty miss in 1998, which dominated the discourse pre-match. Phillips misjudged Sarr’s overcooked pass and, by the time he went running after the ball, it was all too late. A silently seething Bowyer covered his face. Sunderland had drained Charlton’s optimism without even kicking a ball. But Phillips puffed out his chest to make a smart stop down to his left to shutout Grant Leadbitter’s rasping drive. Charlton slowly stirred and soon fashioned a slick equaliser through Ben Purrington’s first league goal. At the heart of the move was an exquisite flick by Anfernee Dijksteel, after clever play by the lively Joe Aribo. Dijksteel fed Lyle Taylor, who slid the ball across goal for Purrington, arriving late at the back post, to do the rest. As his teammates wheeled away to the nearest corner flag, Krystian Bielik headed straight in the opposite direction to embrace a thoroughly relieved Phillips. Charlton had lift-off. And that was just the start for almost 40,000 delirious supporters, with Bauer scrambling home the winner with the game heading for extra time. “I came here to take the club back to the Championship at the first time of asking and I haven’t been able to do that,” said the deflated Sunderland manager, Jack Ross. “We have not fallen short by very much – but we have done. That soreness and rawness that my players and staff are feeling at the moment, I’m sure every fan is feeling that as well.”