Mitt Romney has joined the commander of the Revolutionary Guards in dismissing the threat of war between the US and Iran, despite increasing tensions in the Persian Gulf amid strategic moves by Washington. “Going to war with Iran?” the Republican senator from Utah asked on CNN’s State of the Union. “Not going to happen.” According to the Fars news agency, Major General Hossein Salami followed foreign minister Mohammed Javad Zarif by saying Iran was not pursuing war either. But both men offered caveats. Romney said the threat to US interests was “real” and added: “We’re going to make sure they understand that if they take action against our people, against our allies and against our friends, there will be consequence and it will be far more severe than the initial action taken by Iran.” Salami said Iran was ready to fight, as the difference “between us and them is that they are afraid of war and don’t have the will for it”. The Trump administration has not said what is behind its claim of an increased threat from Tehran. Romney, a member of the Senate foreign relations committee, said the “intelligence community says there’s a great deal of risk” but did not elaborate. It has been reported that US intelligence believes Iranian commercial vessels have carried missiles and ammunition, moves some analysts believe indicate preparations to defend against an American attack. Recently, four oil tankers, two of them Saudi, were targeted off the coast of the United Arab Emirates. Iran-allied rebels in Yemen have claimed a drone attack on a Saudi oil pipeline. Adel al-Jubeir, Saudi Arabia’s minister for foreign affairs, told reporters on Sunday his country also “does not want war in the region and does not strive for that ... but at the same time, if the other side chooses war, the kingdom will fight this with all force and determination”. Amid such denials of intent, the US has sent an aircraft carrier strike group. Amid cautionary moves including an evacuation of personnel by the oil firm ExxonMobil, the US has warned commercial air traffic of increased risk. In response to reports about a draft plan for the deployment of 120,000 US troops, Trump said he did not want war but if he did he would send “a hell of a lot” more soldiers than that. Furthermore, Trump’s national security adviser John Bolton is a well-known Iran hawk who in 2015 wrote a New York Times op-ed entitled “To stop Iran’s bomb, bomb Iran”. Trump withdrew the US from the Iran nuclear deal last year. The Associated Press reported on Sunday that Democrats in Congress will be briefed on Iran this week by former CIA director John Brennan, a stringent critic of Trump, and Wendy Sherman, a former state department official who helped negotiate the Iran deal. Romney seemed unperturbed. “I don’t believe for a minute,” he said, “that either the president or John Bolton or anyone else in a serious senior position of leadership in the White House has any interest in going to the Middle East and going to war. That’s just not going to happen, there’s no interest in doing that. Barring some kind of attack from Iran or something of that nature which I don’t think anyone anticipates. “So going to war with Iran? Not going to happen. Look, the president made it very clear that he thinks the greatest foreign policy mistake probably in the modern age was the decision by President Bush to go into Iraq. The idea that he would follow that by going after Iran, a more difficult enemy if you will, that’s just not going to happen.” Famously, Trump said at the time of the Iraq war that he supported George W Bush’s decision. He has since vehemently denied that he did so.