Once a non-contact sport, netball has evolved significantly from its roots as an English schoolgirl sport in the late 19th century. Though still sometimes referenced by unenlightened commentators of the various football codes to signify a call in the game was “soft”, netball fans understand those comments are out of touch with the modern game. Certainly no one watching Saturday’s game between the Queensland Firebirds and Collingwood Magpies could have had any doubt that netball’s non-contact past is further behind it than cricket’s underarm bowling rule. In one particular incident, 20-year-old Firebirds goal defence Tara Hincliffe lifted an elbow behind her in a manner that could be most generously described as reckless, splitting the lip of her opponent, Nat Medhurst. Although the Magpies were unable to comment when contacted by Guardian Australia as they are in the process of filing a report on the incident, social media had plenty to say when Medhurst shared footage of the incident after the game, asking fans how many weeks on the sideline the lifted elbow would have been worth in AFL football. While the majority of respondents believed it would have attracted a fine or suspension, the reality for netball is that there is no match review process in place to deal with these kind of incidents. While the players and coaches have evolved with the increasing professionalism of the game, with players able to spend more time training and becoming fitter, stronger and more athletic as time goes by, the administration hasn’t been able to keep pace. It has an air of “what happens on court, stays on court” as umpires are left to deal with each event as it happens. However when an umpires doesn’t see the infringement occurring, as happened on Saturday, or they apply a penalty in the heat of the moment that doesn’t match the seriousness of the infraction, questions naturally arise. The last time the lack of review process was discussed seriously was in 2017 following an incident also involving the Firebirds. Gretel Tippett’s two-handed shove in Jo Weston’s back sent her opponent sprawling to the floor. Tippett was warned by the umpire, but no further action was taken, despite the deliberate nature of the contact. However in between these major occurrences, there have been no end of reckless and deliberate incidents on court that have had fans questioning why there is no tribunal to review footage and assist umpires with taking action in a sport that is increasing in physicality with every season. Netball Australia CEO Marne Fechner touted the increased physicality of the competition to Guardian Australia prior to the start of the 2019 season. “There’s been a notion around netball that it’s non-contact; that’s incorrect, it’s semi-contact,” she said. “And when you’ve got very competitive, very strong athletes in a contest where it means something … you’re going to have more contest, more physicality, dare I say it, more devastating impact.” These kind of messages are often repeated as Super Netball grows, no doubt as a way to boost the entertainment factor and television ratings. But there is a possibility that fear of invoking the “non-contact” reputation of old may be holding the sport back from addressing serious issues around player safety. As well as bigger, stronger, fitter athletes, there is also more at stake as the competition progresses. More imports in the game means more competition for places and players must prove that they deserve a spot in the starting line-up. This raises the intensity of the contest and makes every win, every intercept, every feed, every goal worth more than just a mark on a stats sheet. The question now facing administrators is whether to treat the ever-increasing physicality as an inevitability and a selling point, or decide it’s time to draw a line in the sand.