It was the hardest decision of Louis Lancaster’s life. The ambitious coach was on the cusp of starting an exciting new chapter of his career in Asia, but it would come at a price. For Lancaster to take up his new post as assistant manager at Chinese side Shanghai Shenxin, he would need to leave behind his seriously ill father. By jetting off to start his job, he knew he might never see his dad again. “My dad wasn’t well when I left and I potentially wasn’t going to see him again. So, I asked him: ‘What do you want me to do – do you want me to go?’ He knew how passionate I am about football; he had introduced me to it. He said ‘you’ve got to go’ but I knew I might not see him again. I left on 12 July and my dad passed away on 2 August. I didn’t even come back for my dad’s funeral.” It’s the sort of gut-wrenching decision that demonstrates Lancaster’s answer to a question he regularly asks his players and fellow coaches: how much do you really want to progress? The Londoner’s career appeared to be heading down a well-trodden path as a youth coach with Arsenal Ladies, Portsmouth and Watford, before he swerved on to an alternative route to assist another English coach, Gary White, in China. The move propelled Lancaster not only to a new continent, but also towards becoming Taiwan’s national team manager. Leaving his father behind was not the only sacrifice Lancaster made. When he moved to China in 2016, he did so without his wife and two young children. It was a big step. “I wanted to be challenged,” he says. Having worked closely with Jadon Sancho while the youngster was on the books at Watford, Lancaster knew he wanted to work with the brightest talents. “I wanted to be working with the best players and I learned at Watford the big difference between sport for all and sport for the elite. I just wanted to work with elite players and add value that way.” So, after meeting White on a Pro Licence course, Lancaster took the plunge. The move from youth football in England to first-team football in Asia seemed like the perfect step for a coach with big aspirations, but it was a decision laced with risk. “What people see and don’t see can be different,” says Lancaster. “They assume you’re in first-team football and in China, so it’s all sunshine and rainbows, but it was a really ruthless environment. This is why I always ask people if they really want to progress. “My life was simple at Watford. The money I earned this month paid for next month, and the money I earned next month paid for the month after. Then I’ve gone to China and signed a contract that says if we lose three games in a row, I can get sacked with no compensation. I left my two children and my wife at home. Then I went out there and lost my first game, then lost the second. “We took over a team that was second from bottom. It was after the transfer window so we’ve got a depleted squad. We can’t bring anyone in and morale is down. We took them from 15th to eighth in the league by the end of the season and it was a fantastic experience. It was ruthless and gruelling, but enjoyable.” After serving as White’s assistant at Shanghai Shenxin and then Taiwan – also known as Chinese Taipei – Lancaster took the top job in January after White moved on to manage Hong Kong. In the space of three years he had gone from coaching youth players at Watford to managing a national team in east Asia. Lancaster’s focus is now on helping the country climb higher than their current 125th place in the Fifa world rankings and make a good fist of a World Cup qualifying campaign that kicks off at the end of the year. He knows that qualifying for Qatar is a little far-fetched, but he is targeting a place in one of the final qualification groups, which would also guarantee a spot at the 2023 Asian Cup. To do that, Lancaster is focused on creating an atmosphere where his players will perform consistently and maximise their talents. To that end, the manager stays in contact with his players every week, not just those in Taiwan but also the players who are scattered at clubs in Japan, Canada, Russia and England. He is no stranger to setting his alarm to wake up at 3am for a chat with a squad member living in a different time zone. “It’s like every job, there are different challenges,” he says. “For this one, it’s not just about winning on the pitch because our job is to inspire the nation’s children too. We played one game against Bahrain and created a motivational video for the kids. It was Taiwan’s national day and we were 1-0 down in the 89th minute, but we won the game 2-1. It was unbelievable. “There was a little boy among the fans who was crying and I show the players that clip and say: ‘He will never forget that moment for the rest of his life.’ We need to make more moments like that. We have a huge responsibility to inspire the next generation of players and, to do that, everything has got to be right and be better. We have to win, but win in style.” One person who was inspired by the video was teenager Will Donkin. A Crystal Palace trainee born to an English father and a Taiwanese mother, Donkin was only 16 when he got in touch to see if he could try out for the national team. He made the 12-hour flight alone to have a trial and become a regular for the national team. Other players have come forward and Lancaster is positive that he can build a side capable of taking the next step. Not surprisingly, Lancaster is impressed when members of the Taiwanese diaspora show the necessary commitment to travel from far and wide to try out for the national team. After all, that’s what he would do if in a similar position. When asked about his ultimate aim, he could not be clearer. “I want to win trophies. Some people want fame, some want money, but I’m not interested in that – I just want to win trophies. If you do that, all that other stuff comes too. I’m a winner and I want to work with the best players, contribute, add value and win trophies.” If Lancaster can achieve that, the sacrifices he has made will make his family proud. • This is an article from The Set Pieces• Follow Chris Evans and The Set Pieces on Twitter