Travelodge is aiming to recruit 3,000 students this summer with contracts that allow them to fit work around their studies, as the hospitality industry faces a Brexit-fuelled labour shortage. The budget hotel chain said its student recruitment drive was part of its plans to be “Brexit ready” and it is looking to fill roles across its existing 560 UK hotels, with 2,200 of the student jobs to be filled on a permanent basis, and 800 positions to be offered over the busy summer season. The jobs are in addition to the 3,000 roles Travelodge is planning to create over the next five years as it opens another 100 hotels. The company has already announced plans to try to fill some of those roles by tempting unemployed parents back into the workforce with flexible hours that fit around the school run. About a third of the company’s workers currently come from the EU and Travelodge said applications from mainland Europe had dived since the Brexit vote in 2016. The industry has warned of the devastating impact of the government’s plans to slash immigration from the EU by 80% after Brexit. Hotels, restaurants and other leisure businesses face a potential 60,000 shortfall in staff if EU workers are prevented from coming to the UK from this year. More than a third of hotel workers and 75% of waiting staff come from the EU, according to a 2017 report by the British Hospitality Association, which is part of the UK Hospitality industry body. The company said it had surveyed 1,500 student employees to help design its initiative, finding that 62% of them were working between eight and 24 hours a week to help make ends meet. Under the new scheme a majority of permanent roles would be offered to students with flexible working hours designed to fit in with moves between university study and home. It also offers support from a “work buddy” and access to an in-house management development programme to help students improve their work skills while studying. Benefits include discounted hotel stays. Peter Gowers, the Travelodge chief executive, said: “Today’s students have to study harder than ever and meet the rising costs of education. “Our new student programme gives flexibility during your studies and the potential to build a longer-term career after graduation – a better way to earn while you learn.”