When the lethargic heat of summer set in, the residents of Binalonan, a small town in the Philippines, used togather under the trees and share stories about their neighbours, swapping titbits about rumoured scandals, affairs, bankruptcies and divorces. But no longer. In local law imposed on the town, which is north of the capital Manila, such gossip, or “chismis’” as it is known in the Philippines, is now illegal. The anti-gossip ordinance was passed by the Binalonan mayor, Ramon Guico III, after several disputes fuelled by gossip had got “so severe”, with multiple parties involved, that the local council had to intervene. “There are many types of gossip, but most gossip cases here is about conflict around property, money, relationships and the like,” Guico told the Guardian. “This ordinance is to remind people that everything that we say is our responsibility as individuals and as residents of this municipality. We want to show other towns that Binalonan has good people; it is a good and safe place to stay.” For those caught fuelling the rumour mill or peddling salacious stories in Binalonan, the punishment for a first-time offender is a fine of 200 pesos (£3) and three hours of community service, picking up rubbish. Repeat offenders will face a fine of up to £15 and eight hours community service. The mayor confirmed that some residents had already been caught and punished under the new law and it had succeeded in reducing local disputes. The ban was first imposed on the Capas neighbourhood of the municipality of Binalonan, but proved so successful it has been extended to seven villages in the district. As part of his plan to keep Binalonan civilised, the mayor also outlawed karaoke after 10pm. “Banning gossip is our way of improving the quality of life in our town,” said Guico. “A gossip-less town is more fruitful because I believe people have better things to do than talk negatively about others.” Across southeast Asia, the introduction of laws against fake news has become increasingly common, but has also been linked to a suppression of freedom of speech. However, Guico denied that his law would prevent the residents of Binalonan being able to express themselves freely and without fear of legal retribution. “People in Binalonan have been very supportive of our cause for a town free of such activities,” he said. “This ordinance does not infringe on freedom of speech nor expression but is a protection from slander and the like.”