An experimental England starting XI saw off a spirited challenge from Denmark in their penultimate friendly before they fly to France for the World Cup. Nikita Parris, the former Manchester City forward who is expected to be announced as joining European champions Lyon, swept in from the edge of the box to close a frustrating first half and swing the game in the Lionesses’ favour before a Beth Mead cross was cleanly headed home by Jill Scott after the break to secure the win. With Champions League finalists Toni Duggan and Lucy Bronze rested – Lyon’s Bronze on the bench – and captain Steph Houghton, Fran Kirby and Kiera Walsh all on the bench, this was a chance for some of the fringe players to lay claim to a starting place in France. But it was Denmark who began on the front foot. Early pressure saw Sanne Troelsgaard curling an effort over the bar in the second minute, while Pernille Harder headed wide from the first of three corners in three minutes as the Danes came out with purpose. Denmark will not be in France. Having finished behind Sweden in their qualifying group they were forced to fight it out for a final European qualifying spot and lost a tasty play-off final with Netherlands over two legs in a rematch of the Euro 2017 final. With Harder - who took top spot in the Guardian’s first top 100 female footballers of the year – barking instructions, pointing and directing from the front, Denmark caused all kinds of trouble. Harder and Juventus’s Sofia Junge harried and pressed an unusual middle trio of Scott, Georgia Stanway and Jade Moore to great effect. After 11 minutes, Troelsgaard tried again. Played in by Sofia Svava she had time but no clean sight on goal and her shot bounced off the body of Scott. Another Denmark corner saw England make a first foray forward on the break. Emma Snerle blocked Mead’s run but the ball ricocheted off the Arsenal forward’s face before falling back into her path enabling her to force a throw in. Then Snerle turned provider, dancing into the box and feeding Troelsgaard whose shot was cleared off the line by Leah Williamson. A frustrated England should have gone ahead. With Scott asserting some authority in the middle she slipped a defence-splitting ball to Ellen White but the Manchester City signing’s chip floated over Katrine Abel but agonisingly wide. England slowly grew into the game. A Denmark attack fell apart giving Stanway the opportunity to drive down the middle, she had Parris free on her right but opted to shoot and the ball, again, sailed wide of Abel’s left-hand post. Not holding a grudge, Parris, on 25 minutes, collected on the left and laid back to Stanway who sent a swooping ball over the top towards an inrushing Scott, she connected, but could only steer over from point-blank range under pressure from Abel. After a pause to see to a Moore injury, giving Phil Neville the change to help his players regroup and bark some brief instructions, Rachel Daly and Mead combined nicely on the right, Daly swung in a cross which was headed out by a red shirt to the feet of Stokes on the edge of the box, she took a touch and went for goal but her effort rolled wide. The Danish side looked to have been rewarded for their pressure in the 42nd minute. Bruun, controlling a cross with her shoulder, had the ball in the back of the net but the referee ruled it out for handball. On the stroke of half-time the Lionesses pounced. Mead swung a free-kick in from the right, cleared by a diving Danish head it landed at the feet of Parris who quickly controlled and fired home. Buoyed by the goal, England looked more purposeful after the break. Though the Danes still troubled, Karen Bardsley got down well to smother a cross headed for the feet of Harder six minutes after the restart. On 59 minutes England had a second. Mead provided her second assist by placing the ball on to the head of Scott, who was arriving by the penalty spot, and she headed in powerfully and comfortably. This was not an all-conquering England performance. Neville is struggling to find his best fit in the middle in the absence of injured duo Jordan Nobbs and Izzy Christiansen. The experiment of 20-year-old Stanway in between Scott and Moore was not altogether convincing, while White will need to be more clinical across the Channel. What this test did show is that England’s squad players have the ability to grind out a result against thoroughly resilient opposition when needed.