A gothic house built in 1859 and set in 80 acre grounds, this Lake District guesthouse has 18 rooms, with views over the Vale of Esthwaite, Windermere and the fells beyond. Inside rooms are wood panelled, with antique furniture and print-heavy decor; outside the grounds include orchards and an organic vegetable and herb gardens, used in the veggie continental or cooked breakfast. Beyond the gardens, walking trails head up to Tarn Hows (one mile), or the villages of Ambleside (six miles) and Windermere (nine miles). The guesthouse also hosts classical and contemporary jazz concerts and all-inclusive yoga retreats (from £295pp for two-nights).• Doubles from £95 B&B, yewfield.co.uk An apt name for a foodie B&B, there’s a huge and varied breakfast selection on offer at Loaf, whose name actually stands for “local, organic and animal-friendly”. The morning menu includes chickpea patties with tofu scramble with all the veggie fry-up trimmings, pancakes topped with smoked tofu and relish or crumbly tofu rosso and samphire; or, for something sweeter, breakfast-bocker-glories with organic yogurt, fruit and homemade granola. Afternoon tea and picnic hampers can be made to order, too. It’s three miles to Berwick-upon-Tweed, famous for its railway bridges, and a stone’s throw form the border – the coast is rugged on the Scottish side and has miles of unspoilt sandy beaches on the Northumbrian side.• Double from £100 B&B, loafbnb.co.uk If you want to learn about vegan cheese-making, tofu cooking techniques or how to impress at a party by serving meat-free nibbles, Lizzy Hughes’ vegan cookery school with attached B&B is the place. It’s in a top hiking and biking region, close to the Malvern Hills. The B&B has two en suite rooms, which can be booked on their own or with a course, and breakfast includes options such as mushrooms on toast, banana pancakes and vegan yoghurt. For other meals, there’s St Ann’s Well vegetarian cafe at the foot of the Malvern Hills, and several pubs, including the Nag’s Head, which serves a veggie roast on Sunday.• Doubles £65 B&B, single £40. Day courses start at £45pp or £85 for two, ourlizzy.com Near Penzance on the south-western tip of Cornwall, this newly renovated Edwardian house makes a great base for exploring, with Logan Rock, the Minack Theatre, Porthcurno beach and the South West Coast Path all accessible on foot in 25 minutes or less. The eco- and animal-friendly B&B has three en suite rooms with views over Penberth valley, a homely communal lounge with vintage furniture, and dining area serving continental breakfast of pastries and seasonal fruit. Next door, Logan Rock Inn serves veggie options and local ale by the open fire or in the beer garden.• Doubles from £70 B&B, usually a three-night minimum stay from May to October, treenhousebedandbreakfast.co.uk Originally built in 1943 on the RAF North Creake airfield in Egmere, this former control tower once commanded aircraft squadrons on secret missions. The modernist landmark became home to the B&B in 2014 and the new owners restored the exterior, and added art-deco fixtures and furniture inside. Breakfast is locally- or ethically-sourced, including a veggie fry up, vegan yoghurt, poached pears and toast with homemade preserves. There are several country pubs nearby, and it’s just over three miles south of the wide beaches of Wells-next-the-Sea and nine to Blakeney Point for seal spotting.• Doubles from £110 B&B, sawdays.co.uk Spot deer and wild hare from the bedroom window of this 18th-century farmhouse. The garden also has busy bird-feeders and a brood of sociable vegan-fed hens. There’s only one guestroom, which is en suite and comes with a private terrace and a cooked vegetarian or vegan breakfast of herby sausages, homemade baked beans and eggs or tofu scramble. Alternatively, there’s a cosy cabin with its own kitchenette and a breakfast starter pack, including homemade bread. Nearby Trotternish Ridge has hiking and biking opportunities, or head to Portree, four miles away, the largest town on the island, for pubs and restaurants.• Cabin from £75, room from £80 B&B, two-night minimum, vegetarianskye.co.uk Ferghan is well located for hiking up Goatfell, the highest point on the island, and dolphin spotting from the Arran Coastal Way, a 65-mile route around the island. Built in the 1800s in Sannox, on the north-east coast, the B&B looks over the Firth of Clyde to mainland Scotland, and is a five-minute walk to the beach. There are two simple bedrooms, with mini-fridge, retro furniture, sea views and shared bathroom, and “haggis” patties or Scotch pancakes for breakfast. The island is just 20 miles long and 10 miles wide, but most restaurants here offer veggie or vegan options, including Cafe Thyme and Crofters.• From £70 ferghan.com Opened last year alongside an established pair of self-catering cottages, this new vegetarian B&B has three simple, modern rooms and is a five-minute walk from the South West Coast Path and the Jurassic Coast. Breakfasts are cooked to order, with lots of choice, and homemade vegetarian energy balls are available for taking out on day trips, to Portland Bill, Chesil Beach and the seaside town of Weymouth, with its Georgian seafront and harbour. Alternatively, explore a little further along the coastal road, stopping at Broadchurch, West Bay, Lyme Regis, Charmouth and Durdle Door at Lulworth.• From £80, two night minimum, tidmoorfarm.co.uk This little pink cottage is in the riverside village of Glasbury-on-Wye on the English-Welsh border and a two-minute walk the river, where you can rent canoes and paddle four miles downstream to Hay-on-Wye. There are also caving and pony trekking opportunities nearby, and it is right on the Wye Valley Walk (the 136-mile trail from Chepstow to the Cambrian Mountains), and the Welsh National Cycle Route (which runs from Anglesey to Cardiff). The two rooms (both with private bathroom) have views of the Black Mountains and Pen-y-fan, the Brecon Beacons highest point, and breakfast is homemade bread and jams, local free-range eggs or a cooked meat-free option, served in the conservatory or large sunny garden.• Double from £75 B&B, single from £40, glasburybnb.co.uk This Grade-II listed farmhouse has two en suite rooms, and a veggie or vegan breakfast created with seasonal ingredients from local farm shops and eggs from resident hens. It is close to the village of Wingham and a 15-minute drive to Canterbury and Sandwich. Attractions in the surrounding Kent countryside include Goodnestone Park Estate, with 15 acres of gardens to explore and open-air concerts in the summer; family-run Barnsole vineyard in Staple; and Wingham Wildlife Park and Howletts Wild Animal Park.• Doubles from £80 B&B, singles from £65, twitham.com 