Sir Richard Branson has called for all rail franchising competitions to be suspended, as the Virgin Group and partner Stagecoach consider legal action over their disqualification from three franchise bids. Virgin Trains faces ejection from the railways after more than 20 years of running the biggest intercity route, the west coast mainline from London to Glasgow, which will be relet to a new operator before next April. Branson issued a thinly veiled warning of legal action, as he urged the Department for Transport to be pragmatic while recalling a previous battle over the west coast franchise, which ended with the DfT conceding defeat and reinstating Virgin. The government rejected criticisms of the process and said Stagecoach had repeatedly ignored established rules. When is Virgin disappearing from UK railways?By next spring at the latest, and possibly even earlier. The contract Virgin has for the West Coast line, which is in partnership with Stagecoach, expires officially on 31 March 2020. But Virgin could disappear from railways for the first time since March 1997 in November if a new operator has been found by then. Why has this happened?Stagecoach, which owns 49% of Virgin Rail Group Holdings, has had three rail bids blocked by the Department for Transport (DfT), including one to renew the West Coast franchise. This is because none of their offers met pensions standards. The DfT did not mention Virgin in its ruling, but said Stagecoach “repeatedly ignored established rules”. As well as the West Coast route, which it operates in partnership with Virgin, Stagecoach had its bids for the East Midlands and South Eastern franchises rejected. The deadline for bids has passed, so Virgin Group cannot put in a bid with a new partner. Who will take over the West Coast franchise?There are two bids still in the running for the route, now that Virgin Trains has been excluded. First, Trenitalia West Coast Rail is a joint venture between Aberdeen-based FirstGroup and Italian state operator Trenitalia SpA. First Group won the West Coast franchise back in 2012 but then lost out after a legal challenge from Virgin Trains over how the government had awarded it. The second contender is MTR West Coast Partnership. This is a joint venture between MTR Corp, which operates Hong Kong’s public transport network, and Guangshen Railway, which operates one of China’s biggest railways. MTR operates South Western Railway as a joint venture with FirstGroup. Will the Pendolinos still be operating?For the foreseeable future. The Pendolinos are not owned by Virgin Trains and will transfer to new owners – with different branding, of course. Will Virgin make a comeback?Stagecoach is “seeking an urgent meeting” with DfT about the ruling. The Virgin Group boss, Sir Richard Branson, has said he is “devastated”. However, barring a change in the DfT’s rules or a legal challenge, Virgin Trains faces a spell in the sidings. A rail review led by the former BA chief executive Keith Williams is considering extensive changes to the industry and one franchise competition, CrossCountry, has already been paused. Branson said he had “deja vu” from the 2012 west coast franchising fiasco when the DfT defended handing over the franchise to rival FirstGroup as legally robust, before caving in and allowing Virgin to run the line ever since. Writing on his blog, Branson said “history appears to be repeating itself”, after the DfT barred Stagecoach, the Virgin Group’s joint venture partner in Virgin trains, from bidding for three franchises due to be decided this year in a row over rail staff pensions. The franchises are InterCity West Coast, East Midlands and Southeastern. The government said train companies would have to take on liabilities for the Railways Pension Scheme, which has a potential £6bn deficit. Stagecoach, which was forced off the East Coast franchise last year along with Virgin after failing to meet ambitious promised payments, said the private sector should not be expected to bear the risks. Branson said the pensions row led to “the inescapable conclusion [that] the government is setting franchisees up to fail”. According to the government, there are no additional demands for operators to shoulder risk in relation to the pension scheme, beyond those that already exist in most franchises. The tycoon also took issue with the DfT’s award of the the East Midlands franchise to the Dutch state-owned transport operator Abellio, after reports that elements of Stagecoach’s bid were sent to the rival bidder in error. He concluded: “With two of the three outstanding competitions under a cloud, it is far from clear that any franchise can be let robustly as things stand. The DfT should take a pragmatic view and cancel all franchising competitions whilst Keith Williams does his vital work.” A DfT spokesperson said: “Abellio were awarded the franchise after presenting the strongest overall bid, which delivers the best deal for rail passengers. “Stagecoach submitted non-compliant bids for the East Midlands railway franchise and all current competitions, repeatedly ignoring established rules by rejecting the commercial terms on offer. In doing so, they are responsible for their own disqualification. “An expert third-party investigation established conclusively that Abellio did not access any information relating to any other bidders that affected their bid. There was no effect whatsoever on the outcome of the bid process.”