Rugby league’s “summer from hell” in which sex tapes jockeyed for attention with nudity, stupidity, drunkenness and allegations of violence and aggravated sexual assault, was so damaging for rugby league’s brand that clubs without players involved in the matters feared sponsors would flee by association. In Jack de Belin’s hearing to decide whether he could play rugby league after being the first casualty of the NRL’s “no fault stand down” policy, Melbourne Storm CEO Bart Campbell offered evidence that companies had been resistant to sponsoring his club by dint of being in the same code of football as the Dragons back-rower charged with aggravated sexual assault of a 19-year-old woman from Wollongong. Other clubs had heard similar warnings. The NRL had heard the same. Legions of experts in branding and marketing and money lined up to tell Todd Greenberg and company that something had to give. The game couldn’t continue on this path of self-destruction, not if they wanted the big end of town attached. The corporates weren’t going down with a sinking ship. They’re business partners, not friends. Bottom line is all. And so the NRL acted. Critics argued too hurriedly. Other critics accused them of dithering, of drawing things out. Regardless, they needed to make players listen. They had to get through, somehow, and explain that it had to stop. So they drew the proverbial line in the sand and declared they would suspend-with-pay any player charged with an offence carrying a sentence of 11 years of more. De Belin was summarily stood down. And stood up again. Convinced he’d done nothing wrong – and incensed that a war was being waged against him through media – De Belin took his employer to Federal Court for unlawful restraint of trade. It would be a test case – a player fighting the very game. Fighting a law. Four weeks later, the law won. “The court found the respondents had established a clear and present danger to their legitimate interests given, among other things, the seriousness of the charge against Mr de Belin and the unprecedented extent of negative headlines which it attracted,” ruled Justice Melissa Perry. “The reputation of the NRL competition was tarnished by the allegations and tarnished against Mr de Belin and other players during the off-season described in media reports as the ‘summer from hell’. “The Court accepted that nothing short of a rule precluding Mr de Belin and others charged in the future with serious offences of a similar nature from taking the field was likely to address the clear and present danger established by the evidence.” The ruling is a “win” for Commission chair Peter Beattie and NRL chief executive Todd Greenberg, though they were careful not to gloat in their press conference. Professionally they’ll be satisfied by the judgement of their judgement. They’ve been vindicated. They won. “This is not a time for celebration,” said Beattie. “We would have preferred not to be in court on this matter. What the commission did with the NRL executive was act in the best interests of the game. “Our job is to protect the game. Anyone involved in an offence with 11 years or more, an offence against women or children, can clearly understand the rules.” Greenberg said: “We’ve said this from the start and I’ll say it again: we make no judgement whatsoever about anyone’s guilt or innocence. This is a rule that protects the brand and reputation of the game.” There are millions at stake. Corporations demand brands they are paying money to be associated with uphold certain standards. Israel Folau lost a Land Rover because of it and then a career. De Belin can come back, if innocent, even after 18 months out. He is 28 years old and if he doesn’t play rugby league for 18 months, his body could be better for it. Or at least neutral. The game is brutal on bodies. De Belin won’t have aged 18 months in rugby league years. De Belin declared himself “very disappointed” with the decision. Rugby League Players Association chief executive Ian Prendergast was also “disappointed”, “not only on behalf of Jack but all our members, in fact all professional athletes in this country”. “We’ve maintained our opposition to the policy throughout because it goes outside of what we’ve agreed to under the collective bargaining agreement and the penalties it effectively imposes. We’ll now go away and consider the collective issues on behalf of our members including issuing a dispute under the CBA.” Beattie, Greenberg – “the game” – argue they had to do something. Rugby league has had a low base for a long time. The Commission and its NRL executive have made a stand and been vindicated under the law. “When you’re confronted by an off-season like we had, we had to take some action,” said Beattie. “When you are confronted with the damage that was being done, we had to act. This has not been a pleasant exercise for anybody. We had to make a tough decision. Our job is not a popularity contest. It is to do the right thing by rugby league.”