This may look daunting, but once you learn how to make it, the options for different designs and fillings are endless. And because it is so easy to eat, you will want to make it again soon. Make sure you roll the sponge while it is still warm, as it will “remember” its shape and won’t crack once rolled for a second time with the filling. Use a damp tea towel as this will keep the sponge moist – it is very light and has no fat, so is prone to drying out. Don’t forget to trim all the edges first, as these will be a little firmer than the rest of the cake, and may cause it to crack. Prep time: decorative paste 10 mins, design 10 mins, cake 15 mins, rolling and filling 10 mins, plus cooling timeBake time: 10 minsServes: 8 For the decorative paste:50g butter50g icing sugar2 medium egg whites50g plain flourPurple, pink and yellow gel food dyeFor the cake: 4 medium eggs125g caster sugar125g self-raising flourFilling: 4 tbsp raspberry jam200g double cream1 tsp vanilla bean paste75g raspberries Grease a rectangular 15in x 10in (38cm x 25cm) swiss roll tin, then line the base with greaseproof paper. You will be piping your decoration of bees and flowers on to this, so it may help to draw a template on the back of the paper, using our photograph for inspiration. Concentrate the design on one half of the paper (dividing the sheet along its longer edge), as only one side will be visible once rolled. Make the decorative paste. Cream together the butter and icing sugar until light and fluffy. Mix in the egg white, then add the flour and whisk until just combined. Divide the paste between three bowls and colour purple, pink and yellow. Transfer to piping bags. Snip the tips of the piping bags and use them to pipe your design of bees and flowers. For the bees, pipe on the purple details first, then place the tray in the freezer before adding the yellow on top. Once finished, place the tray in the freezer while you make the cake batter. Heat the oven to 180C(fan)/200C/400F/gas mark 6. In a large mixing bowl, whisk together the eggs and caster sugar on high speed for seven minutes. Sift in the flour, then carefully fold in to avoid deflating the batter too much. Spread the batter over the top of the piped design. Bake for 10 minutes until spongy on top. Once baked, carefully turn out on to a chopping board. Immediately flip on to a damp tea towel (at which point the greaseproof paper should be at the bottom again) and trim all the edges. Immediately roll up the cake using the baking paper and tea towel to help (starting from the end without the decoration). Remove the baking paper as you go along. Leave the cake to cool fully while wrapped in the tea towel. When it is cooled, carefully unroll it. Spread jam over it. Whip the double cream with the vanilla paste to soft peaks. Spread the cream on top of the jam, then scatter with raspberries. Re-roll it up and enjoy.