Nearly 8 million people in Britain eligible to vote in the European elections are not yet registered, campaigners have said as the deadline looms. Research commissioned by Best For Britain, the pro-remain campaign, and undertaken by Number Cruncher Politics suggests 7.9 million eligible voters are not on the electoral roll in their local area. The figure is based on population and nationality data, estimates of what proportion of the population is registered to vote in each region, and research from the Electoral Commission on the accuracy of the electoral register. The Green party MP Caroline Lucas said: “It’s really concerning that huge swathes of people across the country, who have the right to vote in the European elections this May, aren’t currently registered. To vote in May’s election you must be registered to vote, be 18 or over on 23 May, be a British, Irish, or qualifying Commonwealth citizen, or a citizen of an EU country other than Malta and Cyprus. You have to be either resident at an address in the UK, and not be legally excluded from voting – or be a British citizen living abroad, in which case you can vote in European elections for up to 15 years after you have left the country. If you are not already on the electoral roll, you can register to vote online. You may need your national insurance or passport number. Unlike the Brexit referendum, EU citizens resident in the UK can vote in European parliamentary elections. If you are a citizen of an EU country (other than the UK, Ireland, Malta and Cyprus) resident in England, Scotland or Wales, to vote you must do the following three things by Tuesday 7 May: If you are a citizen of an EU country (other than the UK, Ireland, Malta and Cyprus) resident in Northern Ireland, you must do the following three things by 7 May: “This analysis shows nearly 8 million people could be at risk of losing the right to have their voice heard at such a crucial juncture for the country’s future, with young people, private renters and EU citizens some of the groups most at risk of missing out. That needs to change. Whether you voted leave or remain, your voice needs to be heard. Get out and get registered.” Her words were echoed by the Labour Co-operative MP Rachael Maskell, who said: “The right to vote is one of the most important rights we hold. It creates a healthy channel of communication between communities and those tasked with representing them.” Best of Britain, which is registered with the Electoral Commission, was founded by Gina Miller, the businesswoman who took the government to the supreme court over Brexit. Its chair is Mark Malloch Brown, the former UN deputy secretary general. The campaign received £400,000 from the billionaire George Soros. The European elections will take place between 23 and 26 May. A total of 751 members of the European parliament represent more than 512 million people from 28 member states.