After weeks of long discussions and little progress, cross-party talks between the government and Labour are over. Seemingly, a plan for MPs to consider a range of possible Brexit options in a series of votes, possibly next week. According to a leaked document, this could also see MPs vote on the idea of a second referendum. However, Labour says it has not yet agreed anything. It’s hard to see how. The first two attempts at such a plan, instigated by backbenchers, ended in deadlock. And we now know that Theresa May seems set to leave Downing Street next month. Would her successor – who might have a very different idea of Brexit – want to walk through the door of No 10 with their hands already tied? The government has promised to table the withdrawal agreement bill (Wab) – basically, the first stage of the departure plan – in the Commons in the week starting 3 June. If a compromise was reached, it could be amended to reflect this. If not, the Wab would seem set to be heavily defeated again. Focus would then shift to a likely brutal Tory leadership election, possibly taking up much of the summer. The odds are narrowing on a hard Brexit-backing MP, such as Boris Johnson, winning, especially if, as expected, Nigel Farage’s Brexit party win seats in next week’s European elections, and the Tories are pushed to fourth or even fifth. A new leader would certainly want to spend some time drawing up a new departure plan, talking it over with Brussels, and then potentially putting it to MPs. Someone like Johnson could soon declare a structured departure impossible and move to no deal. Seemingly not. Both the EU’s position and the arithmetic of the Commons will be the same, whether it is May or someone else inside No 10. Any Brexiter demands for Brussels to ditch the Irish backstop plan will be given short shrift, while MPs have already rejected the idea of no deal. Perhaps a general election, something many people think is possible once a new prime minister reaches their own impasse. This would then raise other imponderables, for example, whether Labour would fight the election promising a confirmatory Brexit referendum, something backed by the bulk of its members and many MPs, but resisted by Jeremy Corbyn. It also remains to be seen whether the Conservatives might seek some sort of pact with Farage’s new party. Brexiters would be keen, but some Tory MPs have already declared this to be impossible for them. As ever with Brexit, no one really knows, but the current firm deadline is 31 October – the extended departure date offered by the EU and agreed by the prime minister in April. Beyond that point, the default is, again, that the UK will leave without a deal. But much can, and very possibly will, happen before then.