Mark Wood faced a nervous night pondering his World Cup fate after injury forced him out of England’s warm-up defeat against Australia. The paceman abandoned his run-up midway through his first spell at the Hampshire Bowl and left the field feeling pain in his left foot. Wood’s history of ankle problems immediately raised concerns and he was sent to a nearby hospital for scans. Eoin Morgan made the same journey 24 hours earlier and was diagnosed with a small fracture in his left index finger, ruling the captain out of the 12-run loss, but he expects to be passed fit for the curtain-raiser against South Africa on Thursday. Jos Buttler, deputising for Morgan, said of Wood: “We’ll see how it turns out in the morning. It can be a worry for him. He’s worked really hard and it’s something he’s battled a bit which is a frustration for him. He puts in all the work, the medical staff are great with him, and I’m sure he’s in the best hands. We hope for the best for him.” This was only Wood’s second appearance of the season, with an output totalling just 13.1 overs, thin workload for somebody heading into an intensive 10-team competition. David Willey stands by having been the last seamer to miss out on the final cut of 15, but England would much prefer Wood to get the all-clear. There were no real concerns over Liam Dawson, after the Hampshire spinner suffered a painful blow while backing up the stumps and was removed from the batting line-up. Steve Smith described the taunts he received from England fans as “water off a duck’s back” after forging a match-winning century. Smith and David Warner were facing their fiercest rivals for the first time since returning from year-long ball-tampering bans. Both were booed on their way to the crease at the Hampshire Bowl and subjected to sporadic chants of “cheat, cheat, cheat” from sections of the crowd. But Smith managed to coax applause from some when he reached 50 and 100. That he finished with 116 in 102 balls was a fair indication that the heckling had not derailed him. “Everyone’s entitled to their opinion. It’s water off a duck’s back to me,” he said. “I try to black it out. When I’m out in the middle I don’t pay attention to the crowd. I heard a few things as I went out to bat … but I was trying to keep my head down and do my job. Fortunately I was able to score a few runs.”