It’s 5pm on a Tuesday night in a semi-residential street in east London. The brown single-decker youth bus is attracting a steady trickle of local teenagers. The sound of laughter, and the unmistakable cheers and moans of boys playing Fifa on a games console comes from inside. “What are we making today?” an enthusiastic boy in the mobile club’s kitchen area asks. “Fajitas,” a youth worker replies, as the boy begins chopping red peppers with a blunt table knife. “Don’t use the whole packet of spice mix though, I think it’ll be too hot.” These small interactions may sound trivial, but the staff believe they are a first step towards ensuring these children do not fall into criminality and violence. The bus offers young people a safe place to gather with friends and supportive adults, and take part in activities such as cooking, quizzes and computer games. They can also use the internet, get careers advice, help with applications and find out about other opportunities. “Because we are here every week, we are able to offer consistency in the young people’s lives and take the time to gain trust and form relationships,” says Helen Perry, branch leader of Worth Unlimited, the national Christian charity that runs the project in the borough of Waltham Forest. “Because the bus can be driven into the heart of some of the most deprived areas, it can attract young people who wouldn’t have engaged in other youth activities,” she adds. Fitted out with comfy pink seating, a table, fridge and a computer games lounge, it is an appealing place for a teenager, and it’s busy. Aspiring boxer and bus regular Mark, aged 14, sums up the vibe: “I first came here because I heard they had Playstations, but I’ve grown to love the staff. If I’ve had a bad day, the staff talk to me and don’t make me feel bad, they comfort me in my time of need.” This is in contrast to the police, he says, who young people see as more of “an issue” than a source or safety. “They see me, as a black male, in a criminal type way, that’s the first thing they see,” says Mark. Clearly, the bus is appreciated by its users, who are growing up in areas where it is all too easy to get caught up in the world of gangs and drug dealing. In recent years, local residents like me have been horrified by the stabbings and shooting of young people and fear for our own children. Since 2017, three teenagers have been killed not far from my house. My 10-year-old son and I have seen their bereft friends grieving at shrines set up in their memory. In January, the youth bus was caught up in a tragedy itself when, during a usual session, 14-year-old Jaden Moodie was stabbed to death in the same street. Staff were among those who tried to help the teenager, who was someone they knew but not a regular bus visitor. They are still dealing with the traumatic aftermath of the killing on themselves and the young people who were there. Despite this background of knife crime, tragedy and a child poverty rate of around 35%, funding for the youth bus is extremely tight. The project has been running for 12 years but no longer receives council funding and is in the final year of a National Lottery three-year grant from the Youth Investment Fund. It frequently breaks down, its interior is worn, the paintwork is scruffy and the vehicle will soon need replacing. It is only able to offer five regular evening sessions per week in a handful of deprived areas in the borough, at an annual cost of around £79,000. Two similar youth buses operated directly by the council were taken out of service in 2016. The bus is operating against a backdrop of huge cuts to youth services across the capital and nationally. The cross-party parliamentary group on knife crime reported this month that the average council cut spending on youth services by 40% over the past three years. Its data suggested a direct link between these cuts and record levels of knife crime in England and Wales. In response, the government launched its Serious Violence Strategy last year, which includes a £22m early intervention youth fund to support local partnership projects to prevent young people getting involved in crime. The fund is open to police and crime commissioners in England and Wales as lead bidders. Last month, Waltham Forest council announced a violence reduction partnership, including a programme for primary school children and vulnerable children entering secondary school, and a scheme to improve police relationships with young people. Staff on the youth bus believe that open-access youth clubs – whose impact is gradual and not easily measured – can also help tackle some of the underlying causes of violent crime. For Perry, nine years of austerity has created “a generation of teenagers who are lacking hope. It isn’t a surprise that those same young people then lose their respect for the sanctity of life. “We are responding by providing the services, support, encouragement and opportunities young people need to discover and reclaim their hope,” she says. Volunteer Monique Francois says young people need somewhere they can relax and talk to adults and peers. “They [often] have no one to discuss their feelings with, they look for solace elsewhere, then they get taken advantage of [by gangs and drug dealers]. Regardless of the front they put up, they are just children.” The users of the bus, too, see it as an opportunity for young people to be a positive influence on each other. Mark, who dreams of setting up his own business, says: “I just want to make it and do good in life, I want to see my friends succeed … everyone just being happy and getting money in a legit way. “I know I’ll make it so they will make it too, I’m not leaving them behind in the dust.”