After weeks of debate, Israel Folau’s code of conduct hearing on Saturday has the potential to not just determine the fate of one of Australian rugby’s highest-profile players, but to redefine the relationship between sporting bodies and their athletes. A three member panel – made up of John West QC, Kate Eastman SC and sports administrator John Boultbee – will determine whether Folau breached Rugby Australia’s code of conduct by posting anti-gay comments on social media or whether he exercised his right of religious freedom. Whatever the hearing determines it will be a landmark decision in both the history of Australian sport and workplace relations because of the unprecedented nature of the dispute. In April last year Folau posted religiously-inspired, anti-gay posts on social media. Citing its policy of inclusion and under pressure from sponsors, RA asked Folau to desist from making further comments. Early last month Folau wrote on Instagram that “Hell awaits drunks, homosexuals, adulterers, liars, fornicators, thieves, atheists and idolaters”. RA announced its intention to terminate Folau’s $4m, four-year contract. Folau sought the code of conduct hearing to challenge the termination. RA will likely argue that players must abide by its code of conduct. The preamble to the code outlines RA’s core values, which include a safe, fair and inclusive environment for all involved in the game. Players are asked to “treat everyone equally, fairly and with dignity regardless of gender or gender identity, sexual orientation, ethnicity, cultural or religious background, age or disability”. A clause in the code also states that players “must use social media appropriately”. RA will highlight the repeated nature of Folau’s behaviour, arguing he failed to obey its warning, justifying termination. Folau will most likely argue he was exercising his right to religious freedom when posting comments on social media rather than freedom of speech. Most of Folau’s comments were direct quotes from the Bible. While Australia does not have a religious discrimination act, it has ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which says everyone has the right to freedom of religion. The question is did RA have the right to ask Folau not to post his anti-gay, but religiously-inspired, comments? Folau could also challenge RA’s inclusion policy, arguing it did not include conservative Christians and their fundamentalist beliefs. If Folau is deemed to have the right to express his religious beliefs, RA would have to prove its attempts to restrict his freedoms were appropriate. If the hearing finds Folau breached the code of conduct and his contract is terminated, he is likely to take legal action for unfair dismissal, which could result in a protracted court battle, dragging on for years. But a guilty finding does not necessarily mean Folau’s contract will be torn up. The hearing must ensure the punishment fits the crime. Would terminating Folau’s contract be deemed an excessive sanction? Keep in mind former NSW Waratahs player Jacques Potgieter made a homophobic slur towards an opposition player a few years ago and was fined $20,000 – not $4m. There is a possibility the hearing could fine Folau for breaching the code rather than terminate his contract. In 2014 there was speculation RA would tear up Kurtley Beale’s contract over the text message scandal involving former Wallabies team manager Di Patson, but a code of conduct hearing fined him $40,000 instead. If Folau is cleared to continue playing, it would create an interesting situation. Wallabies coach Michael Cheika has already stated he will not select Folau whether he is cleared or not. However, the NSW Waratahs have been silent on that question. They appear to be waiting to see what the outcome of the hearing will be before making a decision, which potentially leaves the door ajar for Folau to continue playing for the Waratahs even if Cheika will not select him for the Wallabies. In this situation RA would still have to pay Folau the balance of his $4m contract just to play for the Waratahs, which would be similar to the Queensland Reds paying Quade Cooper to play Brisbane club rugby when he was unwanted by the Super Rugby team. If the Waratahs followed Cheika’s line, Folau could play club rugby and still collect his cheque. But a victory for RA may create tensions with other Pacific Islander players, who make up almost half of the Wallabies squad. Many Pacific Islander players share Folau’s Christian beliefs and may feel hostility towards Rugby Australia. Wallabies and Queensland prop Taniela “Tongan Thor” Tupou posted on Facebook: “Might as well sack me and all the other Pacific Islands rugby players around the world because we share the same Christian beliefs.” A Pacific Islander backlash could have severe ramifications around the world of rugby, not just in Australia. If the hearing decides Folau has not breached the code, he will be free to play and post comments on social media, which could result in RA losing critical sponsorship dollars. If the Wallabies and the Waratahs refused to select him, he could take the matter to the Court of Arbitration for Sport or launch legal action to win back his place in the team. But there is speculation a number of non-Pacific Islander Wallabies will make themselves unavailable for selection rather than play alongside Folau. This stance may cause friction with other Pacific Islander players in Super Rugby teams and the Wallabies, causing a damaging split in Australian rugby’s playing ranks. Rather than play for teams where he was unwanted, Folau may seek to negotiate a settlement and continue playing overseas. Rugby Australia may prefer to pay out Folau’s contract than lose sponsorship and face a player rebellion, but resentments may continue to simmer. It seems unlikely the code of conduct hearing will reach a conclusion that will satisfy all parties, which means its decision will probably be a starting point for further action rather than the resolution of the matter. But whatever decision the panel comes up with may well determine whether there is a swift solution to the conflict or a protracted legal battle. How the hearing deals with two conflicting human rights – sexual discrimination and freedom of religion – will have important implications for Australian sport, potentially re-addressing the rights and responsibilities of organisations and their players.