When I look at Northampton and Harlequins I see two teams at the same stage of their journey. Both were coming to the end of dreadful seasons a year ago, going on to finish ninth and 10th respectively, but both came into the weekend on the same number of points and vying with each other for the last play-off spot. The common denominator is the impact their new coaches have made. If you were to look at the squads Chris Boyd and Paul Gustard inherited, you might wonder what they were doing at the bottom of the table this time last year but both teams were performing well below par. They have given their sides a new impetus, brought some consistency to their performances and some pride back into clubs with rich pedigree considering both won the Premiership not so long ago. Boyd impressed me even before he took over because he spent time during the Super Rugby season coming over to Northampton, meeting the senior players and learning what the problems within the club were. He didn’t come in cold. A lot of coaches or directors of rugby come from Super Rugby and try to bring that southern hemisphere style with them but you have to respect the Premiership for what it is as a completely different league. What Boyd has done so well is bring bits of his Super Rugby knowledge and harnessed it with Northampton’s strengths, and key to that has been the shrewd appointments of Phil Dowson and Sam Vesty on his coaching staff. A lot of coaches come over and they are reluctant to do that, they don’t want to cede control, but it shows the level of Boyd’s security to do that. Vesty in particular has been a very clever appointment because Northampton have a young squad and he has experience of working with youngsters at Worcester. As a result, Boyd has shown great faith in the young players and none more so than Rory Hutchinson, who has been the standout No 13 in the Premiership this season and I fully expect him to be part of Scotland’s summer plans in preparation for the World Cup. Hutchinson is playing in a very important position for Northampton because he is filling the void left by the devastating injury suffered by Rob Horne. Boyd did not panic, though. He did not look to get the chequebook out and Northampton are reaping the rewards. Harlequins, too, have some fine young English talent but the thing that Gustard guarantees wherever he coaches is energy. A few eyebrows might have been raised when he decided to leave England just over a year before the World Cup but he would only take the Harlequins job if he felt he could make an immediate impact and I believe he has. On the face of it, it looked a difficult job because when the team is performing at such a poor level the problems are deep-rooted. But, in reality, it doesn’t require major changes to bring about an upturn. Having a new voice and fresh pair of eyes can often make a big difference and whether Harlequins’ culture was wrong, whether they were lacking in motivation, Gustard has achieved his mission statement which was to be hard to beat. In a league as competitive as the Premiership you have to make sure your culture is robust and Harlequins have that now. Defensively they were poor last season, they conceded the most tries but that has been a big fix. I love what Shaun Edwards used to say, attack sells you tickets, defence wins you championships and he’s absolutely right. Exeter have the best defence in the league and they are top of the table. It doesn’t always manifest itself in tackle completion but the things you can’t stat such as work rate, desire and how quickly a guy is getting back off the deck and into the line. I’ve seen all of those attributes from Harlequins this season so Gustard has made a massive difference there. Now compare how Northampton and Harlequins have improved under new leadership and fresh voices and how Leicester have not. You could argue that Geordan Murphy was a fresh voice but he was not an external appointment and he got the job one week into the season. That means all the structures and all the game plans that Matt O’Connor had put in place over the summer were ripped up. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Murphy had no experience of being a head coach. I have no doubt he will have benefited a huge amount in the long run from what he has been through this season but he desperately needed an experienced figure around him and I don’t see he’s had that. Leicester have had three defence coaches this season – that kind of thing is extremely unsettling. The message from the top has been one of inconsistency and that has a waterfall effect all the way through the team. Yes, the players have to take their share of the blame, they haven’t been good enough either, but whether it be in sport or in business, everything starts at the top and that is where Leicester’s problems have come from. The board have made it clear that Murphy is the man they want, he’s very well respected at the club, but I make the comparison to a young fly-half coming through the ranks. You can’t rush his progression, but you surround that player with experience so that they can learn. I fully expect a senior figure coming it at Leicester next season because they are screaming out for it. If they get the appointment right then they can expect to see the rewards, just as Northampton and Harlequins have done.