‘I’m Anne Boleyn, yeah, I’m married to this dude,” goes the rap. “I might be queen but I’m still a bit rude.” No, it’s not the West End musical smash Six, about Henry VIII’s wives, but a more family-friendly Tudor histo-remix. This is a rackety race through the era courtesy of Birmingham Stage Company and Horrible Histories. This afternoon the touring show has pitched up in the grassy moat at the Tower of London. Alligators once swam here and we’re a stone’s throw from the executioner’s block. If that doesn’t put you off your picnic then try hearing the squelchy sound of rotting brains scooped out of a skull in the “manky medicine” lesson. I’m here with nine-year-old Aggie, who loves Horrible Histories on TV, and five-year-old Hilda, who really doesn’t unless it’s one of the Stupid Death bits (“Hope next time it’s not you-ooo”). Sadly, the grim reaper doesn’t put in an appearance but the production keeps the sketches-and-songs format from the telly. At just an hour (including an overlong plug for this summer’s West End show), it has silly stories, amusing accents and revolting rhymes, with the odd fact check thrown in. The opening capitalises on the setting, with three actors (Neal Foster, Tim Speyer and Tessa Vale) questioning the fate of Richard III’s nephews in the “bloody tower”. The concept is that we’re watching a trio of travelling players using minimal props, including what may or may not be the crown jewels, to tell their stories. The stage has just a chest and two wicker baskets overspilling with dress-up costumes. The princes meet their deaths with a swoosh of Richard’s cape and the king is felled by a spoon in the Battle of Bosworth Field. “Infamy! Infamy!” he cries, channelling Kenneth Williams in Carry On Cleo and perhaps nodding to Horrible Histories’ other tour, Awful Egyptians. Hilda thinks the idea of Edward VI’s whipping boy is hilarious while Aggie looks horrified as the poor lad is lashed. But then Hilda hides her face from Mary Queen of Scots’ bungled execution, and Aggie cackles until the head bounces around the stage. When a thief’s hands are lopped off, Hilda isn’t the only child in the audience anxiously asking if it’s real. They both join in with a “divorced, beheaded died” song – complete with its own moves – and they dance as Will.i.am Shakespeare delivers a tune borrowed from the Black-Eyed Peas, but its Tudor-fied rhymes are forgettable. We’re handed leaflets listing Tudor insults (“beef-witted malt-worm” and the like), but the script is far less colourful. Some of the puns are pretty ruff. The Church of England’s split from the Catholic church is briefly replayed as a Liverpool v Man City match but never hits the net. Much better is a comic account of the sneeze that might have inspired Greensleeves. Plus, the wiper of the king’s bottom makes a splash. Throughout, the sound effects – those squelching brains, the sizzling of the stake – add to the appeal. The young audience prove especially bloodthirsty when they’re cast as a jury and an army. In a black box theatre the show’s flaws might be more exposed. A lot of the enjoyment comes from watching it in the shadow of the castle that had its own grisly role in history. Horrible Histories Live on Stage! is at the Tower of London until 1 June. Then touring until 17 November.