The Brexit party, Change UK and Liberal Democrats have held their final rallies before the European election, appealing to voters to back them to send a clear message on either leave or remain. The Brexit party’s leader, Nigel Farage, told at his last hustings event at a packed conference centre in Olympia, in west London on Tuesday that if they win the EU poll then it would “kill off any chance of a second referendum”. He also said he also wanted to get rid of the Electoral Commission, which is reviewing the Brexit party’s funding, along with the House of Lords, claiming they were full of “remainers”. Farage, who is personally facing an investigation by MEPs for failing to declare expenses funded by the Leave.EU founder, Arron Banks, told the rally: “We have got to get rid of the House of Lords, of Mr Blair and Mr Cameron’s cronies. Oh, and the Electoral Commission, all of whom are remainers, all of whom are part of Westminster establishment.” His address was preceded by speeches from the former Czech Republic prime minister Václav Klaus, who told the audience of more than 3,000 that they should send a message to populists across Europe who he claimed are waiting for their own exit from the EU, and former Tory MP Anne Widdecombe, who urged them to use their vote to “terrify Westminster”. She said they should send a message that MPs can “only interpret in one way – that their future depends on Britain’s future being outside the EU”. The UK elects 73 members (MEPs) to the European parliament, which is made up of 751 MEPs elected by the 28 member states of the EU. The UK is split into 12 European electoral regions, and each region is represented by between three and 10 MEPs. The constituencies are: You can find out who is standing for election in your area here. Current polling suggests that support for the Conservatives has slumped to 11%, less than a third of what the Nigel Farage’s new Brexit party is polling. In England, Scotland and Wales, voters can choose to vote for one party or individual. The ballot paper lists the parties standing with the names of their potential MEPs, as well as any individuals who are standing as independent candidates. The D’Hondt method of proportional representation is used to calculate how many seats each party or individual receives. In Northern Ireland, the single transferable vote method is used, where each voter ranks candidates in order of preference, marking 1 beside their most preferred candidate, 2 beside their second choice, and so on. These votes are then used to allocate Northern Ireland’s three MEPs. Those elected as MEPs on 23 May will represent the UK when the new European parliament assembles on 1 July, until such time as the UK ceases to be a member of the European Union. There were boos when Farage name-checked the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, louder boos for European council president, Donald Tusk, and louder still for the European parliament’s Brexit spokesman, Guy Verhofstadt. But the biggest boo was reserved for mention of a people’s vote. “If win on Thursday, we will kill off any chance of them forcing a second referendum on us, because they know they would lose,” Farage told the audience. Former Conservative supporters were easy to find at the packed hall. Ian Gregory, who said he was a political lobbyist who worked at the Tory party HQ in 1982, said he was supporting Farage’s party because the “Tories were losing their space” in the electoral landscape. Meanwhile, in Manchester, Change UK MPs Chuka Umunna and Anna Soubry addressed the People’s Vote and Remain rally, though later than billed after being delayed by train problems. Umunna told the crowd that many of his family members from continental Europe were still grieving over the EU referendum result and it was “disgusting and reprehensible” how remainers were being dismissed. The former Labour MP, who represents Streatham in south London, said: “Don’t call the people in my community some Waitrose-shopping, latte-drinking elite ... many people in my community live in poverty ... nobody has a monopoly on grievance ... the only difference is that we did not feel that leaving the European Union would change things.” He concluded: “If you want to stop this madness vote for Change UK on Thursday.” Soubry told the audience they could be proud of all the Change UK candidates and said it was imperative for campaigners to get out and canvass votes before Thursday. “This is the beginning of the change that must happen in our country and change is coming,” she said. The ex-Tory MP urged members of her former party to “show courage and to put their country first”, adding: “One nation conservatives, you are better working with your neighbours, which is the European Union.” Among the crowd were Mark Burrows and Nick Foss, both 58, who carried placards as they accompanied Elisabeth Knight, who is standing for Change UK in the North West constituency. Burrows had been out campaigning and said people were ready to vote for a new party who would make a stand against Brexit. In central London, the Liberal Democrat party leader, Sir Vince Cable, cited British Steel and Jaguar Land Rover – businesses he said were struggling at least in part because of Brexit – as examples of factors he believed had motivated people to turn towards his party and its pro-remain position. Cable added that the Brexit process was harming the health service and attacked those who have advocated falling back on World Trade Organization rules, saying he was unsure exactly how many of them understand what that meant. He told supporters that Lib Dem MEPs would provide a “solid block of liberal people who will stand firm against the rise of xenophobia, populism, sometimes outright racism and fascism that we’re now getting across Europe”. Cable closed by summarising the party’s plans for the final days of campaigning, including his planned debate with the Brexit Party leader, Nigel Farage, whom he referred to as “Mr Trump’s little helper”.