Many moons ago, The Fiver disgraced itself at a football awards ceremony at which the men behind The Square Ball won an award for Best Fanzine and collected a nice glass trophy for their troubles. Down from Leeds to visit That There Big London for an evening’s roistering and derring-do, during the course of their celebrations one of the gentlemen in question dropped their newly acquired gong, which duly smashed into several million tiny glass smithereens. Despite the well deserved recognition they had received for their hard work, general excellence and popularity, the lads from the Square Ball editorial team would ultimately go home empty-handed. More eagle-eyed Fiver readers will have spotted certain laboured parallels between what happened to that particular gang of fans and the fate that befell the team they love on Wednesday night, although the analogy does rather break down when you consider the team in question didn’t actually win anything in the first place. But, after a season in which they have garnered rave reviews and hordes of new admirers, they have precisely nothing to show for their efforts. Or do they? A team that had no business being anywhere near the business end of the Championship in the first place came perilously close to winning it playing an exciting, vibrant brand of energetic football that had their own and other fans swooning with delight. Away from the pitch, they have also entertained. Who can forget spy-gate, the scandal mocked post-match by Derby which ultimately turned the Wetherby branch of Costa in which Bielsa could regularly be found hunched over his laptop into the world’s most unlikely tourist destination. Whisper it, but Nasty Leeds have achieved the unthinkable and become loveable again. Neutrals actually like them and even the most stereotypical Yorkshire person alive speaks in awed tones about their admiration for “our lad” Bielsa. For a people hardly renowned for their appreciation of interlopers and their fancy new ideas, this is nowt short of huge. Of course the worry now for Nasty Leeds fans is that their eccentric uncle will do one yonder, possibly under the misapprehension that he has in some way let them down. But then, that is a constant nagging concern for fans of any team he manages, given his proclivity for walking out of jobs at the drop of a hat for any number of strange reasons. “It’s not as you can imagine convenient to talk about this point right now,” he declared, before talking about that point right then. “Anyway, there is a process and you know about this process, that’s why I’m talking about it, if the club offers me the possibility to carry on I will listen to this proposal.” Like the men behind their club’s fanzine all those years ago, Nasty Leeds have something to be cherished in their grasp. Here’s hoping they don’t let it go. “After a turbulent season, everyone at Manchester United is focused on building towards the success that this great club expects and our fans deserve” – yes, it’s Manchester United investors conference call time, which can only mean one thing: Ed Woodward adding “clanking understatements” to his list of skills alongside negotiating deals for Manchester United’s official denim partners. Fellow club suit Richard Arnold had even more upbeat news: “The app continues to perform ahead of expectations.” Football Weekly Extra, with Elis James in the hot seat while Max is off in Hong Kong doing something with Brett Ormerod, will be in this general vicinity. “I appreciate Paul Dixon’s annoyance that the Scottish Premiership’s seventh team often finish a season with more points than sixth (yesterday’s Fiver letters), but this situation is an illusion caused solely by the numbering and should be routinely expected. The league has effectively been split into two divisions with six teams each. Who ever heard of the top team in a lower division scoring fewer points than the bottom team in the next division up? Yours, etc” – Chris Richardson. “The split hasn’t been ‘roundly criticised’ for years – in fact, quite the opposite. A top-six finish is now universally cited by middling clubs and their fans as a target, and the round-robin, post-split fixtures ensure an exciting end to the season with teams scrapping each other for Europe and survival” – Gary C0cker. “I’d like to have something similar to POJT’s no-Chelsea deal, please (yesterday’s Fiver). If a competing newspaper puts out a humorous tea-timely email, I’d like permission not to read The Fiver anymore” – Mike Wilner. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Mike Wilner. Manchester City are most vexed at having their collar felt for alleged FFP naughtiness by Uefa. “[We are] disappointed, but regrettably not surprised,” sniffed a club statement, after it was decided they do have a case to answer for the alleged book-cooking, which is to be referred to Uefa’s ominous-sounding adjudicatory chamber. City Women, meanwhile, have snaffled Birmingham and England forward Ellen White on a two-year deal. There’s likely to be smoke coming out of Maurizio Sarri’s ears for a reason other than his ciggies: Ruben Loftus-Cheek will probably miss Big Vase final after he suffered a bout of achilles-ouch during Chelsea’s charidee friendly against New England Revolution in Boston. Another man who might not be lining up in Baku is Henrikh Mkhitaryan, who Arsenal may have to leave behind on the absolute state of Uefa basis of his nationality. José Mourinho, now outside the Manchester United tent wizzing in rather than the alternative, says “nice guy” managers are puppets for their clubs, naming absolutely no names and with nobody specific in mind. The Fiver’s bagpipes-playing, Wee-Jimmy-Krankie-loving, deep-fried haggis-eating Scottish cousin Shortbread McFiver will be delighted to hear their national team will have a new manager by Monday, with Steve Clarke likely to be the lucky punter. And Nathan Redmond is the relatively surprising name in England’s 28-strong initial lineup for the Nations League finals. Full squad: Butland (Stoke), Heaton (Burnley), Pickford (Everton); Alexander-Arnold (Liverpool), Chilwell (Leicester), Gomez (Liverpool), Keane (Everton), Maguire (Leicester), Rose (Tottenham), Stones (Manchester City), Trippier (Tottenham), Walker (Manchester City); Barkley (Chelsea), Alli (Tottenham), Delph (Manchester City), Dier (Tottenham), Henderson (Liverpool), Morris-Dancing Fiver (Fiver Towers), Rice (West Ham), Ward-Prowse (Southampton), Winks (Tottenham); Kane (Tottenham), Lingard (Manchester United), Rashford (Manchester United), Redmond (Southampton), Sancho (Borussia Dortmund), Sterling (Manchester City), Wilson (Bournemouth). A must-read interview with Nigel Callaghan on all things Watford, recovering twice from cancer and working as a DJ. Why did Uefa give Azerbaijan the final of Big Vase, ponders Paul Doyle archly. Proper Journalism’s David Conn on Manchester City’s ‘seriously misguided’ response to the ‘battered’ song controversy. Paolo Bandini on Lazio’s Coppa Italia triumph bringing Atalanta down to earth. Richard Foster on the Premier League team better away than at home. Test your knowledge of FA Cup underdogs in our quiz. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!