If you are looking for Faf du Plessis, try the kitchen. Or the friendly neighbourhood atelier, gastronome’s grotto, or tattoo shop. Or follow the roar of his vintage motorcycle. He also spends a fair bit of time at the crease. In Derby on South Africa’s 2012 England tour, while the world was obsessed with the pronunciation and nuance of what, exactly, Kevin Pietersen had called Andrew Strauss in a text message, Du Plessis was deep in the concrete of the grandstand in a chef’s tunic and intently focused on helping a Masterchef champion prepare a meal for the squad. Later that year in Adelaide, less than 24 hours after he had finished batting for almost eight hours for the undefeated 110 that saved his debut Test, Du Plessis was comfortable enough not talking about all that to roll his eyes at the fact that some of his teammates “go out wearing just any t-shirt”. He brings echoes of each of South Africa’s previous World Cup captains — Kepler Wessels’ grit, Hansie Cronjé’s flair, though happily not his corruption, Shaun Pollock’s sense of duty, Graeme Smith’s gut feel, and, admittedly as rarely as anyone else, AB de Villiers’ dazzle — to his damnably difficult job. Australians cannot stand him, which is always a good sign. And he is Captain Hipsterpants into the bargain. Infamously, South Africa have not played as well as they could and should have at World Cups past. If anyone is able to change that narrative, it is Du Plessis. He has come to terms with the truth that his team are not as strong as most who have gone before, and he has told them so. He can do that because his life is not in cricket; cricket is in his life. South Africa ICC world ranking 3 (as of 6 May) Captain Faf du Plessis Coach Ottis Gibson World Cup best Semi-finals 1992, 1999, 2007, 2015 Fixtures (10.30am unless stated) 30 May v England, The Oval 2 June v Bangladesh, The Oval 5 June v India, Southampton 10 June v West Indies, Southampton 15 June v Afghanistan, Cardiff 19 June v New Zealand, Edgbaston 23 June v Pakistan, Lord’s 28 June v Sri Lanka, The Riverside 6 July v Australia, Old Trafford South Africa have always leaned, sometimes too heavily, on strong leaders. Du Plessis will be leant on even more because, for the first time since the tournament was last played in England in 1999, the team will be without any of Smith, de Villiers or Jacques Kallis. They still have two of their modern greats in Hashim Amla and Dale Steyn, but both must be relieved of much of their leadership burden if they are to be the players they were before age and injury told them otherwise. Kagiso Rabada has the personality and the presence to step, flaming eyes, flared nostrils and all, into that role, although he needs to work on stepping out of the path of dismissed opponents. Also made for greatness is Quinton de Kock, the game’s Huckleberry Gump, as skilled a smiter of a cricket ball as there is, who knows better than to ask his sizzling synapses what the hell they think they are doing, who when he is not on a cricket ground is a penguin not in water. But Du Plessis, who knows his players better than they know themselves and himself better than anyone, is key. No kitchen is too hot for him. Bowl the other blokes out for 150. Try not to bottle the chase. Or bowl them out for fewer than whatever Hash, Quinnie, Faf and the ‘okes’ — Saffer slang for blokes — made. South Africa have always been a seam-centric side and that won’t change in England; flat pitches, flatter Kookaburra and all. They used to bat upside down, the bottom half of the order making more than the top. Not anymore thanks to a decent top six. But they still don’t do subtlety. Or they didn’t until Imran Tahir arrived. It is tempting to plump for the ebbing Hashim Amla or Dale Steyn, and not only because they deserve more than past World Cups have given them. A good tournament by either would restore South Africa’s faith in themselves, and by both could make them unstoppable. But a fresh face could yet teach people how to say his name before the end of this tournament, because they will have said it so often. If Andile Phehlukwayo saunters to the middle with too few balls remaining to get too many runs, and he gets them anyway, you read it here first. South Africa won a World Cup knockout game for the first time four years ago. But that was a quarter-final — against Sri Lanka in Sydney — and we go straight into semis this time. So there’s no neat way to measure progress. If they lose to the better team, fine. If they help beat themselves, as they have done in the past, their compatriots may never take them seriously again. They will be happy to reach the semi-finals and beside themselves if they make the final. Then what? Who knows. South Africans have no clue what that feels like. • Telford Vice is a freelance cricket writer