After years of receiving the cold shoulder from Washington, Hungary’s nationalist prime minister, Viktor Orbán, will visit the White House to meet Donald Trump on 13 May. Hungarian authorities announced the visit on Thursday morning. Orbán’s spokesman Zoltán Kovács wrote on Twitter that “energy security, defense cooperation, bilateral relations and regional security” would be on the agenda. “Today all I can say is that they have invited us and we have accepted the invitation,” said Orbán, when he was asked about the meeting during a joint press conference with Italy’s interior minister, Matteo Salvini, in Budapest on Thursday. Prime minister of Hungary since 2010, Orbán was shunned under Barack Obama’s administration, and the state department frequently and vehemently criticised his government for a weakening of democracy and rule of law, as well as concerns over media freedom and corruption. Under the Trump administration, there has been a U-turn in rhetoric, symbolised by the appointment of David Cornstein, an 80-year-old jewellery magnate and long-time friend of Trump, as ambassador. Cornstein arrived in Budapest with the goal of building a friendly relationship with Orbán, despite an unease among many career diplomats in the state department about closer engagement. Cornstein praised Orbán publicly, and the US even cancelled a $700,000 state department grant announced in 2017 meant to boost media freedom, which had irritated Hungarian authorities. Nonetheless, the White House invite comes as a surprise. The US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, visited Budapest in February, but a presidential meeting was not believed to be on the cards. A leaked Hungarian diplomatic cable from December, published by the investigative website Direkt36, suggested there was frustration in Washington over Hungarian intransigence on several issues considered as key to US interests. The Orbán government also ignored a public request from Cornstein not to force Central European University, an education institution founded by the Hungarian-American financier George Soros, out of Hungary. However, the Orbán government signed a bilateral defence cooperation agreement in April, a long-standing US goal, and is also believed to be willing to make defence purchases from the US. The meeting with Orbán will come after Trump received the Czech prime minister, Andrej Babiš, in March and the Slovak prime minister, Peter Pellegrini, this week. With Orbán’s loud anti-migration rhetoric, penchant for fence-building and effusive praise for Trump, there is a chance that the meeting could see a bond formed between the two leaders. “I think the Czech and Slovak meetings were more administrative but the meeting with Orbán could be the starting point for a big friendship,” said Ágoston Mraz, head of the Nézőpont thinktank in Budapest. “Orbán is very talented at playing with the ego of people. In January, he called Babiš a genius. It doesn’t cost anything to say these things. If you tell Trump he’s a genius, well, he’s not going to be opposed to that.”