Every parent who has tried to cajole children into going on a “nice walk” knows this is about the lamest thing you could ask them to do. Walking is booooooring, as are ancient buildings and beautiful scenery. But Treasure Trails – a series of more than 1,000 self-guided treasure hunt-style walks in cities, villages and countryside across the UK – can change a trudge into a fun activity as, depending on the theme, kids solve clues, hunt hidden treasure or complete secret agent missions. The trails come as an A5 booklet – by post, or downloadable – with route, facts, and spaces to fill in answers – which form a 10-digit number that can be sent in for the chance to win a £100 monthly prize. There are also some driving and cycling trails. These will depend on the trail. We did the central London “Five pubs in five miles” walk, and discovered, among other things, that the pillar in the middle of Covent Garden’s Seven Dials is actually a sundial. To give away any more would constitute a spoiler. Our kids are well into their teens, yet we were pleased at how excited they were about doing the trail, and how seriously they took it. We’ve all lived in London for years – the kids all their lives – but the walk took us to corners we’d never seen, some fascinating historic pubs, and pointed out unsuspected aspects of familiar places. Who knew the standard units of imperial measurement are built into the stones of Trafalgar Square? There are usually plenty of options: most of the trails start or end in a village/town with pubs and cafes. As we were in central London we were spoiled for choice: the Salisbury pub near Leicester Square had sandwiches, fish and chips, amazing Victorian tiles and some great showbiz history. Excellent. The trails cost £6.99, and four people could use it with ease. 8/10. I had expected the “clues” to be more cryptic and tricky – you often just have to write down a name or date – but no one else seemed to mind. We’re keen to do another, and can’t decide between a Treasure Trail that would take us under the skin of a place we already know – such as the East Yorkshire village where I grew up – or using one as a fun guide to somewhere new. • treasuretrails.co.uk