In the dying days of Game of Thrones, it’s fair to say that HBO got a little needy. With the palpable flopsweat of a soon-to-be-dumped lover, it broke its back showing everyone all the other great shows they could watch if only they stayed subscribed. Like richly-drawn prestige ensembles? Big Little Lies is coming back, this time with Meryl Streep! Like snow and magic? Look, it’s His Dark Materials! Like Westworld? No, of course you don’t, nobody likes Westworld. But here’s a trailer for season three, and it doesn’t even look like Westworld any more! It looks like a cool new Aaron Paul drama. See? We can change. Don’t leave us. We’ll do anything you want. The reason for this sudden desperation is clear. The end of Game of Thrones isn’t just the end of a series. It feels like the end of an entire way of watching TV. Game of Thrones wasn’t the best show on television. It wasn’t even the best show on HBO (that would be Barry). But it was, by some distance, the biggest. Sunday’s finale was the most-watched HBO episode of all time, and that’s before you factor in the tens of millions of people who found other ways to watch it. For years, the internet has heaved under the weight of recaps and spoilers and fan fiction. Game of Thrones was an immovable cultural fixture. It was appointment television on a level that other shows can only dream of. In short, it’s going to leave a hole. HBO will probably be fine. Although a recent survey found that 20% of its viewers would consider cancelling their $14.99 monthly subscription once their favourite show ended – which would cost HBO billions of dollars annually – the reality isn’t nearly so stark. When its last true ratings juggernaut The Sopranos ended in 2007, HBO found that subscriptions actually increased slightly. Besides, it’s not as if the network is done with Westeros. Although programming president Casey Bloys has ruled out a direct sequel to Game of Thrones, replying ‘Nope, nope, nope’ when asked recently, there are still three prequels in the works. One – set 5,000 years before Game of Thrones – is about to shoot a pilot, with two more still at script stage. You can understand why HBO is keen to keep feasting on its biggest carcass, but it’s worth pointing out that spin-offs to smash-hit shows are never automatic slam-dunks. Remember Caprica, the Battlestar Galactica prequel that sunk without trace a decade ago. Or, rather, don’t. But culturally, where do we go now? Last week Vanity Fair published a piece predicting heavy traffic drop-off for websites who until now have gorged themselves silly on Game of Thrones content. Sure, there will be other shows to fill the buzz vacuum – Stranger Things is only six weeks away – but the likelihood is they’ll be squirrelled away on streaming platforms, dropped and left for viewers to discover and watch at their own pace. The fanatics will gobble these new shows up in one sitting. Casual fans might take a few weeks. Intrigued outsiders might take months to discover them. But in terms of excitement, they’ll just be blips, gobbled up in a matter of seconds. Meanwhile, by being scheduled once a week like clockwork, Game of Thrones has managed to achieve two months of breathless, agenda-setting attention. People are losing their minds about a partially obscured water bottle, for crying out loud. That has only happened because each new Game of Thrones episode was a huge cultural moment that took place out in the open. It’d be much harder to strip the flesh from its bones so comprehensively if it was a streaming show, because we’d all be experiencing it at different times. But let’s not lose hope entirely. While it might be hard to think of a show that could fill Game of Thrones’ boots – and, despite HBO’s best efforts, it certainly won’t be Westworld – this is nevertheless a bumper age for old-fashioned linear TV. Despite the fracturing nature of the medium, BBC One’s Bodyguard still managed to launch bigger than any other UK drama for over a decade, and the breathless week-on-week reaction to Fleabag shows that Game of Thrones wasn’t the only series capable of dominating the conversation. The lesson seems to be clear: make it well enough and parcel it out properly, and there might just be life in appointment TV yet.