The book I am currently readingI just started The Silence of the Girls by Pat Barker. I am curious about all the books on the Women’s prize longlist and shortlist and so far, so good. It is fascinating to see Achilles as something other than a tragic hero. The book that changed my lifeTess of the D’Urbervilles by Thomas Hardy. It was not an easy read and it left me feeling wronged. There was justice ... but there really wasn’t justice at all. But it did show me how a book could unnerve you. It is also an interesting lesson about right and wrong, and fate. The book I wish I’d writtenShip of Magic by Robin Hobb. Hobb’s imagination inspires me, her characters are bold and unapologetic and her writing is hypnotic. Or Life of Pi by Yann Martel – who wouldn’t want to have written that book? The book that influenced my writingThe Making of a Poem: A Norton Anthology of Poetic Forms helped me shape my poetry, which in turn helped me shape how I thought of prose. The last book that made me cryI cry fairly easily. But the last book that made me sit in the corner of my room and weep was A Voice in the Wind by Francine Rivers. It is a story about a young girl who is captured by Romans after her entire family is killed. I must have fallen in love with her; I can never forget how deeply her faith and her fate affected me. The last book that made me laughEleanor Oliphant Is Completely Fine by Gail Honeyman, though perhaps I wasn’t so much laughing as gasping. Eleanor’s voice was as refreshing as drinking a cold glass of lemonade. The book that changed my mindThe Bible. My mind is changed a little each time I read and digest a new passage. The book I’m ashamed not to have readLes Misérables by Victor Hugo. It sits on my bookshelf and judges me. I will get to it someday. My earliest reading memoryI vaguely remember the Spot the Dog books by Eric Hill. My comfort readJane Eyre by Charlotte Brontë has been my favourite book since I was 10. I have lost and rebought the novel a couple of times because I must always have a copy in my library. The book I gave as a giftStay with Me by Ayòbámi Adébáyò. It is a tale that stays with you (pun intended) and I have found that the women I have given it to thus far seem to love it (interestingly, I have not given it to any men yet). • Oyinkan Braithwaite’s My Sister, the Serial Killer (Atlantic) has been shortlisted for the Women’s prize for fiction. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.