Nobody wants to waste food. I don’t think I’m projecting here; I think it’s a raw human imperative not to let a delicious thing rot into oblivion, as it is to be loved, or to collect the same notebook in many different colours. Thanks to the campaign against food waste, we now generate £3.4bn less of it every year in the UK than we did in 2007. But progress is a mountain path, not a flight of stairs, as they say in primary school. The fieldwork required for comprehensive studies means there’s always a lag, so the most recent snapshot from the waste-reduction charity Wrap comes from four years ago; what it shows is that, between 2012 and 2014, waste went up slightly, then plateaued. Unbelievably, bottled water is in Wrap’s top 20 most wasted items, which on some important and elemental level shows that people are crazy. Most wasted food is not used in time; after that, the main cause of waste is that it got to the table but there was too much of it. The main culprits, then, are clearly adults, and children. Adults have a problem getting things from the fridge to the table, but will generally eat them once they’re on a plate; children will turn their noses up at stuff that’s in front of them. It is a huge pain trying to prioritise frugality in a family, balancing it against fussiness. I would waste very little if I only gave my children frankfurters and sweetcorn, but I would also have children the colour of skimmed milk whom I couldn’t take on holiday. The really simple fix is not to make enough for yourself, then hover over them waiting for anything they leave. I’ve been doing this for years, and my children eat with their arms curved round their plates, like Oliver Twist. I once read a tip on Weight Watchers that said, to restrict your calorie intake, squirt washing-up liquid all over your kids’ plates the minute they have finished. This is emphatically not a food-waste tip. It’s more for the “people are crazy” folder. You might be thinking of the food that gets wasted when you get a load of stuff in for a particular recipe, then didn’t need any more – such as horseradish or lardo. There are incredibly creative ways around that. The best I’ve come across are in Polly Russell’s 11-year-old book The Kitchen Revolution, in which you plan in seven-day cycles and waste nothing. It takes quite an ordered life. I would say the bulk of my food waste in this category is “had a great plan for that rabbit then decided to have a toastie in the pub”. But if you look at Wrap’s most-wasted items, speciality ingredients aren’t the problem: it’s potatoes, carrots, apples and lettuce; milk, fizzy drinks, water (!!!), fruit juice, lager, “tea waste” and yoghurt drinks (also yoghurt); bread, cakes and pastries; and meat: pork, ham, bacon, chicken, turkey, duck. People don’t seem to throw away beef or lamb. So there’s a thought experiment to be done here: whenever you see a chicken breast in the fridge and have to make a call on whether or not to eat it, imagine it’s a steak. Alternatively, buy much less meat. You clearly cannot eat as much as you think you can, and in any case the idea of a centrepiece meat item, which has to be 100g-plus or it doesn’t count, is very 20th century. There is no excuse to waste anything that can be frozen. The frozen food industry puts its year-on-year sales rise partly down to people worrying about food waste, but I’m not really talking about ready meals. I’m talking about slicing and freezing bread as soon as you get it, freezing milk, grating and freezing cheese in dinky bags (even though cheese isn’t in the top 20). That kind of thing. I think people don’t mind throwing cake away because the guilt is offset by the self-congratulation that at least they didn’t eat it. If you feel this way, you should stop buying cake. A significant mealtime obstacle is all in the mind: it’s hard to put a tiny amount of a thing on the table if it isn’t quite large enough to do its job (for example, if your carb is potato, you don’t want one potato between five). I have an excellent wheeze where I reframe the meal as a war between two nations, and might serve an omelette with some noodles, then call that the Sino-French war, AKA the Tonkin war, of 1884-85. You would be amazed at how many nations have been at war, and how much human suffering there has been in the world, but there is no jar of unfinished pesto at the back of my fridge because it went on a sourdough flatbread (second Italo-Ethiopian war, 1935-37). If you can’t finish a can of lager, you are hereby banned from drinking lager.