The No 64 bus route that runs between the cathedral city of Winchester and the market town of Alton is a picturesque one. The top of the double-decker affords striking views of the cathedral, rolling Hampshire downland and Alresford, known, according to the glossy timetable, as the UK’s capital of watercress farming. But it is not a cheap trip. “Actually it’s really expensive,” said Daisy Smith, a 22-year-old University of Winchester student, as she waited at the 64 stand beneath the statue of King Alfred the Great in the city centre. She pays £24.60 for her weekly “mega-rider gold” ticket. “I don’t think it’s really fair. It’s hard enough for students to make ends meet as it is. I don’t really understand why it’s so much cheaper to travel in big cities than here. It feels like we’re being ripped off.” London plays a crucial economic, political and cultural role in the UK. It is home to one of the world’s busiest financial centres, the royal family, parliament and some of the best museums on the planet. But that domination has come at a cost. To many living outside it, London has become more of a distant city-state than a capital, increasingly disconnected from the rest of the country. In the devolved nations of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, voters can elect representatives who put their countries first. Londoners sometimes argue they deserve a special deal. After all, London paid an average of £12.7bn a year more in taxes than it received in public spending in the decade up to 2014, subsidising most of the rest of the country. And while life in London might be easy for the oligarchs who have bought up Mayfair, it is a struggle for many. Yet while rail passengers in the north of England and Cornwall still judder to work on 35-year-old Pacer trains, Londoners will soon be able to get around even quicker on the £17.6bn Crossrail. This series explores how the rest of England has been left behind. It will expose how some of the poorest people pay the most for public transport, the north-south divide in health and how cultural institutions have been ravaged by cuts. Finally, it will look at the case for more devolution in England and ask what can be done to bring the country back together at a time when it has never seemed more divided. Helen Pidd Moon Hughes, 17, who travels between college and home, says she pays more than £600 a year for a pass. “It is a bit ridiculous. Luckily my dad pays but they should find a way of making it cheaper.” Pam Cannon, a sixty-something who was off to a lunch with friends, paid £7.30 for her return ticket. She sympathised with her young fellow travellers but had a hard-luck bus fare story of her own. She missed getting a free bus pass by three weeks when she was 60 after the government changed the rules. “That was a blow,” she said. She said she did not really mind paying for her bus fares but said she was sorry for the teenagers and young families struggling to pay. “They need more help. It would be nice if the fares were more reasonable.” The most expensive part of the route – and the priciest stretch in England, according to the Guardian’s research – is between the stand near Alfred’s statue and a stop called Tichborne, Matterly Farm. The journey is 4.4 miles and takes only eight minutes. The price of a normal daytime single is £5.65: more than a pound a mile and about 70p per minute of travel. A return is £7.30. Tichborne is a charming village including a pub with a thatched roof, the Tichborne Arms, and a vineyard that produces sparkling wine. The River Itchen flows through it – the setting for a notorious 19th-century case of identity theft that was turned into a film featuring Stephen Fry called The Tichborne Claimant. They have history in Tichborne but, it turns out, no easy access to the bus. Though the stop has Tichborne in its name it is not to be found in the village itself but on the main road, the A31, which bypasses the community. Schoolchildren who need to catch the bus to Winchester have to walk up the lanes or across the fields to get to and from the stop. On their return they have to dodge four lanes of traffic from the bus stop to reach the village side of the road. One woman drives her car to a layby near the stop, leaves it there and then travels into the city on the 64. Most people said they had given up on the idea of catching the bus. There is one way to get out of using the bus. Hampshire county council runs a taxi share service from Tichborne to Alresford for a reasonable £2 return and the trip is free for people eligible for concessionary fares. But that also only runs once a week – on Tuesdays. “The buses do come up at parish council meetings,” said Robert Raimes, the chairman of the parish council. “People do need the bus. It’s a lifeline for some.” According to the villagers the last time there was regular bus service through the village was a decade ago – and it came only once a week, they think. “It would be nice if there was a 10-seater hopper, something like that,” said Raimes. Ray White, who speaks on behalf of the South Hampshire bus users’ group, was not surprised at the prices people in Tichborne have to pay, or the difficulty they have getting to the bus stop. “We feel fares are prohibitively expensive,” he said. “This is particularly true of countryside travel on the cross-county routes.” Stagecoach defends its fare for Winchester to Tichborne, Matterly Farm. A spokesperson said it was in a rural area outside the city boundaries and fell into the next fare stage. “The reality is that boundaries between zones have to be set somewhere,” the spokesperson said. The company argues that regular travellers do not buy singles and that weekly, monthly and annual passes are better value. It also points out that the route does not receive any subsidy. “It is operated on a commercial basis where fares need to cover operating costs and the costs of improvements,” the spokesperson said. That is no excuse as far as Jo Hunt, who sometimes catches the 64 to get to work as a cleaner in Winchester, is concerned. “The bus journey is a big chunk out of my wages before I even get there,” she said. “I don’t always catch it so it’s not worth me getting a weekly pass. It’s hitting the poorest all the time. That always seems to happen, doesn’t it?”