Primoz Roglic, the former ski jumper who has taken professional cycling by storm, blew away all his rivals with a resounding victory in the opening time trial stage of the 2019 Giro d’Italia to the San Luca sanctuary above Bologna. But the gamble on continued dry weather that Simon Yates, seeking to take his second consecutive Grand Tour after winning last September’s Vuelta a España, had taken by starting third from last despite a prediction of evening rain, paid off, as the Lancastrian rode through the Italian dusk to set the second-fastest time on the stage. Yates had ruffled feathers as the race began by suggesting that his form was so good that his rivals should be scared and “shitting themselves”. The former Giro champion Vincenzo Nibali, who made a solid start in pursuit of his third overall win to place third on the stage, was among those who was less than amused by Yates’s comments. “Now I should go to the bathroom, according to Yates,” the Sicilian said. “I don’t know if he really said that but let’s try to have respect for all riders here at Giro.” But Yates, whose challenge collapsed within sight of final victory as he led last year’s Giro into its closing mountain stages, justified his swagger and will be keen to maintain his form as he targets the final week’s run of peaks. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Roglic, who came into cycling in 2012, made light of the cruelly steep gradients to the hilltop finish in Bologna to become the first wearer of the leader’s pink jersey in this year’s race. It was hardly a surprise as he has been the dominant stage race rider and time triallist of the spring, winning the UAE Tour, Tirreno-Adriatico and the Tour of Romandie this season. What did surprise was that in the eight-kilometre race against the clock, the Slovenian humbled Tom Dumoulin, the 2017 Giro winner and a former world time trial champion, by almost half a minute. The Dutchman said that he was “completely on the limit” during the 2.1km climb to the finish. “I paced myself pretty well,” he said. “It was a solid ride, but it was brutal on the steep bits. It was difficult to manage the climb, for me, for everybody.” Rogic said: “It’s quite an advantage [over Dumoulin] so I’m really happy. It’s never fast enough, but it’s a great start.” A little further behind, in the absence of Geraint Thomas and Chris Froome, both of whom are keeping their powder dry until the Tour de France, Team Ineos’s youth policy was performing impressively, with Tao Geoghegan Hart, from Hackney, finishing seventh in what was a flying start to his first Giro stage. “I paid a little bit in the last 500 metres,” the 24 year-old said, “but we’ll hear a lot of people say that. I felt so good, but then all of a sudden the devil came and hit me with a big hammer.” On Sunday, the second stage, running south-west from Bologna to Fucecchio, ushers in a first week including five stages of more than 200km . There are hills along the way, with Tuesday’s uphill finish in Frascati looking a possible option for Yates, although he now has learned to curb his enthusiasm, after last year’s dramatic collapse. “This year’s Giro lends itself to being conservative in the beginning,” he said on the Giro’s eve. “The hardest part of the race is at the end.” Roglic said he was “super happy” to claim the first pink leader’s jersey of the 2019 Giro, having had to wait the best part of three hours for all the other riders to finish. “It is a great start and I am looking forward to the next three weeks,” the Slovenian told Eurosport. “We will see how it goes. For sure, the most important thing is to wear it [the leader’s jersey] in Verona at the end.”