Hospital waiting times and access to specific medicines and treatments tend to make the headlines, but the crisis in general practice is the most serious threat now faced by the NHS. GPs are the main point of contact with the health service by an enormous margin; last year 24 million people attended A&E departments in England, compared with 307 million appointments with family doctors and nurses. We depend on them for referrals, prescriptions, screening and advice. The drop in GP numbers reported this week is nothing new. Serious concerns around recruitment and retention date back years. But far from dampening the impact of fresh analysis from the Nuffield Trust, which shows that the number of GPs per 100,000 people has shrunk from nearly 65 in 2014 to 60 last year, this background makes it all the more alarming. The figures demonstrate that the government’s efforts to stem the decline in this essential public service have failed. In 2015 Jeremy Hunt, then health secretary, pledged that there would be 5,000 more doctors in general practice by 2020. The number of training posts has increased, and the number of unfilled places has fallen. But the high drop-out rate, combined with rising numbers retiring early, means that the situation on the ground is still getting worse, not better. The result, as a BBC Panorama programme this week showed, is long waits combined with frustration about booking systems; exhausted doctors doing up to 60 consultations a day, and worried about safety; and acute difficulties with recruitment in some of the poorest places. People across the country know this from their own experience, even if the details vary (north-west London has among the lowest number of GPs per head, while the highest are in south-west England and Scotland). Given the failure to boost doctor numbers, NHS England’s plan B is pragmatic and necessary. This involves hiring 20,000 pharmacists, physiotherapists, psychological therapists and others to work alongside doctors in general practice. The ringfencing of primary care funding – which was guaranteed to grow both in real terms and as a proportion of overall health budgets as part of this year’s 70th birthday package – was another sensible move. Over decades, the tendency has been for hospitals to gobble up the lion’s share of resources at the expense of those on the frontline. What these recent announcements do not offer is a solution. The problem is in part that the population is growing older, and more unequal – with all the consequences for health that this entails. Research for our “London versus…” series showed how some of the highest rates of depression and obesity are found in the poorest areas. But the demands on the service have also changed, as the rise in chronic conditions, combined with behavioural factors and cuts to social care and public health budgets, have ramped up the pressure on GPs to the point where many either cannot, or no longer want to, cope. The NHS has secured a budget increase, but it isn’t enough. The bullet of social care funding has yet to be bitten. Recent news that childhood obesity in Leeds had lessened, following concerted local efforts, offered a glimmer of hope. But a coherent, nationwide public health strategy remains a distant dream. Until then, GPs will continue to feel the pressure. Since they are the gateway to the wider health system, and access to them remains free when other services have been cut, they take the strain when more people are stuck outside the gates.