Brexit has divided the country – and the Conservative party – like nothing since Irish Home Rule or the Corn Laws. This crisis of division risks not just public trust in democracy, but a decade of decline. The only way we can prosper as an independent country is if we come together as One Nation – all four parts of the Union, North and South, Remain and Leave – and make crisis the catalyst for a moment of inspiring reunion and renewal. All of us believe that the next prime minister must honour the EU referendum result. But they must do so in a way that unites the 52% and the 48%. The next prime minister must honour the EU referendum result in a way that unites the 52% and the 48% To do so would mean Brexit can be the bold moment of change it should be. This is the time to tackle the underlying grievances that drove the Brexit vote and address the major issues, like the environment, that threaten our very future. That’s why tomorrow when the One Nation caucus of Conservative MPs, to which we all now belong, launches our declaration of values we will call for the environment to be given equal standing with counter-terrorism. Brexit can be a moment to reframe the UK’s role in the world as a force for good: using our soft power and through our aid, trade and security commitments to help lead the new fourth Industrial Revolution of sustainable, clean, green, smart development. That is the One Nation Brexit that we support. And it is a vision that we will be challenging all candidates to endorse during the leadership contest. To do that, however, we need to be clear about what One Nation conservatism is. That means setting out our values. The new generation of millennial voters are not tribal in their political affiliation. They will never support a party just because it is “the natural party of government”. So what are our core One Nation values? We believe in the importance of the United Kingdom, and reject narrow nationalism of all kinds. We believe in our global responsibilities to maintain our commitments on aid and trade and security. We believe the state must have an active role in fighting injustices and that there is such a thing as society, embodied in a new social contract between all of us as citizens. We believe that properly funded public services are the key to our wellbeing as a nation. We believe in the duty of environmental stewardship as core to conservatism: we must continue to lead the global and domestic response to climate change and biodiversity. We believe in free enterprise – and the power of good regulation to protect consumers and embody society’s values. We believe in universal human rights as priority for a Conservative government, and will always be vocal about the role of a free press and open debate in protecting our democracy. Not everyone in the Conservative party will agree with these values. That’s the point. These are values worth fighting for. We should not just stand on these values but passionately champion them. The greatest danger our party faces is being overtaken by a divisive and populist movement masquerading as “true”, “grassroots” conservatism. We have all seen the growing tide of extremism gripping the Republican party in America. We would be naïve to think something similar couldn’t happen in this country. In many places, it already has. Our nation is at a crossroads and so is our party. The next prime minister must redefine Brexit as a One Nation project. If they do not, the door will be wide open for Britain’s first-ever Marxist government and a likely decade of decline. The consequences of that will echo down the generations and serve as our party’s greatest failure. We still have a chance to avoid it. Signatories: George Freeman MP, Nicky Morgan MP, Bim Afolami MP, Chloe Smith MP, Sir Nicholas Soames MP