Eighteen years on Christian Heidel remembers it was gut instinct that prompted him to launch the managerial career of Jürgen Klopp in the desperate hope of saving Mainz from relegation to the third tier of German football. “Eight weeks after he started as coach our league position was secured,” says Mainz’s former sporting director, whose left-field choice propelled the team from the foot of 2. Bundesliga to safety on the penultimate weekend of his maiden season. “Our last game was away in Mannheim. We drove 60 buses with 3,000 fans to Mannheim. They swatted us 4-0, but that did not interest us. We sailed fans and staff on a large passenger ship down the Rhine back to Mainz. It was a huge party and Jürgen and I sat together for two hours with a box of beer on the nose of the ship and neither of us could quite grasp what had happened in those eight weeks. By the time we got to Mainz the box of beer was no longer full.” Several influences have shaped a career that will feature a third Champions League final on Saturday when Klopp’s Liverpool face Tottenham in Madrid. There was his father, Norbert, who was a goalkeeper in Kaiserslautern’s youth teams before spending his working life as a travelling salesman, and from whom family members say Klopp inherited his charisma, sense of loyalty and ferocious work ethic; Wolfgang Frank, the late Mainz coach who captivated the striker‑turned‑defender with tactics copied from Arrigo Sacchi’s Milan and video analysis sessions; and the former teammates who validated Klopp’s belief that industry and intelligence could compensate for deficiencies in quality. Without the opportunity offered by Heidel in February 2001, however, those influences may never have materialised into the manager who has re-established Liverpool as a European power. Klopp, in his self-deprecating way, has often explained his first managerial job as a last resort for the Mainz board, a decision based on force of personality. There was more to the appointment than that. Heidel says: “To make Jürgen go from player to coach in a very difficult situation was a decision made with the stomach and not the head. He was not the captain of the team, but he was the emotional leader and the tactical head of the team. “He studied sports science during his time in Mainz and it was clear he would become a coach when his playing career finished. I needed a coach who would continue the tactical path of Wolfgang Frank. This had already overwhelmed two coaches. I trusted Jürgen to do that but it was certainly a risk. “When I explained my idea to him he didn’t think about it for five seconds. He just said: ‘I can do that.’ After the first training session on the second day as coach, he had all the players on side. In the first game, against MSV Duisburg, who were the clear favourites, we had the most motivated Mainz team ever. Although we won only 1-0, Duisburg had no chance that day. I’ve known Jürgen for 30 years now and he has remained the same, he is always authentic “The secret of his success lay first in the tactical plan. Mainz 05 was the first German professional team that played with a back four and without a ‘libero’ after Wolfgang Frank trained the team in the methods of Sacchi. All the coaches who followed Wolfgang were unsuccessful. “Jürgen needed three training sessions to put it right. When you added to that the incredible passion and willingness to run, many of our opponents were overwhelmed. Mainz 05 had one of the smallest budgets in 2. Bundesliga, we were probably an average team individually, but we had an outstanding coach with an outstanding plan.” Frank was Klopp’s biggest inspiration as a coach, but experience of the real world also shaped the approach of the man from Glatten, a small town in the Black Forest that his mother, Elisabeth, and one of two older sisters, Isolde, call home to this day. His love of what he described as the English game during his time in Germany – “Fighting football, not serenity football, that is what I like” – mirrors what it took to turn a passion into a profession. Klopp did not become a professional footballer until he was 23. A trial with Stuttgart, the club he supported as a boy, had been unsuccessful as a teenager and represented an early blow. He had an 18-month old son, Marc, with his first wife, Sabine, and was studying for a degree in sports business at Goethe University Frankfurt when he finally secured a full-time contract with Mainz. Alisson Goalkeeper Season apps 50 The great-grandson of an amateur goalkeeper in his hometown, the Brazil No 1 replaced his brother, Muriel, at Internacional. Trent Alexander-Arnold Right-back Season apps 40 Goals 1 When Liverpool last won the Champions League in 2005, he had just signed for the club as a six-year-old. Andy Robertson Left-back Apps 51 Goals 0 Released by Celtic aged 15, he worked at M&S in Glasgow while playing as an amateur for Queen’s Park. Has never lost a Liverpool game at Anfield. Virgil van Dijk Centre-back Apps 53 Goals 6 World’s most expensive defender at £75m. Worked as a dishwasher at the Oncle Jean restaurant in Breda when he was 16. Joël Matip Centre-back Apps 30 Goals 1 Born in Bochum, he represented his father’s country, Cameroon, before retiring from international duty in 2015. Dejan Lovren Centre-back Apps 18 Goals 1 Said he should be recognised as “one of the best defenders in the world” after helping Croatia to the World Cup final. His family escaped to Germany during the Bosnian war. Joe Gomez Centre-backApps 24 Goals 0 The versatile defender joined Liverpool from Charlton, where he made his first-team debut aged 17. Has represented England at every level. Georginio Wijnaldum MidfielderApps 46 Goals 5 His double against Barcelona sent Liverpool to the final. Started his career at Sparta Rotterdam, where his younger brother, Giliano, plays. Fabinho Midfielder Apps 40 Goals 1 Before joining Monaco, the Brazilian had a spell on loan at Real Madrid from Rio Ave in 2013, making one appearance. Jordan Henderson Midfielder Apps 45 Goals 1 Given his England debut by Fabio Capello. The only English player to miss in the World Cup shootout against Colombia. James Milner MidfielderApps 44 Goals 7 Last season, his nine assists broke the record for a single Champions League campaign. He is England’s most-capped under-21 international. Mohamed Salah Forward Apps 51 Goals 26 Was excused military service in Egypt to focus on football. He is the fastest Liverpool player to score 50 Premier League goals, taking 69 matches. Roberto Firmino Forward Apps 47 Goals 16 He used to help his father in the family business selling water bottles. Was the Bundesliga’s 2013-14 breakthrough player of the year. Sadio Mané Forward Apps 49 Goals 26 Scored the fastest Premier League hat-trick for Southampton against Aston Villa in 2015 in two minutes and 56 seconds. Divock Origi Forward Apps 20 Goals 6 His father played 120 times for Kenya. His double against Barcelona was the first time he'd scored in the Champions League. Xherdan Shaqiri ForwardApps 30 Goals 6 The only player in the Liverpool squad to have won the Champions League. Until then he had combined part-time jobs with his studies and played for Pforzheim, Eintracht Frankfurt II, Viktoria Sindlingen and Rot-Weiss Frankfurt. Add to that the responsibility of raising a young family. When Klopp talks of pressure existing beyond the wealthy confines of Melwood or of being able to park disappointments such as losing the 2013 Champions League final in the 89th minute to Bayern Munich, it is not to project an image. The 51-year-old was the only member of his family not in tears when they reunited at Liverpool’s training ground the morning after last season’s Champions League defeat by Real Madrid. Even his agent, Marc Kosicke, was overcome following Klopp’s sixth cup final defeat in succession. “They were only that sad and disappointed because they thought I was,” Klopp recalled. “I was of course, but I didn’t think it was the end of something. It’s only another step. Life is like this. “If we can exist only if everything works perfectly, then we cannot survive in that world out there. We have to accept sometimes that there is someone better, there is someone else with a little bit more luck. And I accepted it long ago. I know I will be there again. I will try to go to the next final again and then we will turn it. That’s how I see it.” Mainz were the only club of Klopp’s 11-year professional playing career but the long association did not guarantee stability and financial security. Those years were mainly spent battling to avoid relegation to the the fourth tier – with the exception of a promotion near-miss under Frank in 1996-97 – and would regularly go to the final days of the season. “That was pressure,” Klopp said. “Only when they were safe did we know we would be paid for the next 12 months.” The indefatigable spirit that Klopp has instilled in Liverpool – and was never demonstrated more thrillingly than in the semi-final comeback against Barcelona – was born of his own fight to make it as a player and manager. While in charge of Mainz he twice missed out on promotion to the Bundesliga by tiny margins – by a point and then goal difference – before taking the club into the top flight for the first time in their history. Parallels, perhaps, with his attempt to win a European trophy at the third time of asking with Liverpool. “Jürgen electrified a whole city,” Heidel recalls. “Especially after missing out on promotion because of a missing point and a missing goal. He blew away the depression with his speeches after the last matches. “After missing out in 2003 he announced in front of 10,000 fans in the city centre: ‘We will prove that it is possible to get up after such pain.’ He asked the Mainz fans to come to the first training of the new season. There were 10,000 there when training started again. After the last home game in 2007 and the relegation from the Bundesliga he took the stadium microphone in his hand. No spectators left the stadium. He told them: ‘We’ll be back, no question!’ The crowd started celebrating relegation like we’d won the championship.” Heidel does not need to see Klopp finally lay his hands on the European Cup on Saturday to know he backed a winner in 2001, but the pride in his old friend is unmistakable. “I’ve known Jürgen for 30 years and he has remained the same, he is always authentic,” says the 55-year-old, who stepped down as Schalke’s sporting director in February. “Of course he has learned. In 2. Bundesliga he seemed to be sent to the stands [by referees] every four weeks because he often had no control over his emotions. Now he has them mostly under control. He is sincere and honest. “We do not see each other too often unfortunately, but we know the other is there when you need him. I sincerely hope he wins the final because I do not know anyone on this planet who deserves it more.”