You can trawl though the archives and statistics to preview how Saturday’s Champions Cup final may pan out but I wouldn’t bother. Headline statistics are easy to quote: 26-plus international players in the starting lineups for Saracens and Leinster of whom 16 could be British & Irish Lions; coaches on both sides who have won plenty too. Experience everywhere. The finalists will come in as fresh as they can from their respective leagues where they continue to fight at the summits. We have, effectively, two prize-fighters primed, ready and with no excuses in terms of preparation. Dig deeper into recent individual form across the two squads and that tale of the tape may marginally favour Saracens, but it is so marginal that it does not point to them having the upper hand. The officials are led by Jérôme Garcès and his assistants are Romain Poîte and Pascal Gauzère with Philippe Bonhoure as TMO. This all-French team has the experience of big games under their ceintures and the breakdown interpretation will favour the attack. When so much quality exists across the board, on and off the field, then success will come down to the teams’ abilities to put out and set off fires on the field; will they be overwhelmed or will they overpower the opposition? When the game starts the fires will begin to burn and it will be up to the players, units and collectives on the field to see which ones need to grow and which need to be extinguished. These provide visual analogies for what lies ahead and you could continue along the same theme ad infinitum to make one salient point. The team that controls the game in all its elements for its duration will win. Sometimes in games of this magnitude a world-class talent grabs it by the scruff and their individual performance decides the outcome. St James’ Park over the decades has been the stage for players who have done precisely that but the oval-ball version of a Jackie Milburn, Alan Shearer, Paul Gascoigne or David Ginola will not determine the outcome on Saturday. The game will have too many solid foundations in both sides’ structures to allow this. The interpretation of the law at the breakdown will only aid retention of ball without too much risk. A touch of genius may sneak through their clenched defences and the laws but not for long. So while a Vunipola, Farrell, Sexton or James Ryan (or any of their teammates come to mention it) may provide a moment of alchemy that will briefly rattle the scoreboard, it will be the collective that will decide the trophy’s destination. Line-breaks will be rare and we will see plenty of double-digit attack phases being absorbed by both teams. Leinster are known for their first-phase agility but Saracens, I believe, will be ready and have those bases covered. If they don’t, then their spectacular scramble defence will provide a last line to mop up. The Dubliners are of a similar miserly mindset in that department. The kicking game, off the floor and out of hand, for both sides is equally arresting. We may well get a tense, edge-of-seat contest that will go down to the wire but do not expect free-flowing open rugby. We will probably get the odd controversial decision too but these sides may well produce more than 400 rucks, so let’s give the officials a break if they miss something. The magic word we all strive to achieve in team sport is alignment. Everyone on the same page, pointing in the same direction and adapting as quickly as they can. Whoever has that alignment the longest will win. Whoever ends up with the trophy, the game itself that we have all been part of needs to reflect very hard once the domestic season concludes. It does not take a mystic to see what type of game will be in front of us this weekend and the pulverising direction in which it will continue if left unchecked.