Israel Folau’s future in rugby union will be determined by a tribunal sitting in Sydney this weekend. The three-strong panel, which is made up of two experienced lawyers and a senior sports administrator, will decide whether a social media post by the Waratahs and Wallabies full-back contravened the code of conduct that forms part of his contract with Rugby Australia. Folau’s employer – who had previously warned the devout Christian about posts that, in demonstrating his faith, called on “sinners”, including homosexuals, to repent or face the consequences – served notice on him last month with three years remaining on a deal worth £600,000-per-annum. He asked for a hearing and contrition is not expected to form part of his defence. It is a case Australian rugby could do without. It involves their most influential player at a time when the national side is at its weakest since the 1970s. It has so polarised opinion that, whatever the outcome, there will be division. Some of his international teammates support the view of the Wallabies head coach, Michael Cheika, that Folau should not represent the country again; others feel he is being persecuted for his religious views. The hearing will not be about religion itself but the law. Rugby Australia and Folau will be represented by experienced lawyers and a provided-for second day is likely to be needed. The case against him is not as clear cut as a specific clause of his contract being breached, more a catch-all of bringing the game into disrepute. Even if the tribunal finds the case against him has been made, dismissal may not be the sanction applied. The outcome, whatever it is, will have an impact on Australia’s preparations for the World Cup. If the verdict goes the way of Folau, would he be available to the national side or would Rugby Australia look to buy him out of his contract, assuming it had the means to do so? It will not be a long-term problem for Cheika, who is in his last six months in charge before looking for his next venture. He has been linked with a move to Leicester having had a successful period with Leinster, fertilising their growth into one of the leading sides in Europe. As he in the coming months has to lift a side that since reaching the 2015 World Cup final has been on the slide, so the Tigers, for so long the leading club in England, have this season been a frolic on the margin of the Premiership. With two rounds of league matches to go, Leicester still have to secure their Premiership status. They are the only club Newcastle can overhaul, even if the dream for the Falcons is distant. It could be all over for their director of rugby, Dean Richards, on Friday night when two of his former clubs, Harlequins and the Tigers, meet at the Stoop. Leicester have a decent record there, winners on their last five visits. They have won their last five matches home and away against Quins, whose hold on a play-off place has been undermined by five consecutive defeats. Two points and it is high-fives for Leicester, but the hard work would then begin. Geordan Murphy is the fourth head of their coaching setup in the last four seasons. He was appointed, initially on a temporary basis, after the opening round of the season when Matt O’Connor was sacked following a heavy defeat at Exeter. Murphy is so steeped in the club that he has been unable to hide his pain after various defeats this season, including last weekend’s at home to Bristol when, with safety beckoning, they threw away victory in the final minutes. Mike Ford was brought in with five matches to go to add experience and give Murphy a sounding board, but he needed support months ago. When Leicester were successful, they gained strength through continuity. They had a way of doing things, and while they had their messy moments, such as the sacking of Richards, then a club icon, the departure after one year of Marcelo Loffreda, the Argentinian who paid for his job after failing to win a Premiership final, and the swift exit of his successor, Heyneke Meyer, there was a solidity about the best-supported club in the country. The fan base gave Leicester a start on their rivals, one that was bridged by the salary cap. As Saracens, and then Exeter, not only caught up but overtook them on the field, so Leicester’s dependence on rugby for turnover did them. Exeter make millions of pounds a year out of Sandy Park and Leicester have drawn up plans to build a 183-room hotel next to Welford Road. Like Australia, it was in the 80s that Leicester became a real force. There are countless examples throughout sport of teams who, for whatever reason, lost their way and either slipped into obscurity or endured a lean period before re-emerging. This season will have been a jolting one for the club’s board. The difference between staying up and going down is highly likely to be the two matches against Newcastle, the only league double recorded so far this season, with one more opportunity against Quins. Leicester have the leakiest defence in the Premiership. A side that used to know what it was about is now all over the place, but it has too much going for it to remain near the bottom. As the club’s history shows, success does not happen by accident. The chastening experience of this season should prompt an overhaul at the top. European club rugby needs a side that even when struggling pulls in a 20,000 crowd, as much as the average of Saracens and Exeter combined. • This is an extract from our weekly rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe just visit this page and follow the instructions.