Russian and Venezuelan officials have denied a US claim that Nicolás Maduro planned to flee his country during Tuesday’s failed coup attempt until the Kremlin told him to stay. The assertion by the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, was part of an “information war”, said Maria Zakharova, a spokeswoman for the Russian foreign ministry. The opposition leader Juan Guaidó was almost unknown both inside and outside Venezuela until the start of this year. Guaidó was made chairman of the national assembly in January because it was the turn of his party, Voluntad Popular (People’s Will). At 35, he was a junior member of his party but its leaders were either under house arrest, in hiding or in exile. He declared himself "interim president" that month, resting his claim on a clause in the constitution that allows the legislature to take power temporarily and call new elections if it deems the president to be failing to fulfil basic duties or to have vacated the post. Guaidó's relative obscurity initially proved an advantage in a country where the opposition has generally failed to distinguish itself, losing its nerve at critical moments, succumbing to infighting, and getting involved in a failed coup against Hugo Chávez in 2002. He inspired a huge wave of protests inside Venezuela with a message of peaceful change, and won widespread international support. Countries from Europe to the US and regional powers recognised him as Venezuela's legitimate president, handing him control of bank accounts and Venezuelan assets along with the formal recognition. As months dragged on however, Guaidó's hope of winning a wave of military defections that would end the rule of Nicolás Maduro seemed to fade, leaving his movement in an uneasy limbo - self-declared president but with no power. He raised concerns inside Venezuela and internationally when he appeared to hint at the possibility of military intervention after a failed attempt to bring humanitarian aid into the country in February. Questions have also been raised about the bedfellows Guaidó has chosen in what he calls his bid to rescue Venezuela. His main international backer is Donald Trump. Another key regional supporter is Brazil’s far-right firebrand president, Jair Bolsonaro, known for his hostility to human rights and his fondness for dictatorship. Despite these characteristics, Guaidó has praised what he called Bolsonaro’s “commitment to and for democracy [and] human rights”. Pompeo made the claim late on Tuesday afternoon as it became clear that the attempt by the opposition leader, Juan Guaidó, to overthrow the Maduro administration would not immediately be successful. “He [Maduro] had an airplane on the tarmac, he was ready to leave this morning, as we understand it, and the Russians indicated he should stay,” Pompeo said during a televised interview. “He was headed for Havana.” Pompeo did not provide any evidence to back up the claim. US officials have said that Russia’s support for Venezuela amounts to an encroachment on Washington’s sphere of influence. “This is our hemisphere,” said the national security adviser, John Bolton. “It’s not where the Russians ought to be interfering.” The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, warned Pompeo during a telephone call on Wednesday that attempts to oust Maduro were “fraught with the severest consequences”, according to a Russian readout of the conversation. Noting Washington’s “obvious support” for Guaidó, Lavrov called the coup attempt a “gross violation of international law”. On Tuesday, Zakharova told CNN that the claim was “fake”. “Washington tried its best to demoralise the Venezuelan army and now used fakes as a part of information war,” she said, according to the television station. Jorge Arreaza, Venezuela’s top diplomat, also denied Pompeo’s claim. “Making up fake news is a very sad way to accept that the coup you backed has failed … once again,” he wrote on Twitter. “Diplomacy has to be restored in the US government #TrumpHandsOffVenezuela.” Russia is one of Venezuela’s largest creditors and most powerful international backers. It has lent Venezuela the equivalent of billions of pounds to help prop up the economy and finance arms deals, and Rosneft, the Russian energy giant, has invested heavily in the country’s oil sector. Russia has sent military specialists and equipment to Caracas on several flights since the outbreak of the crisis this year. On Tuesday Russia denied it would intervene in the conflict. Reports have said Russian mercenaries have flown to Venezuela to protect Maduro, although Russia has not confirmed their presence in the country. Russian state media have characterised the attempted overthrow of the Maduro government on Tuesday as a US-backed coup. The Russian government has criticised Washington’s support for Guaidó, and in a communique on Tuesday it lashed out at what it called “interference from abroad”. “The radical opposition in Venezuela has once again turned to violent methods of confrontation,” the communique said. “Instead of a peaceful settlement of political differences, a course has been taken to foment a conflict, provoking violations of order and clashes with the country’s armed forces.”