Soak 24 hrPrep 5 minCook 15 minServes 4 400g sustainably sourced cod fillet1 litre cold water100g caster sugar75g sea salt1 tsp fennel seedsPared zest of 1 lemon3 sprigs fresh thymeExtra-virgin olive oil, to drizzle For the salad2 lemons200g radishes2 sprigs thyme, leaves picked100g watercress3 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil The day before, wash the cod under cold water, pat dry with kitchen towel and put in a non-metallic container. Heat the water, add the sugar, salt, fennel and lemon zest, and stir to dissolve the sugar and salt. Turn off the heat and leave to cool completely, then pour over the fish, add the thyme, cover and refrigerate for 24 hours. The next day, lift the cod from its brine and pat dry with kitchen towel. Now start on the salad: cut off the skin and white pith from all the lemons (including the one you pared for the cod marinade), then cut out the individual segments. Slice the radishes as finely as you can (use a mandoline, if you have one) and toss with the lemon segments. Add the thyme, plenty of seasoning and a pinch of caster sugar, and toss again. Remove the skin from the cod and slice the flesh as thinly as possible. Add the watercress and extra-virgin olive oil to the salad and toss. Divide the salad between four plates, arrange the slices of cod to one side and serve, finishing with a final drizzle of oil, if you like. ⁃ The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US. Prep 10 minCook 1 hr 20 minServes 4 2 tbsp olive oil150g cooking chorizo, sliced8 skin-on chicken thighsSalt and black pepper1 large onion, peeled and finely sliced1 stick celery, trimmed and finely sliced3 garlic cloves, peeled and finely sliced2 stalks fresh rosemary, leaves picked250ml manzanilla sherry400ml chicken stock500g jersey royals, scrubbed clean (halved if large)2 tbsp finely chopped flat-leaf parsley Heat half the oil in a large casserole and fry the chorizo until golden and releasing its oils. Scoop out and set aside. Season the chicken thighs, brown in the chorizo oil until really golden, then set aside with the chorizo. Add the onion and celery to the pan, and fry gently for 10 minutes, until lovely and soft, then add the garlic and rosemary, and cook for a few minutes more. Return the chicken and chorizo to the pan, pour in the sherry, turn up the heat and leave to bubble for a minute or two. Add the stock, cover the pan and simmer for 20 minutes. Add the potatoes and simmer for a further 20-25 minutes, until they are tender and the chicken is falling off the bone. Lift out the chicken and potatoes from the casserole with a slotted spoon and keep warm in a serving dish. Turn up the heat under the casserole and let the sauce bubble away for 10 minutes, to reduce slightly, then season to taste. Pour the sauce over the chicken and potatoes, scatter with the parsley and serve with crusty bread, for mopping up the juices. Prep 10 minCook 10 minServes 4 3 baby gems, quartered1 bunch spring onions, trimmed1 tbsp olive oil50g manchego, shaved1 tbsp sherry or vermouth vinegar2 tsp membrilloSalt and black pepper3-4 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil Heat a griddle pan on a high flame. Toss the baby gem and spring onions in the olive oil, then lay them in the hot griddle pan, turning occasionally, until nicely charred all over. Arrange the little gem quarters and onions in a dish and scatter over the manchego shavings. Whisk the vinegar and membrillo with some salt and pepper until the membrillo has dissolved, then whisk in the extra virgin oil. Drizzle the dressing over the salad and serve. Prep 5 minInfuse 1 hrChill 3 hr-overnightCook 20 minServes 4 1 litre whole milk4 cardamom pods, cracked6 large free-range egg yolks1 tsp vanilla bean paste60g caster sugar, plus extra to caramelise40g cornflour1 shot (25ml) strong espresso, cooled Put the milk and cardamom in a saucepan, bring to a boil, then set aside to infuse for at least an hour. Once cool and infused, strain through a fine sieve. Beat together the eggs, vanilla bean paste and caster sugar until thick, pale and fluffy. Mix a little of the infused milk with the cornflour to make a thin paste, then add this, the rest of the milk and the cold espresso to the eggs, and beat gently. Pour into a pan and cook over a low heat for 10 minutes, stirring constantly, until you have a very thick custard. Pour through a sieve into a jug, then pour into four 300ml dishes or ramekins, and chill in the fridge for at least three hours, or overnight, until completely chilled and just set – it should be thick and creamy, not set like a creme caramel. Sprinkle a layer of caster sugar over the top of each crema catalana and caramelise quickly under a very hot grill or, ideally, with a blowtorch. Chill again for an hour before serving. • José Pizarro is chef/patron of Pizarro and José in London, and The Swan Inn, Esher, Surrey. His latest book, Andalusia: Recipes from Seville and Beyond, is published by Hardie Grant on 30 May at £26. To pre-order a copy for £22.68, go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846.