They were teammates and roommates on the Lions tour to New Zealand two years ago, but it is unlikely Tadhg Furlong and Mako Vunipola will be reminiscing when they stand face-to-face before the first scrum in Saturday’s European Champions Cup final at St James’ Park. Not that Vunipola, the Saracens and England prop, is much of a talker according to Furlong, Leinster’s Ireland tighthead. “I got on well with Mako, he’s a good craic,” he says. “I got stuck in a room with him a few times, which I enjoyed. Most of the time he was asleep so I did not get much chat out of him. He’s an horrendous snorer, so it can be tough that way with him.” The pair are the epitome of a modern-day prop. They do not neglect scrummaging but that set piece has declined in number as well as importance, although it still has its moments. It is their contribution in the loose that marks them out, hitting rucks, carrying the ball, tackling and getting around the field in the manner of a back-rower of old. “Tadhg surprised me in New Zealand,” says Vunipola, who started all three Lions Tests with Furlong. “He is such a big guy and his set piece is solid, but I could not believe how hard he worked around the park. I thought I was all right at that, then I saw him and thought: ‘Oh no, I’m not.’ It gives you motivation to push yourself and that is what you get with good players. You are always going to learn on a tour like that. It is just whether you want to.” Vunipola was on the winning side when the pair last confronted each other at the start of this year’s Six Nations in Dublin. “He played well that day, to be fair,” says Furlong. “He is world class. He has had a few injury problems but he has come back and looked really fresh. He attacks the gainline, brings others into the game and has great footwork when he comes late at the line. I enjoy watching him. The game has changed a lot in terms of scrummaging in two years, and what we talked about on the tour in terms of what we wanted to achieve in the scrum is maybe not the case any more.” Tadhg is one of the best (tightheads) in the world, if not the best. I hope we can nullify some of his impact but you can only do so much. I am looking forward to a great match-up Watching the pair play, it is only their build that marks them out as props. “Tadhg has all the skills and sometimes you forget which position he plays in,” says Vunipola. “His bread and butter is the set piece and he never loses sight of that, but he is so reliable. He always gives 100% in training and, in my eyes, that is the sign of a great player. He is one of the best [tightheads] in the world, if not the best. I hope we can nullify some of his impact but you can only do so much. I am looking forward to a great match-up. We spent a lot of time together in New Zealand and got on well. He is easy to get along with, relaxed and funny, although he loves coffee and I am not a big fan of it.” Saracens’ last defeat in Europe was against Leinster in the quarter-final at the Aviva Stadium 13 months ago. It ended a disappointing European campaign for the current Premiership champions who had been unbeaten in the previous two tournaments but they responded with a 22-match unbeaten run in all competitions that ended at Exeter just before Christmas. “It was a kick up the arse and it hurt,” says Vunipola. “It opened our eyes because we had probably thought we were something we were not. You could say it was the best thing that has happened to us. Leinster showed there was another step up and we know we are going to have to be better on Saturday. We have won the tournament twice but this final will require a lot more from us. They are a very talented side that works hard. They are pretty ruthless, going after any weakness. They are very adaptable, able to change their game depending on what they feel. You can analyse what they do but they can be different on the day.” It will be the fourth meeting between the sides in the Champions Cup and Saracens have yet to emerge victorious. “They are back to their best,” says Furlong. “Their rugby is a bit different to ours but that is neither a good nor a bad thing. I enjoy watching them and they have a lot of pace and flair out wide. “I worked closely with Mako and Jamie [George] in New Zealand and have massive respect for the way they play the game. They go for the jugular. When you look at the two teams and the number of international players, it is going to be like a Test match, quick and tough on the lungs and legs. You just march on.”