Callum Sheedy and Marcus Smith are the eye-catching inclusions in a vastly inexperienced England squad to face the Barbarians that offers few clues as to Eddie Jones’s World Cup plans. The Wales-born Sheedy is rewarded for a fine season with Bristol, while Smith’s selection is a surprise because the 20-year-old has been withdrawn from the under-20 squad and will now miss the Junior World Cup in Argentina. They are two of 20 uncapped players picked by Jim Mallinder, who assumes head coach duties this week with Jones distancing himself from the fixture. The Northampton pair Teimana Harrison and Paul Hill as well as Wasps’ Tommy Taylor are the only capped players selected and while there is a degree of wiggle room it is highly unlikely those called up – with the possible exception of Smith – will be included in Jones’s World Cup training squad. Danny Cipriani is not included, strengthening his claims to be part of Jones’s training squad next month but he would have looked out of place in a squad who have a distinctly youthful feel. He was not named in the finalised Barbarians squad either but despite reports to the contrary it is understood he was never in their plans. While Sheedy will not be captured by England even if he features at Twickenham as the fixture on Sunday does not count as a Test, his call-up is indicative of where he sees his international future. The 23-year-old fly-half is eligible to play for Wales, Ireland and England but rejected a call by the Wales Under-20 side in 2015. Other notable call-ups to the 23-man squad include the Harlequins duo Joe Marchant and Alex Dombrandt as well as Ben Curry, the twin brother of the England openside flanker Tom. The Bath prop Beno Obano is also selected, having this season battled back from the long-term knee injury sustained in preparation for this fixture 12 months ago. That match was won convincingly by the Barbarians, who are again coached by Bristol’s Pat Lam. He has compiled another impressive-looking squad who will go into the match as considerable favourites with Gloucester’s Mark Atkinson on Monday added to the ranks. With Jones handing the reins to Mallinder, the former Northampton director of rugby has added the Saints defence coach Phil Dowson, Newcastle’s Dave Walder and Castres’ Joe El‑Abd to his backroom staff Forwards Josh Beaumont, Ben Curry (both Sale Sharks), Alex Dombrandt (Harlequins), Tom Dunn, Tom Ellis (both Bath), Ross Harrison (Sale Sharks), Teimana Harrison, Paul Hill (both Northampton Saints), Beno Obano (Bath), Ehren Painter (Northampton Saints), Will Spencer (Leicester), Elliott Stooke (Bath), Tommy Taylor (Wasps). Backs Josh Bassett (Wasps), Simon Hammersley (Newcastle), Ben Loader (London Irish), Joe Marchant (Harlequins), Alex Mitchell (Northampton), Piers O’Conor (Bristol), Callum Sheedy (Bristol), Marcus Smith (Harlequins), Ben White (Leicester), Johnny Williams (Newcastle).