I have been organising seminars and events at the University of London’s iconic Senate House venue for over a decade. It’s always been hugely welcoming, largely thanks to the warmth and friendliness of the staff like receptionist Glen Jacques. That’s why last year I was nearly brought to tears when I read a letter by Glen describing how conditions for workers like him at the university had been eroded over the years, and how staff were often treated with absolute contempt. Though working exclusively for the University of London, caterers, cleaners, porters, security staff and others – the overwhelming majority of whom are BAME and/or migrant workers – are indirectly employed through subcontractors. It is an arrangement that gives them worse pension, holiday and sick-pay entitlements than their in-house colleagues, as well as making it much harder to raise concerns over issues such as workload and scheduling of hours – as the recent case of cleaner Margarita Cunalata has demonstrated. Outsourced workers are also typically more vulnerable to bullying and discrimination. Their union, the Independent Workers of Great Britain (IWGB), dealt with 54 complaints by outsourced University of London workers in 2017 alone. They face an intransigent university management, whose response has frequently blended short-termism with heavy-handedness The outsourced staff have campaigned for several years for improvements to their employment status, and despite achieving some victories, they face an intransigent university management with skewed priorities, whose response has all too frequently blended short-termism with heavy-handedness. Refusing to negotiate directly with the workers’ chosen union representatives, it has instead expended heavily on policing the workers’ industrial action and student protests taken in support of them, spending over £400,000 on additional security over a two-month period last year alone. During these security operations, strikers and protesters have been filmed experiencing violence and intimidation. More generally, an environment has developed at University of London sites such as Senate House that is far from conducive to free academic inquiry and speech. Meanwhile, University of London management insists a process is under way to bring outsourced staff in-house, yet so far only a handful of outsourced workers have been given university contracts. Thankfully, Glen is among them, but the rest are at the mercy of a sequence of promised reviews that could stretch as far as 2021, without any guarantee of ever being brought in-house. In the face of this intransigence, the university’s cleaners and receptionists continue to campaign, and just last week returned a ballot to the IGWB, overwhelmingly in favour of strike action. In recent months outsourced workers have also called for a boycott of all events – events they clean, cater and provide security for – taking place at the University of London central administration locations. It has already gained the support of more than 400 academics, multiple union branches, and politicians including the shadow chancellor John McDonnell and Green party MP Caroline Lucas. This weekend, delegates at the University and College Union’s annual congress will be asked to vote in favour of a motion backing that boycott. I am proud to support the boycott, proud the seminar I organise has relocated, and proud to call on other academics to vote in favour of it at my union’s congress later this week. As the grandson and son-in-law myself of migrant workers – my uncle works in university catering and was himself outsourced a few years ago – it’s a cause very dear to my heart. Moreover, this is far from an isolated dispute. Outsourcing and precariousness are rife across higher education. Universities routinely invest huge amounts in real estate while neglecting to invest in their staff, forcing us to individually bear the risks imposed by government policy and management decisions. Academics know this as well as anyone: last year, a University and College Union report indicated that 25% of undergraduate teaching is delivered by hourly-paid staff, rising to nearly 50% in some institutions. It’s an untenable state of affairs, which can only be changed through solidarity across the university community, and through the galvanising effect that industrial action and protest can have across disputes. Last year, while I was stood on the picket line outside King’s College London (where I myself was then precariously employed) during our strike over pensions, IWGB members supported our action, with some refusing to cross UCU picket lines. Now we must stand with them. We are all in this fight together. • Dion Georgiou is a senior lecturer at the University of Chichester