Did you hear that sound over the weekend? A deep, cleansing sigh of relief? It was Lisa Alexander. The Diamonds coach – who will meet with fellow selectors Anne Sargeant and Michelle Wilkins this week to pick Australia’s World Cup team – would have been delighted to see her captain, Caitlin Bassett, finally hit her straps as she helped the Giants beat the Queensland Firebirds on Sunday. With her 193cm star shooter returning to form, the national coach has, it appears, one less thing to worry about as she heads into the single most difficult selection of her career, described by Sargeant as a “beautiful headache”. Early next week, the selectors will reveal their 12-player squad, plus four training partners. Bassett, who fractured her left forearm in a practice match in January and missed nearly all of Super Netball’s pre-season, looked back to her fearsome finest against the Firebirds, sinking 50 from 57 attempts at 88% accuracy and taking a round-high six rebounds, virtually nullifying her misses. Bassett shot 72% of her side’s 69-goal total and even managed one goal assist and one feed – not usually features of her game. She also cut down on the handling errors seen in previous weeks. Crucially, for the first time since the only major injury of her 14-year career, Bassett demanded the ball in her inimitable style, was strong on the take and didn’t just look comfortable with the physicality being dished out by defenders Laura Clemesha and Tara Hinchliffe; she appeared to relish it. While still not perfect, Bassett’s performance on the Firebirds’ home court was a world away from her effort in round one in late April, when she scored just 28 goals from 36 attempts, at 78%, and sat out most of the last quarter in her side’s shock seven-goal loss to the NSW Swifts. Her tussle with former Sunshine Coast Lightning teammate and now Collingwood co-captain, Geva Mentor, last weekend looks to have primed Bassett. And she opportunities to build on her form in the coming weeks with clashes against two other world-class keepers : South African Phumza Maweni of the Sunshine Coast and the Adelaide Thunderbirds’ Jamaican star Shamera Sterling. If she can continue on her current trajectory, Bassett will be fit and in-form as she leads the Diamonds at July’s World Cup in Liverpool. It is there that the still-wounded Australians will look to avenge last year’s heart-breaking Commonwealth Games loss to England. To describe Bassett as key to the Diamonds’ chances of doing that is an understatement of the highest order; many believe the national side simply can’t win without her. And it’s hard to argue with that sentiment given her influence on the scoreboard. The “other Caitlin”, the Vixens’ Caitlin Thwaites, will no doubt be named in the squad too, but Bassett has been Alexander’s go-to for several international seasons now. In big moments, it’s Bassett who has had to deliver and it will be the same in Liverpool. At the opposite end to Bassett at the weekend was Firebird Gretel Tippett, who put her name up in lights for the Australian goal attack bib with a scintillating performance, almost single-handedly keeping her side in the match, shooting 41 from 41 for a perfect return. She also recorded seven goal assists, 19 feeds, 21 centre pass receives, an intercept and a deflection. With Alexander expected to take four shooters, the Caitlins plus Tippett leaves just one spot, which most expect to go to Steph Wood. The Lightning player had a better game this round against the Swifts, shooting 14/19 at 74% to help her side to a two-goal win. Last week, against the Firebirds, she shot just 18 from 30, for an uncharacteristically low 60% accuracy. Vixen GA Tegan Philip – after splitting the goaling load 50/50 with Thwaites against the Thunderbirds last week – was again impressive, shooting 27/30 at 90% in her side’s 63-all draw against an improving West Coast Fever in Perth. At the defensive end, it’s likely injured Fever skipper Courtney Bruce, who missed a third straight game with an elbow injury, will be named in the squad and given every chance to get fit. The player most likely to replace her, Vixen Emily Mannix, has had a mixed start to the Super Netball season, but it’s hard to see anyone else getting the nod. Goal defenders Jo Weston of the Vixens and Collingwood’s April Brandley virtually pick themselves. Brandley had a solid game in Collingwood’s 65-47 shellacking of the Thunderbirds on Friday night, picking up five gains, four intercepts, a deflection and a rebound. She also didn’t record a single obstruction; no easy feat for a player whose job it is to defend. In the midcourt, Kim Ravaillion, Liz Watson, Gabi Simpson, who is nursing a hip injury, Kelsey Browne, Jamie-Lee Price, Jess Anstiss, Paige Handley and even Ash Brazill are pushing for selection … but there are just four spots. A revitalised Ravaillion, who took a break from national duties to deal with exhaustion, looks a lock, as does Simpson, injured or not. Vixen Watson put on a sparkling display against Fever at the weekend, while Browne hasn’t been at her best in recent weeks for the Pies. Hadley’s form for the Swifts will be hard for selectors to ignore, but is there room? As happened ahead of the 2015 World Cup, could she come from outside the squad and straight into the 12? Could Alexander pick Brazill, who plays Australian rules football, as well as netball, professionally? Could youngsters Price or Anstiss get a look-in? At the moment it’s all part of Australian netball’s “beautiful headache”.