Katarina Johnson-Thompson may be the best British female athlete in any sport. Yet remind of her the fact she has won three major multi-event titles in 15 months – and that she is the headline act at the prestigious Hypo-Meeting in Götzis this weekend – and she grimaces, shakes her head and makes an extraordinarily honest admission. She considers herself an impostor. “I was reading up on impostor syndrome the other day,” she says. “My mum sent me an article on it because when she was a dancer she felt the same. I don’t know what it’ll take not to feel like that – I’ll just know when it happens.” Those who suffer from impostor syndrome doubt their accomplishments and have a persistent, often internalised fear of being exposed as a fraud. Johnson-Thompson is far from alone among top sports stars in feeling that way. The difference, though, is she is prepared to admit it. “You say stuff like I’m headlining and I’m coming here with No 1 status but I still don’t feel like that,” she says. “I don’t feel like I’ve proved myself yet. I’ve just been told I have to have a photo taken with the decathlete Damian Warner – I don’t want to do it.” Only when she is reminded of the fact she has recent gold medals at World and European Indoor Championships and Commonwealth Games on her CV, as well as a silver medal at last year’s European Championships, she acknowledges she might just be half decent. “I know I’ve done good in the past couple of years and have turned a corner, but I still want more from myself. I want to reach my potential.” The Olympics is just over a year away, but for Johnson-Thompson the journey starts this weekend. And for all the mountain peaks that overlook the freshly laid six-lane track in Götzis, none surely is as steep as the challenge Johnson-Thompson has set herself: find a way to beat Nafi Thiam – perhaps the world’s best athlete – and win the heptathlon title in Tokyo. But, as she points out, there are reasons for optimism. After all she recently turned 26, the same age Jessica Ennis-Hill was when she won gold at London 2012, and feels that she is hitting her peak. “I understand myself, my event and my body and all the different techniques now. I am definitely zoning in on the Olympics, which is my ultimate goal.” Last year Johnson-Thompson went toe-to-toe with Thiam at the Europeans, setting a personal best of 6,759 points in finishing only 57 points behind in second. Sadly, a mouth-watering rematch will have to wait until September’s world championships in Doha as the Belgian is sidestepping Götzis as she returns from injury. However, Johnson-Thompson still faces stiff competition in the form of the world silver medallist Carolin Schäfer from Germany and the supremely talented American prodigy Erica Bougard. “I always want to compete against the best. I have maybe three more heptathlons including this one before Tokyo, so I want them to be quality competitions against the best. I am a bit like, ‘Oh god, I wish Thiam was here’, but it doesn’t bother me so much about getting a win against her before Tokyo. I just need to continue my momentum.” That, as she stresses, is especially important given she probably will compete in only three more heptathlons before the Olympics – and still has a long list of things to work on. In the shot put, for instance, she is working on a return to the shuffle back – a technique she originally “threw out of the window” when she moved to France two years ago. In the high jump she intends to return to a nine-step run-up, not the seven she used in winning gold at the European Indoor in March. And – for good measure – she also believes she needs to tweak her 200m bend as well as her javelin. Amazingly, heptathlon’s great tinkerwoman is not finished there. “I also need to work on my long jump. I don’t know if that is in the right place at the minute. For some reason in the heptathlon it is in the 6.50 metres, which I can jump day in and day out, but I need to get the distance and points up. That is where I am letting myself down the last couple of years.” Yet Johnson-Thompson has happy memories of Götzis, having set her personal bests here in 2016 and 2017, describing it as a “magical place”. “I think it’s a combination of the scenery, the support – the fact that the stadium is full – the track is good and the wind is always the right way. The sun, touch wood, is always out. And the occasion brings it out in me.” It helps too that two other British athletes – the hugely promising 20-year-old Niamh Emerson, who won silver at the European Indoor in Glasgow, and the decathlete Tim Duckworth, who was ranked sixth in the world in 2018 – will also be there. “Having someone there to talk to and support is great,” she adds. “Niamh has really good energy to be around.” Johnson-Thompson intends to feed off that support, as well as that of the 10,000-strong crowd. As always, she appears in superb shape. But whatever happens in the next two days, squashing the persistent doubts in her own mind will, you suspect, remain much harder than toppling her rivals.