A horse with trouble concentrating may be just the type to give Godolphin a second consecutive Derby, according to the trainer Charlie Appleby, who hopes to saddle Line Of Duty in the Epsom Classic next month. Appleby, who won last year’s Derby with Masar, sees similarities in what the pair achieved as juveniles but reports Line Of Duty needs a bit of drama to sustain his focus. “This horse is better on a turning track, it keeps him interested,” the trainer said at his Moulton Paddocks stable on Tuesday. “That’s why I was confident going into the Breeders’ Cup, because there’s turns there and the hustle and bustle. He’s terrier-like and he loves to get into a bit of a scrap. “He’s got all the right credentials to turn up in the Derby. He likes hustle and bustle and, one thing about Epsom, he’ll get plenty of that.” Appleby decided against running the colt in last Saturday’s 2,000 Guineas because that race takes place over a straight mile. “A horse like him, boredom could set in.” Appleby, who shamefacedly admitted he had never seen the TV drama that shares Line Of Duty’s name, will send the colt to York next week for the Dante Stakes, often the strongest Derby trial, and expects him to be “a live player”. The colt is a living embodiment of the new detente between Godolphin and Coolmore, as he is by the dominant Coolmore stallion Galileo, boycotted in the past by Appleby’s employer. While he has a couple of other entrants and the funding to supplement others if needed, Appleby is minded to run only Line Of Duty in the Derby. “The Jalmouds and things like that are nice horses but they’re not ready yet. Discussions will be had over the next few weeks as to whether we run them or not but as we stand here today, Line Of Duty is our one. We’ll go there with one live shot and for me that’s enough, rather than making up the numbers and potentially weakening my squad for the second half of the season.” Chester 1.50 Great Dame 2.25 Manuela De Vega 3.00 Society Queen 3.35 Technician (nb) 4.05 Sneaky Peek 4.35 Pass The Gin 5.05 Frankelio Newton Abbot2.00 Win My Wings 2.35 Truckers Lodge 3.10 Bullionaire 3.45 Saintemilion 4.15 Crooks Peak (nap) 4.45 Thumb Stone Blues 5.20 Global Thrill Kelso2.10 Floki 2.45 Flowery 3.20 Benny’s Secret 3.55 River Of Intrigue  4.25 Mcgroarty 4.55 Llancillo Lord 5.30 Orburstock Fontwell5.10 Itsaboutime 5.45 Some Day Soon 6.15 Stormy Milan 6.45 Robinesse 7.15 Twenty Twenty 7.45 Barton Rose 8.15 Hurling Magic Southwell6.05 Red Invader 6.35 Aphaea 7.05 Ollivander 7.35 Glutnforpunishment 8.05 Antico Lady 8.35 Falcao The trainer reported Masar is on course for a return to action at Royal Ascot next month, in either the Prince of Wales or the Hardwicke, but added the timetable was tight as the chestnut returns from a leg injury. “I’m not going to force him,” he said, nominating the Princess of Wales’s Stakes in July as a back-up plan. October’s Arc is the ultimate target for Masar but Appleby is entirely flexible about the route taken to get to Paris. He is just happy to have a Derby winner to campaign. “He’s a monster, a gorgeous looking horse. He’s done very well, physically. The encouraging thing is, from what we’re seeing in the mornings, he’s showing his natural athleticism, he’s a great mover. “He looks a picture of health. Mentally, he’s very sharp. We’re all very happy. But, as I heard John Oxx say once, when you open up that stable door, you don’t know what’s going to be behind it.” Appleby named the Gold Cup at Royal Ascot as the next target for Cross Counter, his Melbourne Cup winner. Barney Roy could go for the Queen Anne at the start of Ascot week. Auxerre, so impressive in landing the Lincoln, is to be stepped up in class to a Listed race at Windsor before possibly being tried over further than a mile. Old Persian might be supplemented for the Coronation Cup if Godolphin staffers felt the race had a weak look. Meanwhile, Pat Smullen, who rode Harzand to win the Derby and the Irish Derby three years ago, has announced his retirement at the age of 41. The Irishman has been undergoing treatment for pancreatic cancer and, while hopeful that he has seen the last of it, has nonetheless been advised by his doctors against trying to resume his career. “I have a lot of cherished memories of a great career, and I’m very thankful for that,” Smullen said. “Now it’s the second chapter of my life. I’m determined that I’ll still work within the industry and hopefully I can be of some benefit.” Aidan O’Brien said of Smullen, who was Ireland’s champion jockey nine times, “Pat was second to none, both as a jockey and a horseman.”