I separated from my husband 16 years ago. We have two daughters. He went on to marry an aggressive, abusive narcissist who had a hand in rearing our children. She was, by turns, demanding, vicious and loving with them. I distanced myself but encouraged them to build a strong relationship with their father, which they did. One of my daughters recently married, and my ex’s wife almost destroyed the wedding. She got extremely drunk, heckled the speakers and, when my daughter’s father was due to give his speech, she took the microphone, making an appalling speech that left the guests gasping in horror. She spoke disparagingly about the couple, me and herself, swearing throughout. We thought she was having a breakdown in public. The charm offensive began the next day with generic apologetic texts and, a week later, expressions of how upset she was by her behaviour. The girls are being bullied into forgiving her. It feels as though my ex’s wife has a narcissistic cult around her, where everyone has to either collude with her behaviour or be shunned. My other daughter plans to marry and wants her father to give her away, but not if that means his wife comes to the wedding. How do I support the children? They have both said it can never happen again. How can I make sure it doesn’t? Given that you can’t control all the personalities involved, it would be a tall order for you to prevent this happening again. Susanna Abse, a psychoanalytical psychotherapist, who has extensive experience in working with separated couples and parents, asked: on whose behalf you were writing? And she wanted you to look, not so much at others’ behaviour, but your own feelings. “Perhaps there’s a lot here that may relate to some unresolved feelings about how damaged you felt by the end of your relationship with your ex?” she asked I can understand how you want to protect your children against this woman – she does sound challenging – but your children are adults, and it seems as if you’ve already given them some great advice by telling them to foster a strong relationship with their father. They seem to know their own minds, as well as what kind of behaviour they will tolerate. There is a limit to how much else you can do, and you may need to be cautious about getting too involved and finding yourself in the middle, between your ex, his wife and your children. Your daughters may well have had to build a relationship with this “narcissist” (I have no idea if she is or isn’t) but you’re caught, Abse said, in a family drama and “could be at risk of putting the children in a big loyalty conflict”. So where do you go from here? Abse said the best way you can protect your daughter’s future wedding is to foster “an atmosphere of collaboration and positive relationships”. This way your daughter – who I suspect may feel torn between what she wants to do and what she feels she ought to do – can truly decide on what works best for her. It is, after all, her wedding day. I don’t know if she has voiced her fears to her father and said, “It’s you on your own or nothing”; but it is likely that she wants her father there, given what you’ve said. What your ex does is up to him, and I would stay out of it. If your daughter asks your advice, Abse recommended helping her think through the long-term consequences of not having her father there, and the potential for creating a rift. “All you can do is help your children manage their stepmother without losing their father. But remember, it’s your daughter’s choice who attends her wedding – not yours,” she said. Given your description of your ex’s wife, I would take great pleasure in being the calm, supportive one and not putting myself at the centre of any conflict. If you feel the need to vent to someone (and we all do), pick a trusted friend, but keep it from your children and especially the bride-to-be. There may be grandchildren further down the line and other big family occasions. Support your daughters, be neutral, direct your own show. • Send your problem to annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.