A few questions spring to mind at the start of this Cricket World Cup. Questions such as: whose idea was it to have a live guitarist in the grounds? Why are insomniacs and vampires seemingly the target audience for the terrestrial TV highlights? Why do Pakistan do this to their supporters every time? Another head-scratcher has emerged for the batsmen: how are they going to counter the obvious menace of Jofra Archer when their match against England comes around? Archer is four ODIs young, but after his game-breaking new‑ball spell during the 104-run win over South Africa on Thursday the message has been issued that England – purveyors of fast-medium in past World Cups, but currently with Mark Wood waiting in the wings – possess genuine pace. Just ask Hashim Amla, left seeing stars by a brute that crashed into his grille (and rightly necessitated an off-field concussion test.) Or Aiden Markram, late on a delivery that whizzed to slip. Faf du Plessis spoke of taking time to adjust to Archer, only to perish early on the hook, while Rassie van der Dussen also misjudged another bumper. It is not only the speeds that England’s box fresh right-armer generates from that frictionless cruise to the crease – or, indeed, the subtle changes that see him flit from a breezy 87mph up to an unsettling 93mph – but that his line is so laser-precise with it. Archer always seems to be at the batsman. Beyond coping with the obvious physical threat, width is scarcely on offer. So when he does offer up just a smidgeon of room with which to work, the onus is on the recipient to make the opportunity count. Before being struck by the spiteful delivery that forced his time off the field, Amla got such a chance. It was Archer’s second ball, a fraction too short, and the South African looked to have timed the backside off it with a rasping cut shot. But at backward point the prowling Jason Roy flew to prevent what looked an almost certain four and a dot ball resulted. A small moment? In the grand scheme of things, perhaps, but they stack up over the course of an innings and it set the tone superbly. Because while England’s win was set up by the batsmen overcoming a sticky pitch to post a defendable target, sealed by Archer’s surgical strikes and burnished by the supersonic catch from Ben Stokes (one that made Adil Rashid the first English leg-spinner to take a World Cup wicket), their fielding should not go under the radar. Bar one fluffed edge to Jos Buttler off Moeen Ali, all chances were taken. A fine run out was effected – rather than gifted – thanks to the bullet arm of Stokes and some smart work by Eoin Morgan at the stumps. With the ground work generally slick, the pressure on South Africa told. Roy, whose 53-ball 54 helped overcome the early loss of Jonny Bairstow, remarked as such after the match. Runs are the opener’s primary currency, but the delight at his own work and that of the team during the second innings was obvious. “As a collective, that fielding performance was very good,” he said. “We pride ourselves on our fielding and we have been disappointed quite a lot with our fielding over the last year. But boys showed what we are about on the big stage and we’re really proud.” On his own role, Roy added: “It is nice when you field [at backward point] to Jof because he hits that back of a length and guys are looking to use his pace through that area, so you know you are in the game. It’s good fun and you know your hands are going to be battered after the game. “There’s a buzz [when you stop one] because you know that the next delivery could see a wicket and you’d feel you’ve played a part in it. It is definitely a way of being in the game as a non-bowler. I got a fifty and I would have liked to go on, but if I’ve saved 20 runs in the field then that is like a 70-run contribution.” Such a mentality from Roy will not only be music to the ears of Morgan but the head coach, Trevor Bayliss. The Australian is a stickler for fielding and has previously let slip his concerns that English cricketers do not hold the facet of the game in such a high regard. Electric fielding, pace bowling, a wicket-taking leg-spinner and a powerful batting lineup that is capable of adjusting to challenging conditions? While Monday’s opponents, Pakistan, lived up to the old stereotype about early tournament fecklessness, England are already dispelling a few about themselves.