When I went to interview Nigel Kneale about Quatermass he would keep talking about his wife. Apparently she was a writer herself. The more I hauled the steering wheel over to malevolent Martians and aliens in the attic (he kept the Quatermass monster in his study) the more the conversation drifted back towards pink rabbits and tigers who dropped in for tea. Some powerful gravitational force was at work here, professor. God knows what I made of it all. Years later, when Nigel Kneale was dead, I found a little note from him thanking me and mentioning gently that Quatermass was not, as I thought, a name from his Manx background. He just found it in a telephone book. It was a handwritten note that I found physically impossible to throw it away – I often find things impossible to throw away, which was why it was there in the first place – so I sent it to his wife. Who, I now realised, was the equally famous writer Judith Kerr. She was surprisingly delighted. As we wrote and talked to each other over the next four years I had a familiar sensation. Wherever we wandered, the current of the conversation always carried us back to her husband. She called him Tom. He called her Judy. She said she would never have written anything if it hadn’t been for Tom. He dedicated Quatermass to Judy. I had identified the strong gravitational force. It was undying devotion. Old age, as Bette Davis said, ain’t no place for sissies. Judith and I discussed, as old ladies do, which bit had fallen off that week. She was always working on a book and only worried if her drawing wrist was affected. We dived into existential doubt: “I have started a new book and have doubts about whether it is really a good idea. I try to remind myself that I ALWAYS have doubts but then I think, yes, but this time I may be right.” We puzzled over how to draw a frog’s back legs. Did they bend like this? Or that? As she was the author as well as the artist, I said she only had herself to blame for the frog problem. Then there was the business of the handlebars. She needed a bicycle for a book (“No dropped handlebars!”), so she simply stopped a young man in the street on the right kind of bike and asked if he would be kind enough to wait while she drew his handlebars. Her manner was so exquisitely gentle you chuckled to think of that cyclist, harpooned by that charm. There was steel under the sweetness. All great children’s literature is slightly disturbing beneath the surface and no one could draw the smile on the face of the tiger like Judith. Her voice on the phone became tissue paper-thin, but she was determined to finish her last book and, knowing she was dying, she did it. Bette Davis would have whistled.