Government officials are understood to be hopeful a buyer can be found for British Steel after several bidders expressed an interest in taking on all or part of the business. The Insolvency Service has been seeking a buyer since the company collapsed last week, a financial failure that threatens the future of 5,000 jobs, most of them at the Scunthorpe steelworks. The Guardian understands that more potential buyers have come forward in the past few days, increasing the chances of a rescue. The Insolvency Service is expected to issue an update later on Tuesday. Liberty Steel has been linked with a deal but has declined to comment on whether it has approached the Insolvency Service. The Financial Times has previously named Chinese steel firm Hesteel and UK private equity group Endless as potential bidders. It is thought that the interested parties will not be named because they have signed nondisclosure agreements with the government to prevent them discussing the process. Nic Dakin, the Labour MP whose constituency includes the Scunthorpe steelworks, said: “The steps taken over the last week have been positive but these remain worrying times for our steel industry. “Reports that there are indeed buyers for British Steel are positive. Everybody involved will need to continue to work hard to achieve a good outcome.” British Steel went into liquidation last week after the government said it would be “unlawful” to meet the company’s request for a £30m loan. Labour has called for the business to be nationalised to prevent the loss of jobs and the closure of the Scunthorpe steelworks, one of the last two in the UK that makes steel from scratch using a blast furnace. Government efforts have instead focused on finding a buyer, with efforts to secure a sale directed by the official receiver David Chapman, a government employee who oversees company insolvencies. Greybull Capital, the private equity group that bought British Steel for £1 in 2016 from Indian conglomerate Tata, is expected to face questions from MPs on the business select committee about its stewardship of the business.