From the story of “lost” Prince John to the experiences of a black jazz band in the 1930s, Stephen Poliakoff’s elegant excavations of Britain’s past have won him critical acclaim and a wide audience. Now he has turned to his own family history and his “violent” experience of boarding school as a boy to create his most personal drama yet. Summer of Rockets, which begins on BBC Two this month, draws on the life of the writer’s father, Alexander, an inventor and businessman who supplied hearing aids to a privileged clientele, to tell a tale of betrayal, fear and change in the cold war. “I didn’t know that my father, as a Russian Jew, was seen as a security risk – suspected by MI5 of bugging Winston Churchill’s hearing aid – until a journalist phoned me in 2007 having read about it in newly released documents,” said Poliakoff. “But by that point he was long dead. I thought that was an interesting starting point for a story exploring what it’s like to be attracted by this seductive surface, then uncover the deep darkness lurking underneath.” I’ve seen authority abused, as a child, and it’s something you never forget Key to that was Alexander Poliakoff’s desire to be accepted by the upper echelons of British society. “While it’s fictional, some elements are the same – my father was very like Toby Stephens’ character Samuel,” Poliakoff says. “Samuel is a Jew who wants to assimilate and be taken seriously. He loves Georgian architecture, Rolls-Royces, fine ladies … he’s terribly taken in by that establishment world, as my father was. “It was a sort of intoxication about trying to be British, because he was such an obvious émigré – this tiny, exotic man who would kiss women’s hands and who stood out a mile. As a child I’d be shrinking in the corner thinking ‘how embarrassing’, because the English didn’t carry on like that.” Running alongside Samuel’s desperation to belong are the experiences of his children Hannah (Lily Sacofsky) and Sasha (Toby Woolf), who rebel against the establishment that their father is so keen to join. “With Hannah, I wanted to dramatise a character who is forging a new way – you can smell the future on her – while Sasha’s story is very similar to my own boarding school experiences [Poliakoff attended a prep school in Kent], although I had to soften that slightly because I thought people would say it was too over-the-top. It was a very violent place – I would wake up in the morning with a sense of dread. You were hit a lot, and the whole place bristled with tension.” He added: “I do sometimes wonder what my writing would have been like if I hadn’t gone to that school. I don’t know whether it was the making of me or the undoing of me – but I can say that it gave me a lifelong suspicion of authority. I’ve seen authority abused as a child and it’s something you never forget.” The year 1958 has long exerted a fascination for Poliakoff. He set 2007 dramas Capturing Mary and A Real Summer in that same year, seeing it as key to understanding the 1950s and the change to come. “I’ve always been attracted to hinge moments. For me, 1958 was a fascinating year: the space race, the threat of nuclear war, the cold war. It was also the beginning of the end of deference, the last season that debutantes were presented to the Queen, and the summer of the Notting Hill race riots. “The theatre was bursting with a new world – Look Back in Anger, A Taste of Honey, Joan Littlewood – and yet the old world still felt it was in control. To me that felt very potent.”It’s hard too not to hear the echoes with our own equally febrile times, as Poliakoff acknowledged. “I conceived the story before the mess-up after Brexit, but the fact that we’ve become slightly a laughing stock was very much how people were feeling then,” he said. “There was a sort of nostalgia for Empire and a feeling that we’d been humiliated after Suez and that led to lots of people agitating for us not to give away our empire. Plus there is the myth that still haunts our identity that we stood alone in the Second World War. It has become a such a defining thing.” He acknowledges that his work remains at odds with what his long-term production partner, Helen Flint of Little Island Productions, calls “fast and furious television consumed quickly then forgotten about”, but is unfazed by those who call it slow-paced or mannered. “If you set out to write stories that are not like something else that’s the obvious consequence,” he said. Some people will be on your wavelength and some won’t. I’ve been around for a very long time and that can be irritating. What has been consistent is that my work has always performed well with audiences.” Summer of Rockets starts on BBC Two on 22 May at 9pm