Thanks to her previous life in finance and engineering, Adria Wu professes to being more “annoyingly detailed” than others in her industry. During the past four years, the founder of Maple & Co has used this virtue to open four healthy eating restaurants in London and plan the launch of another two for the end of the year. In between running her business, the Le Cordon Bleu-trained chef is a regular on TV cooking show Sunday Brunch, writes for health magazines, and mentors aspiring entrepreneurs. She manages her packed schedule by embracing the best of both new and old tech to maximise her efficiency. And her early morning starts, a focus on team management and her embrace of nifty productivity systems means there are still enough hours in the day for her to enjoy life beyond work – and even spend a bit of time in the kitchen with her first love: food. I normally wake up earlier on Monday mornings – around 4.30am. The rest of the week it’s usually around 5.30am. If I don’t set my week on Monday morning the rest of the week starts falling behind. I can’t work at night so early in the morning I find time to get organised for the day, get my thoughts sorted and understand my own priorities. I have a written to-do list. I know a lot of people on my team use the Sticky Notes function on their laptops so they always have it on their devices. I like having my quiet time in the mornings, if I’m having a cup of tea I don’t really want to get overwhelmed by my phone or laptop. I have my notebook instead and I can think without any distraction about what I need to get done for the day. I usually eat breakfast with my daughter after she wakes up. My mornings are spent with her until her nanny arrives at 10am. I try to squeeze in a quick one-hour workout either with my trainer, or on my Peloton bike – which lives in my room and is a constant reminder for me to work out. I calendarise everything. If I need an hour to check emails, I put it in the calendar, if I need half an hour for a call, I put that in my calendar. If my nanny is off for four hours or my husband needs to travel, that goes in as well. My staff also do it so I don’t bother them when their time is blocked off. I mix all my social plans and work into one big calendar, it’s a tool I find really, really important. Most days I have meetings here and there, but one day a week is dedicated to team meetings. I have about 30 people on my team and we all have one-to-one meetings with our direct reports. Throughout the week we use collaborative online docs to jot down any issues that come up that we want to discuss, for example, if I want to make changes to pricing. It means the team isn’t calling each other every time something happens at a store. It also means less time organising, updating and checking actionable points and more time to think strategically about the business. And it’s much more reliable to have things recorded on a page, as there’s a much lower risk of miscommunication. As a business we probably spend a disproportionate amount of time on good HR practices. It’s so important to have the right team supporting me. To make sure everyone is at their most productive, we ensure everyone’s job description is shared. So anyone from the kitchen porter to the head of operations has my job description and vice versa. Technology helps us as an organisation to get our financial and operational reports out faster. We’re probably looking at at least 40 purchases generated per day between our four stores. We use a program that pulls all our invoice information straight from the pdf or JPEG file – the supplier, the VAT, the amount, and even the category. It’s pretty much all digital and our bookkeeper has to intervene very little. Out of 100 invoices in a month they would have to manually intervene in less than 5%. Getting it done: Wu’s ability to negotiate a packed schedule is facilitated by her smart use of tech, along with open lines of communication with her staff. I love leaving voice messages for the team on WhatsApp. I started doing this because some investors I work with are based abroad and calling long distance over the time zone differences is not so easy. Now, we all do it. For example, if my head chef goes to see some new central kitchens, he records photos, videos and two-minute voicemails that he sends over instead of writing everything down in an email. This simple technology really makes it much more efficient to communicate and share ideas. I take part in a mentorship program called Mentor Matcher. I take on up to two interns at a time and they come in at least three times a week. I come from a spreadsheet and PowerPoint background so they’re always showing me new and interesting tools. One of them introduced me to Canva for design – it is like Photoshop but online-based and much simpler to use. This reduces the time spent sharing files back and forth. Another intern introduced me to a productivity system called Raci [responsibility assignment matrix], which we are using now to help launch two new stores. There are 50 to 100 steps for each task and it assigns someone who is responsible, accountable, consulted and informed on each step. If I’m doing a menu change, for instance, I’m ultimately accountable, my head chef is responsible for testing dishes and the theme, we consult with whoever on the team needs to be consulted and inform our store managers of the upcoming changes. As a team we are much more productive with RACI, having clear responsibilities against actionable items. I miss cooking a lot. I have a wonderful head chef who takes care of the day-to-day menus in stores. I don’t get to do as much physical cooking, but I do get to do some recipe testing. Right now, I’m working on a porridge recipe with a magazine and researching vegetable-based recipes for a show I’m presenting. I love having a glass of wine to wind down in the evening. Even though we do nutritious food at Maple and I teach and talk about all things healthy and amazing for your body, I find having a glass of wine really relaxing. I find my brain stops working around 8.30pm. I try to get home around 7pm and see my daughter before she goes to bed. I love to cook dinner at home and watch cooking shows or sitcoms on Netflix. The last thing I do is have a hot shower. I find it super relaxing and it’s one of my favourite things to do at night. SAP Concur provides intelligent solutions to help your business automate admin tasks such as expenses and invoices – giving you and your business the time and energy to focus on growing, innovating and making fruitful connections. To find out more about how SAP Concur can help you combine efficiency with intelligence, go to concur.co.uk 