What a whirligig week of new sounds, voices and approaches. First a rarity: a drama that foregrounds one of the most undersung aspects of theatre, sound design. In Natalie Abrahami’s production of Anna the cast make a fervent (silent) plea for “no spoilers”. Still, this much can be said. Anna is set in East Germany in 1968. It hinges on secrets and slippery identities. And it is terrific.Crucially, three names are on the title page. Sound designers Ben and Max Ringham have joined forces with dramatist Ella Hickson, who in The Writer dismantled the notion of a well-made play. Together they rewire our senses. The audience watches the action on a stage encased in a glass box. They listen through headphones, hearing only what the title character (beautifully tensile Phoebe Fox) hears: the scrape of a match, an urgent whispered warning, the sound of throwing up. The result is intimate and disturbing. You are sealed off – dialogue unheard by Anna becomes a tantalising dumbshow – trying to piece together fragments. You are also sealed in: some sounds are so invadingly close that they seem to be emitted by the person in the next seat. You feel in one blow what it is to be snooped on and what it is to snoop. Listening so intently alters the way you watch. Vicki Mortimer’s reconstruction of a gleaming model GDR flat becomes full of hidden corners and alarms. It is only at the end that the subtlety of the acting – in particular by Max Bennett and Diana Quick – becomes apparent. It is not the first time that one of the most preposterous feats of British intelligence has provoked a wonderfully inventive piece of theatre. Ten years ago Cardboard Citizens made an engrossing site-specific drama inspired by Operation Mincemeat, in which the body of an unknown homeless man was used as a decoy, leading German troops away from Sicily in 1943. Yet it is the first time it has been set to music. New company SpitLip have done so with esprit, a finely varied score, and lyrics that shame most big musicals by their dexterousness and ingenuity. Musical director Felix Hagan is on keys (his head in a bandeau with bow), urging on a song for obsessive genius (who wishes first to be a maggot, later that “slimy nascent thing” a tadpole: “No need to create … I’d just mutate”) and choruses where flapper meets rapper. It is a measure of the show’s daring that in the midst of high-speed friskiness that the light drops and skittishness halts: a supposedly past-it female secretary (played by a chap who suggests resignation by hands folded as if over a pinny) sings heart-wrenchingly of getting through days while a sweetheart is fighting abroad. There is a new star rising over Regent’s Park. It is only a year since Francesca Henry made an impressive professional debut in The Wolves at Stratford East. Now she shines in Our Town, which evokes humdrum small-town life at the beginning of the 20th century – ice-cream sodas, moonlit heliotrope and a choir singling “Art thou weary?” – and then, in a dramatic shift, shows it shadowed by the grave. Henry is beguiling as a young bride; troubling in a later, darker incarnation; throughout, gleamingly serious. She is supported by the talent that surrounded her in The Wolves. Rosie Elnile’s design is correctly bare, like a rehearsal room: Thornton Wilder’s 1938 play was written partly in reaction to theatrical splash and spectacle. Ellen McDougall’s production is wry and knowing as well as good-humoured. It is droll to watch Laura Rogers who, playing a stage manager, sets the scene in an overlong introduction, pointing out in the foliage of Regent’s Park a blanket factory and a Methodist church; there is clever co-opting of the fading light for the final shift of mood. Yet the vividness is intermittent: the playing with form (direct address to the audience, few props) is no longer striking; that final big shift registers less as revelation than as moral instruction. It is often said that every day since it was first staged Our Town is performed somewhere in the United States. It may be due for a rest. The newness of White Pearl is in bringing to the main stage of the Royal Court lives that have not before commanded that space. Thank goodness we no longer have to marvel at the fact that this is largely (six out of seven) a female cast. That is not the point. Anchuli Felicia King’s play puts on stage a small company based in Singapore – “No corporate shit. We’re like the Facebook of Asian cosmetics” – and picks apart with considerable deftness the endemic distrust between (among others) Indian Signaporean, Chinese Singaporean, Japanese and South Korean. Their squabbles and shifting alliances are finely calibrated, nastily intimate, registered with squealing persuasiveness. Yet as satire – the drama hinges on a racist ad that has gone viral – White Pearl is heavy-handed. Nan Dakin’s production semaphores a default Modern Inauthentic from the beginning: screens flash up messages and abuse. Electronic sounds ripple, scenes change to the sight of chairs whizzing across the stage on casters. Not all new is good news. Star ratings (out of five)Anna ★★★★Operation Mincemeat ★★★★Our Town ★★★White Pearl ★★★ Anna runs until 15 June; Operation Mincemeat until 15 June; Our Town until 8 June; White Pearl until 15 June