When Harlequins were awarded a penalty just inside their own half with two minutes to win the match and earn a play-off at Exeter, James Lang tried to nick a couple of metres but was spotted by the referee, Matthew Carley. He had to take the ball back to the mark where the offence had been committed and the official’s attention made the difference. Lang was confident, despite his attempt to reduce the distance, and so were the Harlequins coaches. The player he had replaced, Marcus Smith, had at the start of the afternoon kicked a long-range penalty, although he had managed to nudge the ball a few metres closer to the posts without the referee noticing. “James has a metronomic boot. I was anxious, nervous and excited,” said the Quins director of rugby, Paul Gustard. “I did not know where to look. I did not know where not to look.” For a moment the ball looked as if it would make it to the posts, hanging high at the end of an afternoon that, if not still, was hardly blowy. The home supporters prepared to groan at the end of a season in which they had seen their team win only four of their 15 home matches in all competitions, mostly against teams battling against relegation. It was the end of an emotional week for Wasps. The match marked the final club appearance for seven of their match-day 23, including the long-serving Joe Simpson and Elliot Daly. The pair had tilted the match the home side’s way at the start of the second half, twice combining for tries scored by Simpson, 10 years after the scrum-half had marked his debut with a try against Harlequins. The second marked the high point of a match that flickered intermittently. Wasps moved the ball right and then left from a lineout and when Daly scented space on the outside, he drifted into it and waited for Simpson to support him on the outside. He timed his pass perfectly, drawing what remained of the defence to give the scrum-half a free run to the line and generate the loudest of roars from the crowd. The try put Wasps 24-8 ahead with 25 minutes to go. They have not been at their most effective in the final quarter of matches this season and Quins, who had heard that Northampton were losing at Exeter, knew victory was not beyond them. Danny Care scored a try from a quickly taken penalty and Lang kicked a penalty to reduce the deficit to six points with 17 minutes to go. Wasps looked frazzled, another victory in danger of slipping away, but Lima Sopoaga’s second penalty steadied them until Quins scored their third try through the replacement hooker Elia Elia that Lang converted. When Sopoaga ran the ball in his own half and was tackled by Semi Kunatani and forced to hold on to the ball, Lang had his moment. The kick was a summary of Harlequins’ season, falling just short. They finished level on points with Northampton in fourth and Bath in sixth, but won one match fewer. They had the same number of victories and defeats as Wasps, who at one point in the afternoon had been sixth in the table only for late scores elsewhere to dump them in eighth and the Challenge Cup. “There is very little to separate the teams outside the top two,” said the Wasps’ director of rugby, David Young, who faces a rebuilding job two years after guiding the club to the Premiership final against Exeter at Twickenham. A late kick condemned Wasps then but next season only eight of the 23 who were involved that afternoon will be at the club, compared to the Chiefs’ 16. “Being in the Challenge Cup may be the kick in the nuts we need because we have not been good enough this season,” added Young. Wasps experienced delight and dismay almost in the same movement. Josh Bassett scored their first-half try, created by Willie le Roux, who roamed with menace on his final appearance, but sloppy defending let in Joe Marchant for Quins’ opening try, the centre standing out in front of the England head coach, Eddie Jones. They were barely worth their 10-8 interval lead but, at the end of what Young said was a week in which tears were shed, found strength when it mattered while Quins, who won only one of their final seven league matches, were denied fourth place, a position no one merited in an extraordinary battle of the ordinary.