Formerly known as At-Bristol, this harbourside science museum relaunched in 2017 as We The Curious to better reflect its mission to get kids to ask questions and engage in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (Stem subjects) in creative ways. It’s a hugely interactive space, with a science festival feel, and includes a planetarium on the second floor. My sons turned a series of wheels to find out how much energy our brains need at various stages of life. The seven-year-old was surprised to see the 45-year-old brain light up first, far quicker than the 14-year-olds’ brains, showing that teenagers need more energy to think than adults. He’d expected the reverse. (The five-year-old was just excited to be turning wheels around and seeing things light up.) My kids don’t shy away from telling me if they think a museum is boring but here they were too busy darting from one hands-on exhibit to the next to have any such complaint. They dressed up as bees to catch pollen, made cheese, watched ice form, weighed human brains, stretched out strips of DNA to compare the genetic sequence of a rhesus monkey and an armadillo, and went to a blood-making workshop. It was the most interactive museum we’ve ever visited. The five-year-old loved splashing in the waterwheel best, while the seven-year-old enjoyed the planetarium, which had a 3D stargazing show based on the Bristol sky that night. The lunch queue at the cafe wasn’t long but it didn’t move especially quickly. Still, the kids’ lunchboxes were good and not too pricey (£4.95 for five items) and both my soup (£4.50) and coffee (an americano, £2.60) were tasty. Not directly, it’s to the lefthand side as you leave – so can easily be bypassed. It did a good line of educational science books and toys, though, with lots of space-themed stuff. We The Curious is near the National Cycle Network (routes 3, 4, and 33). The museum has lots of bicycle parking and a free-to-use pump outside the main entrance. Alternatively, it’s a 20-minute walk from Bristol Temple Meads railway station or a five-minute taxi ride or 17-minute ferry ride (Number Seven Boat Trips, and Bristol Ferry Boats). If driving, follow the We The Curious brown signs and park at the Millennium Square car park. Given that the science museums in London, Manchester and Newcastle are free, it does jar having to pay £14.50 for adults and £9.50 for kids (aged 3-15) to get in. Though kids under 3 are free, and cheaper family and grandparent tickets are available, as are deals for groups of three or more. On top of that you pay £3.50 for the planetarium. That said, it was super-educational and fun, and I did have to push them out the door at the end of the day. Weeks on, they still refer back to things they learnt there. Monday to Friday 10am-5pm (during term time), 10am-6pm at weekends, bank holidays and Bristol school holidays; closed 24-26 December. 8/10. The most interactive science museum I’ve ever visited; if I lived in Bristol I would take my kids all the time. • wethecurious.org Looking for a holiday with a difference? Browse Guardian Holidays to see a range of fantastic trips