John Pybus, landlord of the historic Blue Bell pub in York, has fixed ideas about what it takes to be a good publican. They do not include fraught legal wrangles with major pub companies. “You need to be physically and emotionally tough,” he says. “You need to be able to talk people down from a knife fight. You need a heart of gold and do it because you love your local community. Those type of people aren’t great at legal battles; we’re not trained for that. We’re trained for good banter on a Friday night and a decent Sunday roast.” Pybus is just one of a legion of publicans to have voiced their displeasure with a law that was meant to help them. In 2016 the pubs code regulations came into force, including a new mechanism for publicans to cut the 400-year-old “beer tie”, an arrangement under which they buy beer exclusively from the company that owns their pub, in exchange for lower rent. The biggest tweak was the new “market rent only” (MRO) option, under which publicans could apply to cut the tie if they felt they could make more money. Their rent would be assessed independently and they would be able to buy and sell beer much more cheaply, from whoever they liked. According to dozens of pub landlords around the country, already wrestling with the rapid decline in the number of Britain’s pubs, the reality has been very different. The small business minister Kelly Tolhurst recently announced the first statutory review of the pubs code and the way it is arbitrated, via the pubs code adjudicator. But she will already be in little doubt as to how many publicans view it. Pub tenants and MPs have been “duped and betrayed”, according to the British Pub Confederation, which said the MRO was little more than a myth. It accused pub companies of seeking to scupper MRO applications by any means necessary, including spooking them with eviction notices. The group also cast doubt on the independence of assessments used to set rents. The BPC chair, Greg Mulholland, who pushed the MRO option through parliament as a Liberal Democrat MP, said that in its current form “tenants do not have the rights they were promised by ministers”. He said: “The review into the pubs code must be an honest one, which means accepting the reality, which is that there is no genuine MRO option available to tenants and this must be rectified or it will be clear that the government have and never had any intention to deliver on promises made to parliament.” Like most landlords who seek an MRO option, Pybus never got his. Instead, the former British debating championships runner-up thrashed out a deal face to face with his landlord, the pubco Punch Taverns. His case was helped by publicity whipped up by the dispute, not to mention romantic regard for the Blue Bell, a 200-year-old pub whose interior has not changed since 1903 and where York City football club was formed. But not all publicans have his gift of the gab or his pub’s heritage, and those who know the code well say its flaws leave most with no way out of a bad deal. David Law and Simon Clarke run the Eagle Ale House, near London’s Clapham Common, and rent the premises from Enterprise Inns, the subject of more than three times as many MRO applications as any other chain. They say the tied option does not make financial sense for them and the pub would be more profitable – as well as offering cheaper and better beer – if they were free of the tie. “Ours is an experience typical of a lot of licensees, in that the relationship breaks down very quickly with the pub company,” Law says. He and Clarke claim that when they applied for the MRO option, Enterprise tried to attach unreasonable conditions to their new lease that made it unworkable. They were left facing the prospect of spending huge sums on legal advice and hours of time on protracted negotiations. They also felt that the supposedly independent assessors who set the market rent were anything but. “You’re immediately put off when you’re told your rent is going to double and the terms are going to cost you loads of money,” says Clarke. “It’s absolutely designed to put you off.” Clarke says he helped draft the pubs code regulations but has still been unable to make them work. He and Law still do not know whether they will get their MRO or end up signing a new tied tenancy with “onerous” conditions. Even if they get their wish, they will have wasted three years of time and money. “If we can’t get there, knowing what we know, for the average tenant – Betty at the Dog & Duck – there’s no chance at all.” The complexity of the regulations – not to mention pushback from deep-pocketed pubcos – could be why there have been so few MRO applications – and even fewer that resulted in a market-rent deal. According to data from the British Beer and Pub Association, there have been 739 MRO applications since the system began three years ago. Only 57 resulted in MRO tenancies. The BBPA, whose members include the six largest pub companies, believe the pubs code is working well. “While there have been some challenges with parts of the implementation of the code for all involved, the BBPA and the companies covered by the code continue to work closely with the adjudicator and other stakeholders to resolve these,” the chief executive, Brigid Simmonds, said. But the pubs code adjudicator, Paul Newby, who arbitrates MRO disputes between publicans and pubcos, has been criticised for acting too slowly, failing to highlight unfair business practices, or simply not applying the code properly. What’s beyond doubt is that the current system is ripe for the review that is now under way. But exasperated publicans have run out of patience already. Chris Wright, of the Pubs Advisory Service, said: “We should have had a proper code years ago. Where is the redress for all the damage caused to tenants by the lack of action?”