What next for Super League’s Magic Weekend? The event relocates to a sixth different home in its 13-year history this weekend, but as Anfield prepares to become the latest major venue to host all 12 top-flight teams there is already debate about the future of the Magic Weekend beyond this year. Robert Elstone’s decision to move Magic from Newcastle – which has hosted the last four editions – has been a controversial one. Reportedly low ticket sales have not helped either; it is widely accepted work still needs to be done to exceed the lowest-ever Magic crowd of 52,043, set in 2009. “I’m absolutely not losing any sleep about it,” said Elstone, the Super League chief executive who has repeatedly refused to be drawn on ticket sales. “Talking to coaches and players, all they’re talking about is Anfield.” Some in rugby league already believe Magic has run its course; setting a new all-time low crowd figure would do little to dampen that disquiet. But any talk of that being a fatal blow for the event appears to be wayward. Super League this week confirmed a new three-year sponsorship deal for Magic until 2021 – and, by the time that deal ends, it may well have moved to at least a seventh venue, with no guarantees about Anfield beyond this year. Magic has already been to England, Scotland and Wales, but could it soon head overseas? “I would really welcome a Magic abroad,” Elstone admitted. “There’s work to be done to getting to the stage where we find the right place, but we’re confident we could deliver it.” A crowd of almost 32,000 in Barcelona last weekend for Catalans Dragons’ game against Wigan will certainly whet Elstone’s appetite in that regard. “Magic has to be a celebration of all that’s good, a chance to reach new audiences or a commercial opportunity: it has to tick one of those things,” he said. “I was in Toulouse last week and that’s been mentioned as a potential venue. Barcelona provided a brilliant city for rugby league. While I think we need to give certainty on it as soon as we can, we need to properly reflect and debrief afterwards.” Most observers agree this has been a strong start to Elstone’s first season in charge of Super League. However, in the year the NRL adopted the Magic Weekend concept for itself, there is surely a certain sense of irony that in England the long-term future of the event is arguably more unclear than ever going into this weekend’s Anfield extravaganza.