China has hit back in its trade war with the US, announcing plans to impose tariffs on $60bn of American imports. Tariffs will be imposed on 5,140 US products with an annual value of about $60bn (£46bn) from 1 June, the Chinese finance ministry said on Monday. The latest escalation in the trade war between the world’s two biggest economies came shortly after Donald Trump tweeted a warning to China not to retaliate against the extra tariffs he imposed last week on imports to the US. However, Beijing has apparently ignored the US president’s threat that the escalating trade war between the world’s two biggest economies “will only get worse!”. China’s Global Times newspaper reported that Beijing was also considering cutting orders for new Boeing planes and boycotting US agricultural products. Earlier on Monday, the US president said China would be “hurt very badly” if the country did not make a deal with the US. His comments came after the US more than doubled tariffs on $200bn (£15.4bn) of Chinese goods on Friday. Trump ordered the tariff increases after talks in Washington with China’s vice-premier, Liu He, ended with no deal in sight. In a series of tweets on Monday, Trump said China had “taken so advantage of the US for so many years”. ..There will be nobody left in China to do business with. Very bad for China, very good for USA! But China has taken so advantage of the U.S. for so many years, that they are way ahead (Our Presidents did not do the job). Therefore, China should not retaliate-will only get worse! Trump said there “is no reason for the US consumer to pay the tariffs, which take effect on China today … China should not retaliate – will only get worse!” The president suggested that manufacturers who make goods in China could shift production to other countries to avoid the tariffs. “I say openly to President Xi and all of my many friends in China that China will be hurt very badly if you don’t make a deal because companies will be forced to leave China for other countries,” Trump said. “Too expensive to buy in China. You had a great deal, almost completed, and you backed out!” “Many tariffed companies will be leaving China for Vietnam and other such countries in Asia. That’s why China wants to make a deal so badly!” he added. Trump said in another Twitter post that the trade war would not have a significant impact on US trade. “We are right where we want to be with China. Remember, they broke the deal with us and tried to renegotiate. We will be taking in tens of billions of dollars in tariffs from China. Buyers of product can make it themselves in the USA (ideal), or buy it from non-tariffed countries.”