The crackdown against politicians involved in last week’s failed uprising against Nicolás Maduro has intensified with secret police seizing the vice president of Venezuela’s opposition-run parliament in Caracas. “The dictatorship has kidnapped [Edgar Zambrano],” Juan Guaidó, the opposition leader who commanded that botched revolt, tweeted, attacking what he called political persecution typical of authoritarian regimes. Zambrano was on the scene on Tuesday last week when Guaidó tried unsuccessfully to spark a pre-dawn mutiny against Maduro outside an airforce base in the Venezuelan capital. On Wednesday night, Zambrano was detained by intelligence agents who transported him to Venezuela’s most notorious political prison, El Helicoide, inside his vehicle after he refused to get out. “Edgar Zambrano has been detained. He was one of the main [leaders] of the coup,” Maduro’s second-in-command, Diosdado Cabello, celebrated on his weekly television show to loud applause from the studio audience. Opposition leaders and members of the international community condemned what was the harshest move yet in Maduro’s counterattack against those who tried to topple him. Guaidó accused Maduro of “kidnapping” Zambrano in a bid to break up the opposition-controlled national assembly. “But they will not succeed,” he added. “This isn’t a detention … it is a crime,” tweeted the prominent Venezuelan journalist Ibéyise Pacheco. The United States state department slammed Zambrano’s “illegal and inexcusable” detention, warning: “If he is not freed immediately, there will be consequences.” Recent days have seen a series of Guaidó-supporting opposition politicians targeted by Maduro’s administration for their participation in last week’s botched uprising. At least 10 National Assembly deputies now face prosecution for alleged crimes including treasure, conspiracy and civil rebellion. One of them, Marianela Magallanes, has reportedly sought shelter in the residence of the Italian ambassador to Caracas. Guaidó’s political mentor, Leopoldo López, took refuge in the home of the Spanish ambassador shortly after the abortive revolt. But Maduro has yet to move against Guaidó himself – a fact many attribute to fears that doing so might trigger a strong reaction from Guaidó’s backers in the White House. Pedro Carreño, a top member of Maduro’s Socialist party, told the Guardian Venezuela’s opposition should abandon its campaign to unseat his leader – or face the consequences. “If they continue down the path of coup-mongering they will end up in jail,” Carreño vowed. “The long arm of justice … will arrive.” Guaidó insisted his movement would not be cowed and that Maduro’s time in power was running out. “The dictatorship will not mask its internal split with these measures, nor will it stop the inevitable.” Additional reporting by Patricia Torres in Caracas