The Vatican has unveiled a new editorial committee for its women’s magazine following the sudden resignation of its former editor and other members over an alleged “climate of distrust”. The publication of the monthly glossy, Women Church World, will be “coordinated” by the journalist Rita Pinci, the Vatican said. Pinci worked for the Rome-based daily Il Messaggero for over 20 years and joins the magazine, which is published as a supplement to the Vatican daily L’Osservatore Romano from TV2000, the TV station of the Italian bishops’ conference. “There will no longer be a director, but a coordinator,” L’Osservatore Romano said in statement. “The new team has international and interreligious characteristics, with a Jewish and Muslim presence.” Lucetta Scaraffia, who founded the magazine in 2012, and the majority of the editorial committee quit in late March over allegations that Andrea Monda, who was appointed editor of L’Osservatore in December, tried to interfere with and exert control over the coverage. Scaraffia had stoked controversy by publishing articles denouncing the abuse of nuns by priests. An article in February highlighting cases of nuns being raped by priests and forced into having abortions or leaving the church if they fell pregnant prompted Pope Francis to admit to the widespread issue for the first time. Monda vehemently denied the allegations and vowed that the magazine, which will publish in May, would continue. Two of the women from the former committee stayed on. In addition to the new leadership team of 10, there will be three other female writers. Pinci was also previously deputy editor of the magazines Panorama and Chi. “I am very happy about this appointment. I wasn’t expecting it and was very surprised by the proposal,” she said in a statement, adding that she had been assured “complete freedom”. “I have been following Women Church World since the beginning and believe the church needs the view and voice of women, who represent more than half of the faithful.”