Esther Teichmann has created a space where photography, painting, sculpture and film combine to create a kind of personal dreamspace. Her show, upstairs at Flowers East in London, is singular and difficult to define, drawing on surrealism, romanticism, fantasy and literary theory – the transgressive thinking of George Bataille and Maurice Blanchot cast long shadows here. The end result is uneven but fascinating, a heady mix of the cerebral and the sensual. It is Teichmann’s large-scale backdrops that initially draw the eye, photography and painting blending into each other as washes of colour accentuate the otherness of her close-up images of caves, giant stalagmites and glistening subterranean rock formations. In an adjacent room, you can see the original photographs which, even without the carefully applied layers of acrylic colour, possess a heightened, unsettling power. On another wall, two monochrome prints feature mysterious human figures of the sort one might find in allegorical paintings and poetry. In one, a woman stands in profile in a room encrusted with seashells, her long, dark hair falling over the entire length of her naked body. Next to her, another figure, draped in seaweed, seems to be walking through a cloudscape. Reverie and daydream are the constants here, the unconscious a landscape as symbolically loaded, but ultimately as unreadable, as it was for the surrealists. Elsewhere, there are cyanotypes of floating seaweed tentacles and a small but startling black and white print in which a woman lies on a shadowy, cloud-like surface, her legs apart, her body trailing fronds of jet-black sea wrack. For me, it is the single strongest and most unsettling image in the exhibition, existing in its own darkly suggestive space, free from the sometimes overloaded symbolism of the other work. A case in point is the sculptural piece that sits on the gallery floor, the skeletal frame of a rowing boat topped by a sail that is, on closer inspection, a large print of dark clouds. It seems about to topple over from the weight of its allegorical cargo. The boat belongs to Teichmann’s father, who, on a big print on the adjacent wall, lies prone in an inflatable dingy as her mother rows it though a swamp that looks as if it may have been created by a surfeit of acid rain. Trees, leaves and water have been treated with washes of colour that accentuate the swampiness to an almost hallucinatory degree. Teichmann grew up in rural Germany close to the Black Forest, and the lingering memories of childhood reveries and adventures, in all their heightened intensity, loom large here. Like the boat sculpture, though, this work seems to have slipped in from another show. It possesses a different kind of heightened aura, more Peter Doig than Georges Bataille. The most mesmerising piece here is also the most restrained. In a smaller room, a film unfolds in what at first appears to be slow motion. It features dancer Sophia Wang, whose body, projected at almost life size, writhes, curls up and unfurls slowly on a mattress framed by draped curtains. The muted lighting, shadows and the contrasting textures of skin and fabric all nod to classical painting, but there is something about Wang’s taut dancer’s body (her blemishes and small bruises are the result of her other pursuit, rock climbing) and seemingly effortless ability to move with slow abandon, that gives the film an almost meditative sway. For a time, she moves in silence, and then to the accompaniment of a quietly intense string quartet soundtrack composed by Deirdre Gribbin. This is an almost minimalist work, but deeply sensual and wonderfully intimate. Therein lies its quiet power. It is telling that this exhibition overlaps with a similar show of the same name at Galerie Les Filles du Calvaire in Paris. For Teichmann, each exhibition is part of an ongoing exploration in which the same thematic elements can be reconfigured to varying effect. It is, as On Sleeping and Drowning shows, an ambitious but always fascinating journey into the realm of dreams, memories, the unseen and the imagined, the tidal sway of the sea and of sleep. Heady stuff, indeed but, when it works, it pulls you under. Esther Teichmann: On Sleeping and Drowning is at Flowers Gallery, London, until 22 June.