Aston Villa are back in the big time after three seasons in the Championship. Their 2-1 victory over Derby in the play-off final banishes the memory of their trip to Wembley last year, when they were as flat as Frank Lampard’s side were on Monday. Jack Grealish performed well in that 1-0 defeat to Fulham but the boyhood Villa fan and academy graduate was carrying an ageing side that ultimately ran out of steam. It was a different story this time around. Grealish had one of his quietest games of the season against Derby, while numerous others stepped up. This crop of players are more prepared for a return to the top flight, though there is work to be done over the summer. The first priority should be turning loan deals into permanent transfers. Tyrone Mings, who joined on loan from Bournemouth in January, and Anwar El Ghazi, who spent the campaign with Villa on loan from Lille, both stood out at Wembley. Signing Mings should be the top priority for Dean Smith. Bournemouth will demand a higher fee now than they would have wanted in January given his recent performances, but the Cherries have signed two young defenders, Chris Mepham and Lloyd Kelly this year, so Villa will feel confident of keeping Mings – especially after he described his time at the club as “perfect” and “everything that a player could want”. Villa reportedly have first refusal on El Ghazi and Kortney Hause, who has spent the last six months at the club on loan from Wolves. Smith may stay loyal to both players, but whether they can cut it at Premier League level remains to be seen. Axel Tuanzebe, who made his Manchester United debut in 2017 before a couple of stints at Villa, may well return for a third loan spell to compete with James Chester and Tommy Elphick in the heart of the defence. Not long ago centre-back was a nightmare position for Villa, but now it is a position of strength. The situation regarding the future of top scorer Tammy Abraham is more complicated. With Chelsea facing a transfer embargo, they are likely to recall either Abraham or Michy Batshuayi, who has spent the last five months on loan at Crystal Palace. Villa hope an offer of around £25m will secure Abraham, who scored 26 goals this season and is still only 21. Villa have already signed Frederic Guilbert, who will arrive from Caen having agreed a deal in January. The right-back had an up-and-down weekend; Caen were relegated from Ligue 1 on Friday night but he was effectively promoted three days later when Villa won at Wembley. The Frenchman has played across the backline this season, ranking among the top 10 players in Ligue 1 for both tackles and interceptions. Guilbert should prove an astute acquisition at right-back, but Villa need some competition for Neil Taylor on the opposite side of the defence. Luton full-back James Justin is thought to be on the club’s wishlist, along with Brentford’s Rico Henry, another hot prospect whose progress has been stunted by injuries. Justin is a natural right-back who operated on the left as the Hatters secured promotion to the Championship; and Henry hasn’t tasted defeat for the Bees since mid-December, ending on the winning side in eight of his last 12 appearances. The goalkeeper situation is tricky for Villa. Jed Steer currently occupies the No 1 spot and he was instrumental in the club’s promotion, pulling off two saves in the penalty shootout as Villa beat West Brom in the play-off semi-finals. However, the club have signed two goalkeepers in the last year and both of them joined the club expecting to be the main man. Orjan Nyland, who was signed by Steve Bruce last summer, had an underwhelming start and then ruptured his Achilles in December. The club brought in Croatia keeper Lovre Kalinic in January, but he conceded eight goals in his first three games and never found his feet. The giant 29-year-old was dropped for Steer just eight games into his Villa career so we have no real idea how good he is. Alan Hutton, Mile Jedinak and Albert Adomah are all on the wrong side of 30 and are expected to leave this summer when their contacts end. It remains to be seen whether 35-year-old Glenn Whelan will be given another year. Either way, at least one holding midfielder and two wingers will be required, along with a striker (or two if Abraham does not return). With new signings needed, it wouldn’t be a surprise to see Smith talking to his former employers at Griffin Park this summer. Along with the aforementioned Henry, both Romaine Sawyers and Neal Maupay have been linked with a switch to Villa – and the latter has made it clear that he would welcome a reunion with his former boss. Maupay was superb for Smith at Brentford and would suit the new approach at Villa. He is a livewire to say the least and he left his mark on Villa – and John McGinn’s shin – in both meetings between the sides this season. He scored 25 league goals this season and three of them came against Villa. Expect plenty of scouting and recruitment from elsewhere on the continent too. The club’s finances have been transformed in the last year and co-owners Wes Edens and Nassef Sawiris say they are ready to back the coach handsomely in the transfer market. The task of identifying and signing new players will fall to sporting director Jesús García Pitarch and chief executive Christian Purslow, with Smith only playing a part in the recruitment process. As was the case at Brentford, he prefers to do his work on the training ground. Villa will want to avoid the trap Fulham fell into last summer, when they turned their back on the group of players and system that earned them promotion. Fulham brought in too many players, particularly from overseas, and lost sight of how the new faces would affect the balance and harmony of the squad. There is no danger of that happening as long as Smith gets his way. Having guided the club back to the top flight after taking over when they were in the bottom half of the Championship, he should be obliged. The football played under his leadership will be bold, regardless of the step up in division, but the transfer policy this summer must be a little more measured. Keeping the core of the team that embarked on a record-breaking run of 10 victories is as important as adding some much-needed competition for places. Either way, it will be a busy and exciting summer at Villa Park. • Visit WhoScored for more statistics and ratings• Follow WhoScored on Twitter and Facebook• Follow Martin Laurence on Twitter