There’s a fallacy that kohl-rimmed eyes suit everyone. They don’t. It’s like the grey cashmere jumpers and black wardrobe we are all supposed to adopt when the season changes. We’re in denial – they make most people look anaemic. Coloured eyeliner smudged into the waterline offers a joyous, skin-lifting alternative to black. Green (as at Cividini SS19, right) too terrifying? Try navy blue, black’s less austere, more wearable, sister. For me, it’s like leopard print – a modern neutral. Fancy pushing boundaries? Pink eyeliner is very now. A richer pink is best, otherwise you’ll look like you have an eye infection. Urban Decay 24/7 Eye Pencil in The Night King £16, selfridges.comYsl Couture Kajal Eye Liner in Bleu Cobalt £26, ysl.com Givenchy Khol Couture in Jade £18, harrods.comMarc Jacobs Fine Liner Ultra Skinny Gel Eye Crayon in Grapevine £20, net-a-porter.comGlossier Play Colourslide Eyeliner £13, glossier.com As a teen blighted by the joys of breakouts (and face-stripping treatments that made everything a million times worse), I remember adults trying to console me with really unhelpful advice: ‘It will pass’; ‘It’s just your hormones.’ The idea that once we pass through our teens, life will automatically grace us with perfect skin is a myth. Proper grownups are still battling acne and breakouts. The demands of modern life mean our cortisone levels are through the roof and it is written all over our faces. In the absence of an endless holiday, I give you this: an incredible skin-clearing cleanser. The results are so thrilling, you’ll be tempted to wash your face 10 times a day (please don’t). It tackles excessive sebum production, blackheads, visible pores and any residual marks. Cleverly, it does this while helping to protect, maintain and repair the skin barrier. This is crucial - a damaged skin barrier worsens the skin’s condition. It is free from sulphates and soap, and has the perfect balancing pH level of 5.5, so your skin is really hydrated and really clean (it removes every scrap of makeup). If you are suffering from breakouts, I cannot recommend this enough. It will give you clearer skin within a week.Vichy Normaderm phytosolution intensive purifying gel, £18, boots.com Essence of romance From Carine Roitfeld, the legendary ex-editor of French Vogue, this fragrance line is genderless, seductive and inspired by seven unforgettable lovers in seven cities across the world. Ooh, la la indeed. £233, net-a-porter.com Skin deep If you need a professional-grade complexion overhaul at home, try this two-step liquid exfoliating acid treatment by Dr Dennis Gross. It refines pores, smooths wrinkles and diminishes pigmentation in days. £102, spacenk.com Botanical booster After a boost to deal with fatigue, stress, insomnia, but can’t stand supplements in tablet form? These botanical tinctures are a blend of 50% ethanol and 50% herbal glycerin extracts. They taste good. £22, blooming blends.co.uk Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.