José Mourinho believes Tottenham could go on a trophy spree if they win the Champions League final against Liverpool. “Spurs is not winning titles and to win the first one, the biggest one of all, would be, of course, fantastic and would mean to win other domestic trophies [is easier] because the Champions League is the biggest one of all,” Mourinho told Sky Sports. “I think, big match, of course, with huge levels of pressure. We used to say finals are not to play, finals are to win.” Mourinho, who has won the Champions League twice, also believes success would be huge for Liverpool’s Jürgen Klopp but thinks a third Champions League final defeat for the manager would be a big blow. “Being a manager and understanding what it means for a manager to play a Champions League final, there is always a negative side that one team is going to lose it,” Mourinho said. “If Jürgen wins, it is an incredible achievement. If Jürgen doesn’t win ... you know, to lose three Champions League finals has to be really, really hard. But in this moment, he is a positive guy and I think he just thinks about winning.” Mourinho, who had two spells as Chelsea’s manager, also reflected on his former club’s Europa League final against Arsenal and the future of Eden Hazard. “It looks like it is the last match in blue for Eden Hazard, a player that was crucial for Chelsea success in this last generation,” he said. “I think Eden will try to be what he is the majority of the time – a fantastic player on the pitch – and to win and go, possibly – I don’t want to say more than possibly – to Real Madrid with a last trophy for Chelsea.” Mourinho, who is out of work after being sacked by Manchester United last December, believes the pressure is on Arsenal in Baku but is delighted to see English sides dominating in Europe. “More pressure of course for Arsenal because they play for their season. They play for the Champions League [qualification] next season, they play for many millions, pride for the success of their season. It is really special, we will have two English teams with two cups.”