The photograph is small, and grey as seaside mist. It shows a large family in Victorian clothes on a beach. The men are in black, the women wasp-waisted in their corsets, parasols artfully arranged before them on the sands. Only the baby is allowed the freedom of bare feet. To their right, and perfectly conspicuous, is a man holding what looks like a large flag above the proceedings. He is the photographer’s assistant, spreading the glare with a primitive diffuser. In a minute, the sitters will stand up, brush the sand off their clothes and wait for the magic promised for the price of a few pennies. And it will happen: an image of themselves will appear on a scrap of metal almost with the speed of a Polaroid – even though this ferrotype was way back in 1880. Not the least pleasure of this tremendous show of seaside photographs, opening this week at Turner Contemporary, is the sheer rush of revelation. The ferrotype, rapidly made by creating a direct positive on metal, involved dragging huge cameras on to the dunes to snap London day-trippers on bank holiday outings. Sand flies, as these photographers were known, could also get round Britain’s Sunday trading laws by carrying out their business on the beach. And there is something so liberated about these little pictures, compared with the rigor-mortis gravity of Victorian studio portraits – a sense of fresh air and blowing sand (literally caught in certain images), and of imminent delight. These people are not dead and gone so much as alive with anticipation of their great day in the sun. Seaside: Photographed runs all the way back to the bathing machines and bloomers of the 1860s, and forward to Iain McKell’s life-size portrait of a good-time girl in Blackpool, a 21st-century dusk glowing over the esplanade behind her. It includes masterpieces by Henri Cartier-Bresson as well as works by artists whose names should be far better known. Michael Bennett’s black and white photographs from the late 1970s, for instance, show seasides from Llandudno to St Leonards as melancholy and austere in every season, homing in on the weather-beaten faces of solitary workers – the signalman, the kiosk girl, the caretaker lugging the barrier to a pier in dark rain at closing time. They are starkly poignant laments. You sense the sea as a presence everywhere, even when it is invisible The show runs right around our coastline, from Enzo Ragazzini’s Isle of Wight, where festival-goers pack the cliffs like seabirds, to Anna Fox’s Hayling Island observed as a kind of gaudy New Jersey. Clacton-on-Sea goes mad with mods in the 1960s; Skegness swelters in 2002, hot legs sticking to plastic deckchairs. Raymond Conrad Lawson’s photographs of his large family at Whitstable in the 1950s are fantastically joyous: the women in rayon blouses and winged sunglasses, a wooden windbreak behind them, cheerfully passing tea and biscuits to their children. The laughter, you feel, was louder than the gulls in the air. The sea itself scarcely makes an entrance, except in thrilling fin-de-siècle photographs taken by big wave hunters, as they were called. The box camera had to be held tight in the wind as photographers leaned into the storm, some tying themselves to rocks to avoid being swept away. But you sense the sea as a presence everywhere, even when it is invisible – in the marine light reflected in tanned faces; in the dozing, idling, sunbathing bodies; in the strange endurance test of Britons sitting tight beneath their blankets all along the chilly front. The show’s curators, Val Williams and Karen Shepherdson, also the authors of a marvellous accompanying book, for anyone who cannot make it to the exhibition – have gone off on fascinating tangents. There is an eerie section on seaside hotels, with set breakfasts that never change down the decades; and those rundown B&Bs where the carpet never matches the curtains, and your feet tread in the residue of someone else’s dirt. People gravitate to the sea, to the island’s edges, to the very end of its piers. Some get stuck there, never to return – the retirees of Eastbourne, the whelk sellers of Whitby, the marginal lives of tattooists in Weston-super-Mare. Others go there for the sea’s freedom and oblivion. There are beach bohemias all through this show: photographs of Paul Nash and Eileen Agar on the sands at Swanage, Barbara Hepworth and co in St Ives, Benjamin Britten in Aldeburgh with Peter Pears. The sensuousness of the seaside is captured by some of the greatest photographers here. In particular, the Observer’s own much-lamented Jane Bown, whose rear-view photograph of two deckchairs is outstandingly beautiful. The girl on the right leans excitedly, in profile, towards the boy on the left. Or so we assume, from her face and his hands. For he is entirely invisible except for these strong hands, gracefully entwined and hanging seductively over the back of the chair. Some of the best-known photographers here started out as sand flies too. Dafydd Jones worked for Butlin’s in Minehead, snapping holiday portraits for the customers. But his off-duty shots of campers queueing for the dining room or burning raw-red as they wait in the high sun for their chalets to be cleaned took him towards his career as a social observer. Martin Parr made his name with The Last Resort in 1986, those dazzling high-chrome shots of fading New Brighton in the north-west of England. You might say he has never left the seaside; and there is a curious permanence to the scene. The beach is like a street along which our social history passes like a never-ending pageant, from the charabanc outings of Victorian bootblackers and factory workers to the illicit clasp of Edwardian boys with nowhere else to meet, caught through Paul Martin’s lens hidden in a brown paper bag. From the romance of a simple walk along the strand, with picnic and parasol, and possibly spats, to the exhausted sleepers of Brighton’s 90s rave scene. Rapid shutter speeds and digital cameras have of course changed the nature of seaside photographs. A large and beautiful picture of a boy leaping to shoot a ball at some offstage teammates, made by the Finnish photographer Sirkka-Liisa Konttinen in 1986, is such a marvel of split-second poise – scissoring legs, suspended ball – it might be a work of geometric abstraction. And we are all able to catch the millisecond turn of the wave these days. Yet for all this speeding up, time stands still at the seaside. No matter how the people come and go, and how differently they are portrayed by photographers down the years, one song remains the same: the shore itself never changes. • Seaside: Photographed is at Turner Contemporary, Margate, from 25 May to 8 September, then tours to the John Hansard Gallery in Southampton, the Grundy Art Gallery in Blackpool, and Newlyn Art Gallery in Cornwall in 2020 • Seaside: Photographed by Val Williams and Karen Shepherdson is published by Thames & Hudson (£19.95). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&p of £1.99