The dinner party has served as the setting for many tragicomic explosions and meltdowns on stage, from Neil Simon’s marriage and divorce story, The Dinner Party, to Mike Leigh’s toe-curling satire in Abigail’s Party. Journalist Bim Adewunmi’s debut follows in a similarly comic mould. In east London, two sisters, Ami and Rafi Bakare, are hosting a dinner for their youngest sister, Bili, and preparing to meet her American boyfriend, Brian. All runs smoothly until their imperious mother, Wura, calls in unannounced, or as one sister puts it, does a “drive-by visit”. A family car crash ensues, with Brian taking shelter in an off-stage kitchen, while the Bakare women fight out their mother-daughter grudges. Adewunmi’s script makes clear that this is a second-generation British Nigerian family, so only the mother is in west African dress, and the sisters drop winking London references to Only Fools and Horses (“This time next year, Rodders, we’ll be millionaires”). The comedy works best when the sisters tease Brian for his American ways, and then as Wura casts her judgments over the gathering. “Do you know we are Muslims, Brian?” she says as he cowers and the daughters scrabble to hide the wine. But the drama does not quite touch the nerve it sets out to: the central complaint that the sisters have towards their mother is her hoarding of merchandise over the years for her business ventures. Rafi feels the greatest emotional injury, speaking of the embarrassment of bringing school friends back to the family house, but the hoarding theme ends up feeling confected and simply not dramatic enough to warrant the emotional ruptures it creates. Director Femi Elufowoju Jr positions some characters on the other side of the stage to stand close to the audience. He used a similar technique to brilliant effect in the riotous drama The Secret Lives of Baba Segi’s Wives at the same theatre last year, but here it seems to splinter the dramatic moments of confrontation between characters, and their emotional interplay is not always easy to navigate with the physical space between them. Emmanuella Cole, cast as Ami, was announced absent through illness, and her stand-in, Estella Daniels, does a sterling job with a script in hand. The rest of the cast is entertaining, even if some parts are overplayed, and the synergy between the sisters feels genuine, as does the switch between family accusation and anger to teasing humour and hugs. Tyler Fayose is especially winning as nerdy, eager-to-please Brian, but the most charismatic performance is Ellen Thomas’s as Wura – a fierce and flamboyant creation and, it seems, the heart and soul of this play. • At the Arcola, London, until 8 June.