Rope in hand, a lone middle-aged man tramps glumly across his garden towards the sturdy bough of a tree, clearly ready to end his life. A bit melancholy for a sitcom, yes, but also very much the prevailing mood of the latest in British television entertainment. The scene from the opening episode of the second series of the Channel 4 sitcom Flowers last year featured Julian Barratt, famed funny performer from The Mighty Boosh, but it did not begin with a laugh, or even a wry smile. Similarly, the second season of the acclaimed Fleabag this year started with a miscarriage, while Ricky Gervais opened his new Netflix series, After Life, with the depiction of a man deep in mourning – and also considering suicide. Miri, the lead character in Daisy Haggard’s Back to Life, faces a challenge almost as grim. She has returned to her home in a seaside town after serving out a lengthy prison sentence. All these popular recent shows make one thing plain. Television comedy has a bad case of the blues – and yet it seems to be revelling in the gloom. The rise of such dark “dramedies”, or comedy dramas, has been swift. Writers and performers who have established their careers in comedy or in sitcoms are now opting, almost en masse, to tackle serious subjects and to reject easy gags in favour of saying something that matters. Actor and writer Rufus Jones suspects British audiences have always had an appetite for comedy with a dark slant, and he cites Blackadder Goes Forth, which tackled life in the trenches of the first world war, as an example. But an upsetting or troubling premise for a sitcom is now the rule, rather than the exception. Jones’s own Channel 4 series, Home, which he wrote and stars in, is one of two successful new dramedies to directly address the refugee problem in Europe. In Home, a Syrian asylum seeker, played by Youssef Kerkour, hides in the boot of the car of returning holidaymakers and then takes his place in their suburban family. Several of its more pointed political scenes, such as an unpleasant encounter with a racist at a post office, have gone viral online. Meanwhile Toby Jones’s new BBC Two show, in which he plays a coach driver in Bognor Regis, is also grounded in a sympathetic approach to the issue of immigration. Some of the sequences in Don’t Forget the Driver, which the actor also created, are closer to tense political drama than to the gentle comedy of Jones’s previous hit show, The Detectorists. But does it really matter if the genre categories are blurred? The danger, Rufus Jones concedes, is of coming over as a “balsa wood Stephen Poliakoff or Duplo Dennis Potter”, but he is prepared to risk being accused of preaching as he put his show together. “If I am a snowflake, and I earn the snowflake tag, then let it snow. To be perfectly honest though, I have had an almost unanimously positive reaction.” And the writer and performer has been intrigued to see the other programmes venturing into equally sober territory. “The easy answer is just to say this boom of mixed-genre shows is a quirk of television commissioning,” he says. “But I think it comes from watching some of the great recent American shows, such as Transparent and Breaking Bad. I would call Transparent a ‘holistic’ show because it was my favourite comedy, my favourite depiction of a family and yet also of dysfunction. So writers are aiming perhaps for this holistic approach now.” Frances Trussell, a therapist and mindfulness coach, welcomes mainstream culture’s efforts to embrace the darker and difficult sides of life, particularly mental illness, which for years has been a butt of jokes rather than the inspiration for entertainment. “Comedy is a great vehicle for both leading and reflecting changes in culture and how we communicate,” says Trussell. “Clearly these comedy dramas are striking a chord with audiences, and that’s a good thing. It’s important that we don’t shy away from the difficult, that we instead accept that life will contain challenge but that it’s possible, and advisable, that we equip ourselves to best weather inevitable ups and downs.” An earlier, gentler wave of dramedy, including shows such as Sally Wainwright’s Last Tango in Halifax, Stefan Golaszewski’s soft-hearted show about a widow, Mum, and Sharon Horgan and Rob Delaney’s Catastrophe, can now each be seen as having tested the water for the more serious fare to come. “The trend in addressing these issues is really helpful for opening up debate and greater honesty,” adds Trussell, who has suffered with depression and anxiety herself. “It reflects a growing willingness in society to admit to mental ill-health. A move towards greater openness means individuals are more likely to seek help sooner rather than waiting for breakdown or crisis.” If the latest shows share more than their creative decision not to gloss over nasty truths in the quest for amusement, then it is the praise heaped upon pretty much all of them by critics. Reviewing Haggard’s show, the Guardian’s Lucy Mangan described her central character as “all of a piece with the closely woven realism of every other part of Back to Life, which doesn’t have a false note in it. Nobody does anything stupid, extreme, inconsistent or out of character.” Haggard has previously described the show she co-wrote with Laura Solon as “a mysterious, dark, comedy drama about an adult beginner”. “The balance between comedy and drama naturally presented itself as we wrote,” explains Solon, a writer and Edinburgh comedy award-winning performer. “It’s a naturalistic show so we just kept interrogating whether the scenes and stories were emotionally truthful. And we lost anything that was too dramatic or too contrived for comedy.” Gervais’s show was recommissioned last week and the good news prompted the performer, who also wrote and directed, to admit he had been surprised by the warm reception for it. “I have never had a reaction like this before,” he said. “It’s been insane. And heartwarming. But now I have to make sure the second season is even better so I’ll probably have to work much harder than usual. Annoying really.” Rufus Jones, who has previously appeared in more overtly comic series, such as W1A and Camping, was prompted to write Home as “an angry, helpless response to what we were all seeing on the news” during the height of the Syrian refugee crisis. He wanted to say something about how we treat refugees and the refugee experience. He researched the idea by speaking to experts at the UN and then worked with Ahmad al-Rashid, a refugee who had filmed himself coming through Europe for the BBC documentary Exodus, and with Hassan Akkad, who won a Bafta for making it. For Babita Sharma, author of the new book The Corner Shop, about her childhood as the daughter of immigrant shopkeepers, what appears on TV matters. She writes of the pervasive effect of popular peak-time sitcoms such as Till Death Us Do Part, Only Fools and Horses, Open All Hours and Mind Your Language during the 1970s and 80s. “These sitcoms all followed the same format – canned laughter dubbed into scenes of apparently funny dialogue to make us, the viewers, laugh along too. Racist slurs didn’t escape this.” And even her mother and father laughed along. This was just the world as it was, they seemed to accept. “My parents joined in with the chorus of amusement. United by common experience, people felt that what they watched on the television was a reflection of what was going on on the doorsteps of the nation.” It seems possible that the tradition of British satire is moving over to make way for a more rounded portrayal of all that can go wrong in the world. And Rufus Jones welcomes this wider perspective. “We have seen a period before where there has been a lot of what you can call the comedy of embarrassment,” he says. “With Screations like Steve Coogan’s Alan Partridge and Ricky Gervais’s David Brent, these indefatigable characters who just carried on obliviously. I feel that what has changed is that we are now looking on television at what happens the next day. What is the real impact of all that embarrassment? Certainly that is what Ricky is doing so brilliantly with After Life.”