There was a whiff of desperation about Theresa May’s last ditch attempt today to get approval for her deal to exit the European Union. She made two key concessions in rhetoric. First Mrs May offered MPs a vote on a closer customs arrangement with the bloc than previously envisaged. Second, she offered to timetable a vote on a second referendum and promised to legislate to ensure a plebiscite was held. The prime minister believes that Britain would suffer if MPs voted for either or both of these options, but she is willing to trade her principles for her opponents’ support. Mrs May says she will bring the withdrawal agreement bill back to the Commons when parliament returns from its Whitsun holiday in June. It seems unlikely that Mrs May has done enough to convince her critics in the main parties or the Democractic Unionist party to support her deal. Her withdrawal agreement has already been defeated three times in the House of Commons, at the last try by 58 votes. The problem has been that Mrs May’s previous deals would have placed Britain either too far from Europe’s orbit for Labour MPs and not far enough for too many Tory MPs. Not even Mrs May’s own departure could convince her own side to back the terms of EU exit that she had negotiated. Hence MPs will vote on a “new bold offer”, which simultaneously woos Labour MPs while seeking to assuage Tories with the idea that the Irish backstop, hated on the Tory and DUP benches, need never come into force. The devil will be in the details, but it is hard to see what the prime minister can guarantee when she is on the eve of resigning and almost certainly to be replaced by a hard-line successor. Mrs May has also not changed her pitch to MPs. Since January she has told them that whatever revisions she has made, her plans represent the only politically practicable and available means of securing Britain’s exit from the EU. Repeating the argument has done little to persuade MPs of the merits of her proposals. Perhaps she thinks that the drubbing both main parties look as though they’ll be taking in the European elections might focus minds. Nigel Farage’s Brexit party is likely to win more votes than any other party. This might send an powerful electric shock through the political establishment but not enough to stun it into submission. Mrs May warned her own MPs that if they rejected this deal then “leaving the EU with a negotiated deal any time soon will be dead in the water”. The options would then be either a ruinous no deal, which parliament, she asserted, would block; or a general election, with the threat of Jeremy Corbyn taking power; or a second referendum that could lead to revocation – and no Brexit at all. The trouble for Mrs May is that MPs have been threatened with these choices before and always seemed to prefer them, and their attendant risks, to her deal. Whoever cleans up this mess will have to deal with Brexit and the causes of Brexit. Mounting resentment over political and economic disenfranchisement has to be tackled. A new politics will be needed to balance questions of sovereignty within a globalised system; and notions of identity within a nation. Nothing seen in Westminster suggests the answer might lie there. That has to change.