The primatologist Frans de Waal is an author I studiously avoid. It is born of a fear that his casual yet scientifically enlightening prose will influence me too much when I am writing on related subjects. I refused to open his previous book, Are We Smart Enough To Know How Smart Animals Are? while I was writing on human and animal intelligence, until I had finished. His writing and science are infectiously good. Mama’s Last Hug is a book that displays the deep knowledge and warmth of a lifetime observing some of the inhabitants of planet Earth. It has been said that some senior male primatologists are as alpha as the apes they study, but there’s little trace of ego here, just awe and humility in the presence of other apes. The Mama of the title was a chimp in Burgers’ zoo in the Netherlands, who died at the grand old age of 59. A month before her death, she was visited for the last time by the primatologist Jan van Hooff. They had known each other for 40 years, and despite her being emaciated and incapacitated, she gave a gummy grin, raised her brow, and they caressed each other as two old hominid friends. As De Waal unambiguously says “She was happy to see him.” This moving encounter (watch the video online) sets up a challenge. We have a strange, imprecise relation with animal emotions, and struggle to talk about them. Scientists are all too aware of the dangers of anthropomorphising animals, that we see us in them and assume that their internal state is similar to our own. If you tell me that you enjoyed eating some chocolate, I take it on trust that it is true, and the fact that lots of people say the same reinforces that view. We can now scan brains and identify neural circuitry that we agree signifies pleasure. But we can’t do that so easily in animals, and because science doesn’t enjoy imprecision, we steer away from declaring human-like emotions in animals. Anyone who has a dog would be hard pressed to say that a retriever fetching a stick is not having a great time, yet science leans toward what De Waal calls anthropodenialism. And at the same time, we make all sorts of casual assumptions about animals such as bottlenose dolphins, who do fun tricks and have naturally smiley faces, masking the fact that they are serial deployers of lethally violent gang-level coercive sex and infanticide. Primatology is hard science: we have to put away our human prejudices in observing animals that look at a lot like us and do things that superficially resemble our own behaviours. Emotions are hard to deal with, in life and in science, and yet as De Waal says “they give meaning to everything”. Darwin made an decent fist of this question in his 1871 book The Expression of the Emotions of Man and Animals, though as de Waal points out, this is his one major work that doesn’t get cited so much, not least because of uncharacteristic humanisation in the descriptions of the faces of monkeys and apes. He saw such continuity – including with the orangutan Jenny – that his descriptions don’t seem scientific enough. Mama’s Last Hug is not a perfect book: De Waal shines as an observational primatologist, but in other terrains of biology he falters. He insists emotions can be measured, and exaggerates the role of the hormone oxytocin, which has been characterised elsewhere as a sort of singular biochemical explanation of all sorts of bonding and trust-related emotional states. Yet in avoiding anthropomorphism and anthropodenialism, he treads a fine line well. The depths of our egos as a species makes it hard for us to not look on other creatures in relation to us The depths of our egos as a species make it hard for us to not look on other creatures in relation to us. Evolutionary psychology is a field with plenty of good research, but is also beset by the over-application of adaptation, the assumption that natural selection has carved or winnowed every aspect of our bodies, minds and behaviour, and that the ontogeny of these traits will be revealed in the behaviour of other beasts. Maybe some will and are. But so often this comparative biology fails to acknowledge that in the seven or eight million years since we shared a common ancestor with chimps, they have also spent all that time evolving in their ecological niches. Was the ultraviolence inherent to chimpanzee culture present in our common ancestor? Was the hypersexualised behaviour of bonobos? We don’t know; maybe we can’t know. We study ants or pillbugs or crows or even rocks because the secrets they hold harbour greater truths about evolution. But so often we fixate on the primates because we think they might reveal something about us. I say study apes because they are interesting, and as Mama’s Last Hug clearly shows, they have minds and complex emotions. De Waal considers apes not because they are our cousins, but because they cohabit our planet. You might, like me, find yourself emulating the oh-so-familiar actions of chimps detailed in this lovely, compassionate and insightful book. But as you furrow your brow, bare your teeth and scratch your arse as they do, perhaps remember that it’s not all about us. • Mama’s Last Hug is published by Granta (£14.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.