Beyond friendship, love and good health, often what I really want is a delicious salad. One that’s not too difficult to put together and entertains the tastebuds. Not too much to ask, you’d think, but actually, it can be difficult to achieve. So I have decided to dedicate my life to searching for the perfect salad. Today’s recipe, packed with vegetables that roast well, combined with a punchy, miso-and-mustard dressing, is one small step on that journey. White miso is milder, sweeter and less pungent than brown miso, and you can buy it in big supermarkets, Asian food stores and online. Prep 20 min Cook 50 minServes 4 3 tbsp olive oil1 ½ tsp hot smoked paprikaSalt1 large cauliflower, broken into florets (650g net weight), leaves and stalks saved for another use500g beetroot, scrubbed and cut into eighths250g asparagus, woody ends trimmed100g blanched almonds, roughly chopped5g dill, leaves picked and chopped5 sprigs mint, leaves picked (about 3 tbsp)20g parsley leaves (about 5-6 tbsp)150g frozen edamame beans For the dressing1 tbsp dijon mustard4 tbsp white miso1 tbsp red-wine vinegar Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7. In a large bowl, mix the oil, paprika and a teaspoon of salt, then add the cauliflower and beetroot, and toss to coat. Lift out the vegetables, spread them out in a single layer on a large baking tray, then roast for 30 minutes. In the same bowl, toss the asparagus and almonds in the remaining oil and paprika, then spread out on a second baking tray and roast for 10 minutes. While the vegetables are roasting, make the dressing. Put the mustard, miso, vinegar and four tablespoons of cold water in a small bowl, and mix well. Defrost the edamame in boiling water, drain, then chop the herbs. Once the vegetables and nuts are roasted, toss them with the beans, herbs and dressing, arrange on a large platter and serve. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.