We’ve had 35 years to make this place our own,” says Lucy Abel Smith, ushering me inside her Cotswolds rectory. It’s a rambling, comfortable place stamped with the art historian’s bohemian seal. When Lucy and her husband David, an engineer, moved here, the interior was “quite plain”. Now the opposite is true. Every wall is crowded with paintings. Sculptures on windowsills jostle for space with shapely ceramics, while triffid-like glass lights spread their tentacles across ceilings. “We like things to be different,” she says, her turquoise-streaked hair glinting in the spring sunshine. Set in a peaceful valley in Quenington, near Cirencester, the house, which has been in her family since 1928, has grown “haphazardly” over the centuries. The kitchen sits in the 17th-century wing while the south front was added in the 18th century. A priest blessed with 10 children extended the house in the 1800s, and later, in the 1930s, the sister of Lucy’s mother-in-law bolted on the Arts and Crafts annexe. “It gave her something to do,” she remarks. Another relative left their mark by commissioning the influential interior designer Godfrey Bonsack to design the 1970s bathrooms with pink and amethyst baths. “Bonsack was the first to believe bathrooms should be comfortable and sexy, rather than just functional. “We’ve never just stuck to one style or era, we prefer being surrounded by things we find interesting,” Lucy says as we tread gingerly over a rug designed by Helen Yardley. In the early days it was art-deco furniture, then their gaze shifted to textiles and ceramics. Under the eaves in the attic (“once called the rattic”), angular modern furniture sits next to chintz-strewn beds. Growing up in Ayrshire, Lucy traces her appreciation of art to her grandfather, Herbert Dunsmuir, an astute collector of the Scottish Colourists (all sold to meet death duties). Lucy might have become an artist, “but my parents wanted me to have a sensible job”. So she taught history of art at institutions including the Victoria & Albert Museum. Now, her creative outlet is commissioning art. “It’s not like ordering socks… Discussing colours and materials with an artist leads to something unique.” In the kitchen, the lacquered red of the cabinets is echoed in the shutters, hand-painted by a former pupil, Carey Mortimer, with gold motifs inspired by Japanese furniture. In pursuit of “something different” to screen the dining area, Lucy commissioned the stained-glass panel. Another Abel Smith, Aunt Violet, dressed in her debutante finery, gazes out from the portrait. “We were the only family members with a wall tall enough for her.” The couple sneaked a quiet reference to themselves into the dining room, where the fresco-like mural depicts the stories of St David and St Lucy. The trompe l’oeil Romanesque arches are a nod to the local church, St Swithin’s. Lucy also commissioned the avant garde furniture designer Fred Baier to design the table with its colourful jagged edges; a set of high-street chairs was transformed with the addition of metal finials made by Baier’s wife, Lucy Strachan, a sculptor. What Lucy calls the “dottiness” of the house spills into the outdoor library by the River Coln, which flows through the five-acre garden. Designed by architect Michael Gold, the circular structure draws on 12th-century dovecotes; a Perspex peak adds requisite wackiness. The Abel Smiths have a reputation for championing the avant garde. “So the planner was disappointed; he’d expected something more cutting edge,” she says. A set of lino cuts, next to a bookcase, is by Ion Constantinescu, an artist from Transylvania, where the productive Lucy runs a literary festival. Huge doors fan open so that the abstract tapestry by Scottish artist Norma Starszakowna merges with the ample grounds. Next month the gardens, with their meandering paths and shady beeches, will open to the public for Fresh Air Sculpture, the biennial show which began here in 1991. Alongside pieces brought in for the event, there will be works from the couple’s permanent collection. “We’ve found things in all sorts of places – and we’ve never spent a huge amount. We hope the show inspires people to have ideas and have the confidence to buy different things.” Fresh Air Sculpture is at the Old Rectory, Quenington, Gloucestershire from 16 June to 7 July (freshairsculpture.com)