In your report on overpriced buses (Scandal of ‘unfair’ bus fares in England, 6 May), Andy Burnham asks: “Why did everyone else get bus deregulation and London did not?” Thatcher’s Conservative government of the early 1980s wanted to privatise and deregulate all bus services. The public rationale was that competition would drive up quality and drive down fares. The private rationale was that they saw too much of public subsidy to buses being taken by real increases in bus workers’ wages, promoted by the then powerful Transport and General Workers’ Union. But when they saw the effects of a couple of experiments in small towns like Newport they were advised that a free-for-all in London would encourage many private operators to run services direct to Oxford Circus and Trafalgar Square, which would result in daily gridlock. So London’s buses remained under the control of London Transport and the Greater London Council (now Transport for London and the mayor). In the north-east, deregulation meant that the newly built Tyne and Wear Metro, approved and paid for primarily by the Labour government in the 70s, lost significant patronage and revenue, which had grown since it opened in 1980, because the private operators ran services straight into Newcastle, rendering the purpose-built interchanges in places such as Heworth and Four Lane Ends semi-redundant. In the early 1980s Tyne and Wear was seen as the model for integrated transport, with local buses feeding the interchanges, where passengers would switch seamlessly to the Metro to take them into the centres of Newcastle and Gateshead. The results of deregulation in 1986 were a significantly lower return on the government’s investment in the Metro, bus congestion in the city centres, lower real wages for bus drivers and regular fares increases above inflation.Mike ParkerDirector general, Nexus (Tyne and Wear Passenger Transport Executive), 1994-2006 • Why did everyone else get bus deregulation and London did not? Because Professor Christopher Foster of the London School of Economics wrote a paper looking back at the competition between bus companies in London in the 1920s and 1930s (before the creation of the London Passenger Transport Board), when the behaviour of bus drivers trying to beat each other to the bus stops to scoop up as many fares as possible had become downright dangerous. Mrs Thatcher decided that this was a risk she was not prepared to take – in London. Chaos did indeed hit most of Britain’s larger cities after bus deregulation.Stephen ReesVancouver, Canada • Buses were regulated between 1933 and 1986. Most were publicly owned between 1948 and 1990, during which time bus use shrank by two-thirds. Why? Every first family car reduced bus use by about 400 trips a year, and every second car by about 250, Transport Research Laboratory research showed. There are now 30m cars. Added to which, spending on new roads and motorways continues to this day – even though road-building does not reduce congestion but increases car use, traffic volumes and toxic air pollution levels. Market research shows that what puts people off bus use is service quality, not fares, which are fourth or fifth in priority. Indeed, nearly a third of bus travel is pensioners on free passes, yet pensioners make more journeys by car. There is talk of paying people not to drive but go by bus. On average this will cost about £5 for each journey to compensate for the comfort, convenience and speed of car travel. Bus fares in London are subsidised to the tune of nearly £1bn a year, as Stagecoach observed in your article. As it is, there are four times more bus trips than rail, which gets a subsidy of £5bn a year. If that kind of funding is available for local public transport, should it be spent on Crossrail schemes for regional cities not doing as well as London? Or perhaps the NHS, housing and schools have a higher priority for public expenditure?Prof LJS LesleyLiverpool • As a concessionary bus pass holder, I have often wondered why no exposure is given to the fact that only single tickets can be obtained with a concessionary pass. As return tickets are often significantly less expensive than two singles, and the majority of concessionary pass holders appear to make round trips, shouldn’t someone examine how bus companies are ripping off the public purse by this practice, which, one assumes, could be easily modified to permit concessionary return tickets? This is being brought home currently, as our local (near-monopoly) bus company, Stagecoach West Scotland, has just raised its fares, but only for single journeys. Derek HallMaidens, Ayrshire • May I just mention some other annoying bus iniquities? Londoners aged over 60 can travel free at all times with a 60+ Oyster card, whereas others have to wait several years more until state pension age, and even then can’t travel free in the morning peak. And free London passes also include underground and light rail services – outside London the default is buses only, though some city regions include off-peak tram or train services.Andrew WhitworthHarrogate, North Yorkshire • Here in Kendal we have an appalling bus service with no Sunday or bank holiday routes apart from the tourist bus between Lancaster and Keswick. There are no evening services, and if you finish work at 5.30pm you cannot catch a bus home. How I wish we had even some of the investment that has been made in London.Angela RoyleKendal, Cumbria • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition