On 27 October 1962, at the height of the Cuban missile crisis, the US navy dropped depth charges on the Soviet nuclear submarine B-59. With the vessel damaged and cut off from communication with Moscow, its captain, Valentin Savitsky, assumed that the US and USSR were now at war, and thus initiated steps to fire its nuclear torpedo at US forces. Protocol demanded that all three of the senior officers should approve the launch. Although one officer agreed with Savitsky, the other, Vasili Arkhipov, vetoed the decision. The world came within a whisker of thermonuclear war. The continued proliferation of nuclear weaponry represents one of the greatest threats to humanity’s long-term survival. Yet tomorrow Westminster Abbey is hosting a service to “celebrate” 50 years of Britain’s “continuous at-sea deterrent” – that is, having a nuclear-armed submarine on constant sea patrol, ready to attack or threaten anyone, anywhere, any time. As part of a series of events led by the Royal Navy, the invitation-only congregation (including Prince William) will be asked to rejoice at this dubious achievement and, somewhat incongruously, to “pray for peace”. Protests and peace vigils are planned to take place outside the abbey during the service, and nearly 200 Anglican clergy have signed a letter calling for it to be cancelled. They point out that in July 2018 the Church of England’s General Synod passed a motion declaring that “nuclear weapons, through their indiscriminate and destructive potential, present a distinct category of weaponry that requires Christians to work tirelessly for their elimination across the world”. The dean of the abbey, the Very Rev Dr John Hall, has responded by saying that “the service will be neither one of thanksgiving nor in any way a celebration of nuclear armaments”. However, invitations have described the event as a “national service of thanksgiving” and the Royal Navy has badged it as a way to “celebrate 50 years of success of [the] Navy’s ultimate mission”. It isn’t difficult to understand why so many people are upset. Jesus Christ is identified in Christian tradition as the biblical “prince of peace”, and New Testament authors and the early church interpreted his death on the cross as an example of nonviolent love for one’s enemies, for all Christians to follow. In contrast, Britain’s Trident nuclear submarines can each carry 40 nuclear warheads, each eight times as destructive as the bomb dropped on Hiroshima in 1945, which killed up to 150,000 people. There is therefore an extraordinary incongruity of the celebration of nuclear weapons in a church. There is an extraordinary incongruity of the celebration of nuclear weapons in church The historian AJ Hoover once wryly remarked that the founder of Christianity taught “blessed are the peacemakers” but one would never have suspected as much from the conduct of his followers. Nor, we might add, from the services of thanksgiving they organise. Events such as this at Westminster Abbey are deeply political interventions in public life. Commanding significant media attention, they narrate a story about who and what Britain values. This is only heightened when politicians and royalty attend. That is why Friday’s service matters to everyone, and not just to Anglicans. Trident renewal, approved by MPs in 2016, is deeply controversial. By holding this service the church is – possibly inadvertently – providing legitimation of a controversial choice that is morally, legally and politically dubious. Morally, nuclear weapons are indiscriminate in their destruction, and their proliferation makes the world less safe. Frustrated at the failure of powers such as Britain to abide by their legal disarmament obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the United Nations adopted the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 2017. Politically, Trident is useless in the face of the security challenges that the UK faces, such as cyber-attacks and terrorism. CND estimates that the lifetime cost of replacing Trident stands at an eye-watering £205bn. This money could be used to rebuild public services decimated by years of cuts, and accelerate the transition towards a low-carbon future and thereby mitigate the threat to all humanity posed by anthropogenic climate change. Trident is simply not affordable given other priorities, yet this service effectively confers a blessing on a contested political choice. Surely the abbey can celebrate better things than half a century of the underwater deployment of nuclear weaponry? Its own architecture abounds with hints. In 1998 the abbey unveiled 10 statues to “modern martyrs”, many being men and women who had given their lives in nonviolent struggle for peace and justice. One of these is Rev Dr Martin Luther King Jr. On 4 April 2018, Westminster Abbey held a service to mark 50 years since King was assassinated. Drawing attention to the abbey’s striking statue, John Hall said: “We hope again to learn from the example of Martin Luther King and to commit ourselves afresh to keeping the dream alive of justice for all peoples under God and of peace in the world.” Fine words, yet King was an outspoken opponent of nuclear weapons, declaring his “hatred for this most colossal of all evils”, and arguing unequivocally that “the development and use of nuclear weapons should be banned”. The Church of England cannot possibly claim to be learning from King’s example if it is sanctifying the deployment of weapons of mass destruction. Sixty years on from the Cuban missile crisis, President Donald Trump is pulling the US out of the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces treaty and a new nuclear arms race may be on the horizon. Today’s service should be one not of celebration, but of repentance and mourning that King’s words remain unheeded. But let protesters take heart: one suspects that if King and Jesus were here, they’d be outside the Abbey with them, rather than inside rejoicing over the weapons. •Dr Nick Megoran is lecturer in political geography at the University of Newcastle