This article is part of the Guardian’s 2019 Women’s World Cup Experts’ Network, a cooperation between some of the best media organisations from the 24 countries who have qualified for France. theguardian.com is running previews from two countries each day in the run-up to the tournament kicking off on 7 June. Spain won all their eight qualifying games but were handed a tough draw in France coming up against Germany, China and South Africa in the group – and if they finish second they could face the United States in the last 16. “People take it for granted that we will make it to the knockout stage and go far in the tournament but our group is really complicated,” the coach, Jorge Vilda, has said. The recent success of Spain at youth level – the under-17s became world and European champions and the under-19s won the Euros while the under-20s finished second in the World Cup – has led to increased expectations for the senior side. However, the domestic league is too uncompetitive with Barcelona and Atlético too superior, for the national team to have any realistic chance of winning the World Cup in the near future. The nucleus of Vilda’s squad, unsurprisingly, is made up by players from Barcelona and Atlético and a total of 16 players from the two clubs were called up for a recent friendly. The defence has a heavy Barcelona feel to it with the exception of the centre-back Irene Paredes (Paris Saint-Germain) and the right-back Celia Jiménez (Reign FC). Other non-Barça-Atlético players are Alba Redondo, the forward who has had a really strong season with Albacete and won her first cap in January, and Nahikari García from Real Sociedad. This is Spain’s second World Cup after failing to get past the group stage in 2015, a tournament which is mainly remembered for the players’ rebellion against the methods of the then-coach Ignacio Quereda. The players, in fact, were so unhappy with him that they published a joint letter calling on him to go after the tournament and Quereda duly left his post soon afterwards. Spain did not get past the quarter-finals at Euro 2017 and this tournament will be a test of the maturity of the coach and the players. Vilda has decided not to call up the veteran forward Vero Boquete and trusts that the players that took Spain to France will prosper there. Vilda likes to play in a 4-3-3 formation with a freedom to switch positions for the players but Spain have been lacking a cutting edge going forward recently and have also made some basic mistakes in defence. Yet they have usually been able to respond well and the World Cup will be an intriguing test as to where Spain stand in the women’s game at this moment in time. Jorge Vilda, 37, has been in charge of the team since the 2015 World Cup. His father, Ángel Vilda, was the fitness coach for Johan Cruyff’s Barcelona in the early 1990s. Jorge won the European Championship with the women’s under-19 team in 2017 and 2018. Vilda is always keen to stress the importance of the collective rather than any individual stars and he has not called up Boquete for that reason. The player who stands out the most is Jenni Hermoso, the Atlético Madrid striker who was the top scorer of the Liga Iberdrola with 24 goals this season. Celia Jiménez, a 23-year-old defender, is also an aeronautical engineer. She has always been interested in engineering, excelling in maths and physics at school, and moved to the United States at the age of 18 to be able to continue her studies and play football at a high level. She decided to study aeronautics because she was intrigued by the possibility of defying gravity. “We’ve always had the idea of gravity, that when you jump up you come back to the ground, when you throw something up it comes down again,” she once said in an interview. “The idea of being able to build an aircraft weighing tons, something huge that can take people from one part of the world to another, cruising through the air, and for us to be able to decide when we land it, is very impressive.” It’s hard to disagree with that. Recent studies have found that women’s football first made the news in Spain in the spring of 1914 with the the Spanish Girl’s Club being formed. The club, however, did not last long and discontinued its activities that summer. The first match on record was that of Montserrat against Giralda at the Velódromo Parque de Deportes on 9 June 1914 – both made up by players from Spanish Girl’s Club but now playing in different jerseys. The game was a friendly match for the Female Federation Against Tuberculosis but it failed to create much interest. The decades then came and went without much progress – or any at all, in fact. Women’s teams started playing unofficially again in the 1970s but it was not until November 1980 that the Royal Spanish Football Federation (RFEF) recognised women’s football. Two years later, Uefa urged all its affiliated members to organise and encourage women’s football and the first Spanish women’s championship took place in 1988-89. The women’s team qualified for the Euros in 1997 but did then not make a major tournament until 2013 and they have never qualified for the Olympics. Jenni Hermoso is known by many in the game but could have her true breakthrough in France considering the form she is in and the goals she has scored this season. Her teammates at Atlético praise her for her versatility and the fact that she can control and hold the ball as well as slow the game down when needed. Getting out of the group stage and into the last 16, which would be one step further than they managed at the last World Cup. Spain are not in an easy group and the last 16 could see the team playing the reigning champions, the US. Not available. Around 60,000. Eleonora Giovio writes for El País. Follow her on Twitter here.