Chelsea’s appeal to Fifa against the imposition of a two-window transfer ban has been rejected, meaning that the club will take their case to the court of arbitration for sport (Cas) in the hope of having the sanction reduced or overturned. Chelsea will also seek an interim ruling at Cas to ask for their ban to be frozen while the final appeal is heard – which, if it is granted, could allow them to sign players this summer. The Fifa appeals body had insisted that the punishment begin in the summer, even though Chelsea’s appeal was in train – much to the club’s amazement. Chelsea were found to have broken a host of rules regarding their dealings with under-18 players from foreign countries over a number of years; they were charged with 92 breaches of article 19 alone – the most serious offence – and found guilty of 29 of those cases. Fifa’s disciplinary committee handed down the two-window ban in February and Chelsea immediately announced their intention to appeal to the governing body. It always felt as though that appeal would be doomed to failure – and they would have a better chance of winning concessions at Cas – and that has proved to be the case. Fifa did, however, announce a small adjustment to the original punishment. Chelsea’s ban will not cover the registration of minors under the age of 16 who do not fall under the scope of article 19 – in other words, players from the United Kingdom. Fifa’s basic rule is that clubs cannot bring in players under 18 from other countries, unless their parents have emigrated for reasons not connected to football or both the player and club are based within 50km of a national border. Under article 19, the only other exception is for transfers within either the European Union or European Economic Area where the player is aged between 16 and 18. Chelsea’s fine of 600,000 Swiss francs (£453,000) stands. “The club is very disappointed that the transfer ban of two consecutive registration periods was not overturned,” Chelsea said in a statement. “Chelsea FC categorically refutes the findings of the Fifa appeal committee. It acted in accordance with the relevant regulations and will appeal the decision to the court of arbitration for sport.” Chelsea felt that they were treated unfairly by the Fifa appeals committee when their request to freeze the ban, pending the completion of their appeal, was rejected. They pointed to leeway granted to Barcelona, Real Madrid and Atlético Madrid, who had all successfully delayed bans by appealing, and suggested the governing body was guilty of double standards. Fifa had clearly moved to prevent clubs emulating their counterparts in Spain by seeking tactical delays to the process in order to buy new players in anticipation of a ban yet it also believed new cases would be heard far more swiftly than in the past. Chelsea said in February they were “astonished” by Fifa’s decision not to suspend the sanction pending completion of the appeal process. They added: “So far as the club is aware, in all previous cases where a registration ban has been imposed by Fifa, a decision has also been made to suspend the sanction until the appeal process has been completed. In this case, Chelsea considers that it is being treated inconsistently in comparison with other European clubs.” Chelsea maintain that they acted in accordance with the relevant regulations. The club have always said that the majority of the cases involved short-term trialists at their academy, who did not go on to sign. They argued there is no law against trying out under-18 international players, that it is common practice across Europe and, as such, they believed these cases ought not to have been included in the final judgment.