I’m driving up a corrugated red dirt track, hours from Broome, with two architects and three builders, into a remote part of the Kimberley. We are visiting a traditional owner, Bruno Dann, to help build him a shed. The Nyul Nyul elder won his native title claim recently, and it means he can finally build on his land. I was in the Dampier peninsula five years ago, with the architect Adam Haddow and the builder Joe Gordon as they sat with Bruno and his partner, Marion, drawing the shed design in the red dirt with a stick. I wasn’t useful then but maybe I could be useful now. The shed is finally being built! And they had invited me along. I’d never been on a building site, let alone one in what is probably one of the most remote and harsh locations on Earth. But the Sydney tradies “Salty” and Ryan made it sound like anyone could be useful on a building site – even someone who has never hammered a nail. I could help with something called the degluing, and something called the doweling and this thing they were fixated on that held it all in place, called the “screw piles”. We arrive mid-afternoon and head straight to work. The site is a bare patch of red earth that needs to be marked up with pegs and string. It’s boiling hot and the builders are shirtless and dripping sweat about an hour in. I crouch down and hold some string down on a peg while something is measured. I don’t realise it at the time but this is the most use I’ll be all week. That night, the generator winds down and it is dark and quiet. Lying in my tent, I don’t want to take off my contact lenses. Here, there are no lights, the moon is a sliver and the night sky is so heavy with stars that it seems to sag against the treetops like a swag full of diamonds. I wake up at 6am. It’s cold and the light is soft. Salty, the first up, warns us that “there’s so many flies they’ll carry you away”. When I apply the sap it looks like I’ve been stabbed. It runs, then clots like blood When I clamber out of the tent (is there any other way to exit a tent?), I’m covered in lumps and sores. They’re up my arms, on my eyelids and there’s a clump of bites in each knee crease. I itch madly. The flies flock to the sores. I must have scratched them in my sleep, as they are swollen, oozing and on my arms there are some sort of insects nesting in the wounds. I go up to the building site and show Adam, who carefully uses his thumbnail to remove the creatures from my weeping sores. “I think they are ants,” he says, then gets back to work. Bruno tells me the sap from the red gum heals bites and sores. When I apply the sap it looks as though I’ve been stabbed. It runs, then clots like blood. On the site, the first truck comes in from Perth with the prefabricated timber. An excavator arrives to great excitement. “The excavator!” We cheer. But it’s a difficult morning. The ground is so hard it can’t be drilled through. Bruno walks through carrying a bucket with burning leaves, doing a smoking ceremony on the site – which he then has to abandon because the water has been cut off suddenly. He rushes off to check the bore. The dirt needs to be softened or we can’t build. We all stand around, getting sunburnt. There’s a weird tension on the site. Have we come all this way and waited all these years for the ground not to yield? That evening there is a celebratory air around the campfire. That afternoon the excavator managed to drill into the ground! We pass around beers, wine and gubinge gin. I go to bed early but am woken by the builders. There are four of them, lying on the ground near my tent, in thrall to the hectic night sky. “Shut up!” I yell. But Ryan, who hails from “the dodgy part” of Kent, does not want to go to sleep. “Look at the fookin’ sky and all those stars,” he says, with a voice full of wonder. Later that night there’s a meteor shower. A few days later the builders meet in the morning just after dawn and decide what to do first – put on the roof or put on the floor. “Roof!” I suggest. I am overruled. One of the trucks carrying the solar panels can’t get in because the road is not wide enough. People – not me – are dispatched to hack through the growth and widen the road. I visit the site although I don’t do any work. It’s hellishly hot, but something about seeing the shed constructed is strangely mesmerising. It changes appearance by the hour. I offer to help lay the gravel, whatever that means, but oversleep and miss it. Oh well! Instead I go for a drive with the water panel installers where we can get phone reception. On the way back one of the installers says “Let’s go check out the beach.” We drive across a desolate salt pan – an iPhone satellite map showing a thin blue line of tributaries, then the sea. It’s grey and cracked and stretch to the horizon. Halfway across we become bogged. The wheels chew through the car mats we’ve placed on the mud to get traction. Standing on the salt pan I start sinking into the mud. I’ve become bogged!! Me and the car will need to be winched out. Is it possible to drown in a salt pan? With one bar of phone we ring the Beagle Bay medical clinic. “We’re bogged. We don’t know who else to call.” Not long afterwards two four-wheel-drives arrive. The Indigenous rangers. They tie ropes to the car and pull us out. We sheepishly follow them into town and buy them ice coffees as a thank you. After that, it’s time for me to return to down south. While I’m still covered in lumps and oozing sores, I don’t have so much as a callus from my week on a building site. I can do things in a city – like jaywalk across four lanes of traffic while holding three big bags, a coffee and sending a tweet – but take me to a building site at the Kimberley and I’m as useful as tits on a bull. • Brigid Delaney is a Guardian Australia columnist