The race to succeed Theresa May has escalated as 10 contenders from the Conservative party spent Monday either touting their visions for the future or busily refusing to rule out running. With the prime minister’s final attempt to pass a Brexit deal being dismissed by all wings of the party and her time in Downing Street being measured in weeks, there were two full-blown launches of new party groupings on Monday. On the hardline Brexiter wing, the former work and pensions secretary, Esther McVey, kicked off a movement to reconnect the Tories with working-class voters by promising to slash the overseas aid budget and give the money saved to schools and police. At an event seen as the start of her leadership campaign, though not billed as such, McVey said her new group, Blue Collar Conservatism, would push for the overseas aid budget to be cut from the current level of about £14.5bn a year to the £8.5bn seen in 2010, with the balance going to domestic priorities. Later in the day, McVey’s successor in the work and pensions job, Amber Rudd, led a push from the centrist, remain-minded wing of the Conservatives for their views to be heard, notably in rejecting a no-deal Brexit. “The Conservative party is entering a new phase and we here in this room are determined to shape that phase,” Rudd told the One Nation caucus. The most resistant segment of the European Research Group of Eurosceptic Tory MPs comprises 28 pro-Brexit backbenchers who have refused to be wooed by Theresa May and opposed her third attempt to pass her Brexit deal. Steve Baker, Andrew Bridgen and Mark Francois are the most vocal members. Jacob Rees-Mogg remains close to the group despite backing May’s deal. Another 100 MPs have been associated with the ERG, including the potential Tory leadership candidates Boris Johnson, Michael Gove and Andrea Leadsom. Esther McVey, a Brexiter who reluctantly voted for Theresa May’s deal, is the latest Tory to breathe life into the idea of blue-collar conservatism, previously championed by Robert Halfon, the chair of the education select committee. McVey launched her version on 20 May at an event widely seen as the unofficial start of her leadership bid. She and fellow MPs including Eddie Hughes, Ben Bradley and Scott Mann plan to tour UK pubs to spread their message. McVey’s supporters claim to have up to 40 MPs signed up to the group; other Brexiters claim the figure is less than 20. Amber Rudd has spearheaded this pro-remain, anti-no-deal group of MPs, which includes the international development secretary, Rory Stewart, and the former cabinet ministers Nicky Morgan and Damian Green. The group claims to have more than 60 MPs onboard and plans to stand against “narrow nationalism” and division and in favour of internationalism, environmental policies and protecting consumers from corporations and an “over-mighty state”.  Led by the hugely popular Ruth Davidson, the leader of the Scottish Tories in Holyrood, and the Scottish secretary, David Mundell, this group’s overtly remain tendencies put them at odds with the likes of the ERG. Among the 13 Scottish Tory MPs and 31 MSPs there is controversy over Boris Johnson, who is a highly divisive figure in Scotland. A loose term nowadays, since the former Cameroons are largely nowhere to be seen. Those flying the flag for a more socially progressive, relatable kind of conservatism include the former education secretary Justine Greening and the health secretary, Matt Hancock, who even set up his own app in an attempt to keep up with the digital age. Both Greening and Hancock want to move on from Brexit so that other issues can be dealt with, but they are split on what that should look like. Greening has promoted a second referendum, while Hancock is urging all Brexiters to get behind May’s deal. Other cabinet moderates who might stand for the leadership role – Rory Stewart and David Gauke – entered the meeting for a private briefing as the media were ushered out. It fell to Nicholas Soames to sum up the frustration of centrist Tories, who he said had been “drowned out by the very aggressive and intolerant tone of the ERG”. Both Rudd and McVey are seen as outside chances to succeed May in a race where Boris Johnson is still clear favourite. Rudd has not even officially said she will stand. As such, their events were as much about shoring up their position in a future administration, both in terms of ministerial jobs and overall vision. McVey made it plain that in her view the new prime minister must be a true Brexit believer – a definition that would rule out not just the likes of Rudd but also the born-again Brexiters Jeremy Hunt and Sajid Javid. Hunt and Javid themselves, while widely assumed to be interested in the post, were notably coy when asked about it on Monday. Javid, asked about his ambitions after a speech on counter-terrorism, said: “The prime minister has said she will step down. When she does there will be no shortage of candidates and whether I’m one of them, you’ll have to wait and see.” Hunt, speaking at an event in Geneva, said voters “want Brexit sorted … as quickly as possible and we have a responsibility to find every which way to do that”. Hunt said a no-deal departure would be “immensely disruptive”, and he declined to be drawn on a leadership bid, telling Channel 4 News: “What I can confirm is I want to sort Brexit along with my cabinet colleagues and that’s what we’re discussing tomorrow.” The fortunes of the environment secretary remain hard to predict and opinion is split in the party. His detractors believe he is deeply unpopular with the country and has ruined his reputation for good when he stood against Johnson at the last leadership race. However, most MPs were delighted by his performance in the no-confidence vote where he tore into Corbyn. While the response of many voters to mention of the health secretary is still likely to be ‘Who?’, to some he is starting to have the makings of a from-the-sidelines contender. The former culture secretary is only 40 but has six years of frontbench experience, and is on to his second cabinet post. The nickname ‘Theresa in trousers’ has stuck. Most colleagues speak about his candidacy unenthusiastically and warn about his reputation with the country after having weathered the junior doctors’ strike. He could still succeed by bridging the Brexit-remain divide and attracting colleagues looking for a moderate grown-up. The home secretary is reported to have told Tory MPs he is the only one who can beat Jeremy Corbyn in a general election, but has made less of an impact than first predicted. Several MPs believe that the case of Isis bride Shamima Begum was mishandled and find Javid’s speeches and vision less than inspiring. Still favourite for the top job, Johnson has kept himself out of the messiest Tory warfare in 2019 and has enthusiastic support from younger Brexiter MPs – and the patronage of Jacob Rees-Mogg. His supporters insist no other name on the list can connect with voters in the same way and win a general election. However, his reputation is still severely damaged from his time as foreign secretary and there is a concerted ‘anyone but Boris’ campaign among party colleagues. Leadsom has revived her reputation somewhat during her tenure as Commons leader, especially her rounds in the ring with the Speaker, John Bercow. However, few believe she would ever be first choice again among Eurosceptics and a number of her former campaign team have said they will discourage her from running. Former cabinet minister McVey has already announced her intention to run. She has the Brexit credentials, having quit as Work and Pensions Secretary in protest at Theresa May's withdrawal agreement, and claims to already have enough support from fellow MPs to make her bid viable. The international development secretary is a confirmed Brexiter, which will appeal to much of the leadership electorate, but is also decidedly liberal on social issues, so could be seen as a unifier. But for some the idea of Mordaunt is more credible than the reality. There is still, however, time for her to turn this impression around. The former Brexit secretary has a loyal fanbase and a professional team, including support from Vote Leave’s ex-comms director Paul Stephenson. MPs are forming the view that the next party leader should be a younger face from a new generation of politicians – which gives Raab the edge over Boris Johnson. The work and pensions secretary, the favourite among the party’s left, has all but ruled herself out of the race. She could still be a powerful kingmaker, and is being wooed as a running mate by everyone from Johnson and Michael Gove to Hunt. Truss has worked the circuit more than almost any other potential candidate, speaking on the future of the Tory party at almost any venue that will have her – thinktanks, launches and in weekend newspaper spreads. She hopes to win Brexiter backing with a publicly enthusiastic embrace of a no-deal Brexit – much to the scepticism of Treasury colleagues. Among the senior figures not expected to run are Brandon Lewis, the party chairman, Chris Grayling, the transport secretary, and Philip Hammond, the chancellor, who acknowledges that he is not popular enough. Gavin Williamson’s recent sacking after the Huawei leak inquiry will also surely rule him out as an option this time around. Falling somewhere between the two approaches was Matt Hancock. The health secretary simultaneously refused to definitively confirm a pitch for No 10 while outlining at some length what his personal vision would be if he did. Sent out for a round of media interviews to talk up May’s seemingly doomed Brexit plan, which returns to the Commons at the start of next month, Hancock told the BBC: “I don’t rule out standing for the leadership of the Conservative party.” Hancock was later obliged to explain why he, as health secretary, was pictured eating a high-fat waffle for breakfast. The defence secretary, Penny Mordaunt, used her first Commons outing in the new job since taking from the sacked Gavin Williamson to say Jeremy Corbyn was wrong on a series of global issues ranging from the Falklands to Russia and to Hamas. At an event on Monday night with several leadership hopefuls, the former Brexit minister Dominic Raab called for a 5p cut in the basic rate of income tax. The other possible contenders speaking at the Telegraph event – Hancock, Liz Truss, James Cleverly and Victoria Atkins – also urged the Tory leadership to put money back in voters’ pockets, solve the housing crisis and deliver Brexit to see off the threat of Jeremy Corbyn and Nigel Farage.