As a teacher, lecturer and examiner of sociology for many years, I could not agree more with the view stated in your editorial (Humans need the humanities. Societies need social science, 1 May). Sociology in schools has increasingly fallen out of favour with school managers because the skills it promotes cannot easily be measured or marketed, and because it has often (rightly) been associated with encouraging criticism of the status quo – dangerous to those in power. Sociology challenges the claim that “facts” can be learned by rote and regurgitated as the bite-size snippets that feature in revision guides and presentations. It is no longer viewed as a valuable subject. Instead, “marketable” subjects such as maths and sciences are flourishing, but A-level students are no longer critically examining the history, philosophy and sociology of science, as they did in the sociology specification. As “economies” are made, sociology is being removed from the curriculum in many schools despite excellent exam results and good take-up, as happened in the grammar school where I taught for 24 years. The Association of Social Science Teachers, once a forum for teachers and an organiser of student conferences, is no more. The disappearance of sociology from schools represents a threat to the principles of liberal democracy.Stephanie GarrettWelwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire • You conclude your editorial with the astute observation that “it is the subjects of least obvious use that may prove of ultimate value”. Last year, you printed a letter (2 July 2018) about the value of educational drama. Now, Professor Richard Rose (Letters, 2 May) could well be describing the value of drama in education, in writing that “today’s society will increasingly require individuals who are adaptable and capable of making a critical appraisal of complex situations” and “graduates able to challenge the status quo”. Last July we wrote that government policies had forced the National Association for the Teaching of Drama (NATD) into hibernation. But since then, and perhaps not coincidentally, there has been a sharp rise in membership and, on 8 June, NATD will be coming out of hibernation, sharing two workshops at the Story Makers Company Festival, Story Rebels: A new kind of hero, taking place at Leeds Beckett University, followed by a full AGM. All teachers, not just drama specialists, will be very welcome.Liam Harris (chair), Maggie Hulson, John AirsNational Association for the Teaching of Drama, Liverpool • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition