Interesting that the Rail Delivery Group’s answer to the failure of the fragmentation of the rail network into franchise groups is … more fragmentation (Rail industry calls for end to franchising, 30 April). How is the travelling public going to be better served by “mass commuter routes … let as concessions, with control devolved away from government” and the services on long-distance routes provided by more than one operator, to provide competition, when the real competition with rail comes from air and road transport? Rail does not need to compete with itself to provide better services, it needs central direction and regional/business administration that provides strategic planning designed to provide the fast, frequent and efficient services that are possible with modern technology. Stripping away the shareholder interest from rail operations is what is most needed to improve the services provided by this crucially important infrastructure operation. As for fares, if franchise operators can provide advance tickets at a discount, they can provide those fares all the time as a walk-on provision.Les SummersKidlngton, Oxfordshire • The direction of travel of Keith Williams and the sensible proposals by the Rail Delivery Group would be to devolve more power over our railways. The principle of devolution is common ground for our civic leaders and metro mayors who represent the interests of passengers, business leaders and those who currently run our train services. In the major northern cities and across the “northern powerhouse”, this devolution would make it possible to integrate transport better, which is already being worked towards with more touch-in-and-out travel within and in between our towns and cities in the north. This would be used by more of us as passengers if the government supports the fare system being reformed more quickly.Henri MurisonDirector, Northern Powerhouse Partnership • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition