This feels like a landmark in the National Theatre’s history: a tumultuous epic about first-generation Jamaican immigrants playing to a genuinely diverse audience. It is based on the novel by the late Andrea Levy which Helen Edmundson has skilfully adapted into a three-hour-plus play directed by Rufus Norris with hurtling energy. If I was moved, it was by the occasion as much as the play, in that it showed theatre exercising a truly national function. Levy’s book allows big themes to emerge through the interwoven lives of four people. Edmundson focuses on just three. One is Hortense, a light-skinned Jamaican who, farmed out by her mother, becomes a prim schoolteacher who arrives in Britain in 1948 with great expectations. She is joining her husband, Gilbert, who, having served in the RAF, is part of the Windrush generation and equally buoyed by the false hope that postwar Britain will be a land of opportunity. The third figure is Queenie, the daughter of a Lincolnshire pig farmer, who becomes landlady to Gilbert and Hortense. We hear less about Queenie’s husband, Bernard, whose reflex racism is partly explained in the book by his experience as a serviceman in partitioned India. Edmundson also takes a more linear approach than Levy and the play’s first half, shuttling between Jamaica and Britain, is a helter-skelter affair charting the three main characters’ urge to escape. The second half, set in 1948, paints an unforgettable picture of postwar reality. We see Gilbert, working as a postal driver, routinely asked: “When are you going back to the jungle?” Queenie is ostracised by her neighbours for her hospitality to what they call “darkies”. Yet we also see Hortense’s shock at realising she and Gilbert have to coexist in a grimly spartan single room. In the end, it is a play about lies; and the biggest lie of all is that Britain would both welcome and utilise the talents of its fellow citizens from Jamaica. But individual stories take precedence over messages and one of the virtues of Norris’s superb production is its ability to focus on people while giving the action a panoramic sweep. Jon Driscoll’s projections encompass everything from Caribbean hurricanes and burnished sunsets to the bustle of prewar Piccadilly and the echoing emptiness of Lincolnshire landscapes. Katrina Lindsay’s sets also evoke multiple locales with minimal fuss. In a vast cast there are outstanding performances. Leah Harvey precisely captures Hortense’s stiff-backed pride in the face of prejudice. Gershwyn Eustache Jr expertly shows how Gilbert’s anger at being denied self-fulfilment is being masked by a surface cheerfulness. Aisling Loftus touchingly pins down Queenie’s working-class resilience and, even if Bernard is more shadowy than in the book, Andrew Rothney shows his initial shyness giving way to downright aggression. CJ Beckford also lends a carefree glamour to Jamaican airman Michael, whose story intersects with that of Hortense and Queenie. From an aesthetic standpoint, there may be better plays this year. But, in showing how aspiring Jamaicans left one small island to land in another of diminished hopes, it will surely rank as one of the most important. At the Olivier, National Theatre, London, until 10 August.