Spoiler alert: this blog is for people watching series five of Line of Duty (it also contains spoilers from earlier series). Don’t read on unless you have watched episode six. OK everybody, hold it right there. I’ll get back to you as soon as I’ve perfected my Morse code deciphering skills. Line of Duty finales are when the show tends to throw everything at the wall. This time was no different, as we were treated to the sublime (a lengthy interrogation) and the ridiculous (Steve’s out-of-the-blue realisation that Dot was tapping out Morse code as he died). That said, it was a more downbeat conclusion than in previous series, which I appreciated. I’ve always loved Line of Duty for its quieter moments rather than its ever-so-twisty twists and enjoyed the fact that final revelations largely made sense instead of milking shock moments for all they were worth. We all called it – Gill Biggeloe was a “rotten apple” (and not just because she spelled her surname the wrong way). Kudos to those who pointed out that Biggeloe having been a defence lawyer would prove a key plot point. I thoroughly enjoyed the revelations concerning the extent of her villainy (yes, even the moment when everything went a bit slasher film in the toilets), largely because Polly Walker has been a poisonous delight in the role. Unsurprisingly, Biggeloe provided many of the night’s best moments, from wiping the smug grin off DCS Carmichael’s face by pointing out that the eager DI Brandyce had filed the wrong paperwork, to unwisely suggesting that Carmichael should stay in the interrogation room with Steve and Kate because “it’s up to you if you want to be in on it or not”. Indeed every small exchange between Biggeloe and Anna Maxwell Martin’s Patricia Carmichael, AKA the Maximilien Robespierre of the anti-corruption world, was worth savouring. Ted’s interrogation might have been billed as the main event, but the real action was happening on the undercard as Carmichael and Biggeloe circled each other in a particularly venomous game of cat and mouse. With all that going on, it was no surprise that the OCG plot strand took a backseat. There was one brief scene featuring Lisa McQueen’s interrogation (after all that, it seems she was just a criminal, albeit one who wanted to change) and another focusing on Ryan’s acceptance to police academy (yes, yes, you were all right). In truth that was OK with me. Jed Mercurio, the writer, has always been tighter on the police corruption element than on the gang plot. If I have a complaint about this particular series, it’s that in the early episodes it got bogged down in gang interaction when the interesting stuff has always been AC-12’s increasingly desperate attempts to stem the flood of corruption in the force. It might have been obvious but I’ll admit I let out a small cheer when Kate and Steve decided to save the gaffer themselves. And then an even bigger one when they marched straight past Carmichael and into the interview room in what was pretty much a declaration of war. Kate, in particular, was on fire this evening, from telling Brandyce where to go, to ensuring that all the regulations were observed to the letter even as she worked at cross purposes from Carmichael. I’ve said it before but she’s much better at being a DI than at being undercover. The episode’s main thrust, however, was Carmichael’s tense interview of an increasingly broken Ted. This was pretty much a showcase for Adrian Dunbar and he rose to the challenge, showing us a Ted who was both recognisable and surprising: a man obsessed with his moral righteousness, who felt so ashamed of watching pornography that he dumped his computer; who had, if not an affair, then close feelings for the young and widowed Anne-Marie McGillis; and who felt guilty about his past and bewildered by his present. The story, when it was finally divulged, had its roots as expected in Ted’s time in Northern Ireland: a sad tale of a Catholic cop in a largely Protestant force who found some sort of kinship with a Catholic widow grieving over the violent death of her husband. It was a kinship that was to prove disastrous for both of them – and for the next generation as well. Which brings us to the real victim: John Corbett, a decorated undercover officer who was primed as a weapon by Biggeloe, lied to, betrayed and set on a path of destruction that would ultimately result in his death. The callous way Biggeloe used Corbett without heed as to what would become of him was bleakly believable. Like so many officers on this show, he died in the line of duty, but as Ted sorrowfully observed, it was a “tragic, senseless death”. Is it just me or did the explanation for Dot’s dying message make no sense? I feel as though I’m through the looking glass here – once there was H, then there were balaclava men, now there are four caddies. What’s next? An explanation that he was also wiggling his toes to tell us more? I was quite glad when Steve suddenly turned into Mr Exposition and got us up to speed on all the salient plot points. Less so, however, by Ted’s unravelling of Biggeloe’s motivation and actions, if only because I kept imagining her saying: “And I would have got away with it if it wasn’t for you pesky kids in AC-12.” Where did Ted hide the rest of the money and how complicit was he in Anne-Marie’s death? Despite the holes in his storyline, I still trust him and was pleased he gave the £50,000 to Corbett’s widow, but even I must admit he’s not as straightforward as he pretends to be. Well done Gill, for calling out the world’s most useless police solicitor. Poor DI Brandyce: when Carmichael wants someone gone, they’re toast. That said, the reference to glasshouses by DCC Wise was well-made given that Carmichael’s team consisted of one bent copper and one incompetent one. That’s nearly as bad as the shaggers of AC-12. In another first season reference, Ryan cited Simon Bannerjee – the police constable he gave the run-around to – as the officer who made him want to become a cop. For something to pass the time with now that Line of Duty is over, check out crime writer Adrian McKinty’s outstanding Sean Duffy series, which is all about a Catholic cop in Northern Ireland during the 80s. Smug, self-satisfied and seemingly convinced that she was too smart to be caught, Gill Biggeloe was the weasel’s weasel, a woman who offered hope with one hand, only to quickly snatch it away. “We’re witnesses not suspects, now stop making a tit of yourself and piss off.” DI Kate Fleming lays down the law. So what did you think? Was it a satisfying conclusion or one with too many plot holes? Were you glad Steve and Kate saved the day, and did you believe Ted’s tale? Finally, it’s been a pleasure reading all your theories over the past six weeks, thanks for reading, commenting and pointing out the errors. See you back here next time provided there’s no urgent exit required …