Thousands of households face energy bill increases of up to £362 a year because more than 60 fixed-price gas and electricity deals are about to end. Expiring deals from 13 different suppliers, including four of the “big six” players – British Gas, EDF, npower and Scottish Power – would add an estimated £42m to the energy bills of almost 193,000 households, assuming they all did nothing. The 61 fixed deals typically end on 31 May, and customers on these tariffs will be automatically rolled on to their suppliers’ default tariffs, according to the price comparison website uSwitch.com. It added that these consumers needed to take action and find a cheaper deal. The average “rollover” price increase has been put at £216 a year, but two expiring npower deals – Online Energy Fix May 2019 and Online Broker Fix May 2019 – would result in hikes of £362 and £343 respectively, assuming a household with medium annual consumption on a dual-fuel tariff paying by monthly direct debit. Part of the reason many of the increases are so large is that Ofgem’s new, higher price cap – which sets an upper limit for default tariffs – came into force on 1 April. The regulator’s controversial price ceiling only came into existence at the beginning of January, and was designed to protect around 11 million customers on default tariffs, which are often very poor value. However, on 1 April, the level of the cap was upped by £117 a year, or 10%, to £1,254 for a typical default tariff customer. All the big energy firms have increased their default tariffs up to the maximum the new cap allows. Other suppliers with expiring fixed deals include First Utility (now Shell Energy), Sainsbury’s Energy and Utility Warehouse. Sarah Broomfield at uSwitch.com said default tariffs had “skyrocketed” after the price cap was increased, adding: “The good news is that many energy plans on the market were not affected by the price cap and are currently much cheaper.” It is estimated there are currently about 30 energy deals priced below £1,000 a year, and more than 150 that cost less than the price cap. The switching website said the cheapest deal on the market as of 28 May, priced at £873, was from a Leicester-based company called Outfox the Market, which launched in September 2017.