How would you feel if a council bill for £146,000 landed on your doormat? This monster demand – for £146,257, to be precise – was sent to Lloyd Onuoha, a 62-year-old nurse, by Southwark council in London. Onuoha is the leaseholder of a two-bedroom flat on an estate run by the council, and this is the estimated bill for refurbishing his tower block. But just to be clear, that’s not £146,257 shared between everyone – that’s his share of the cost. The gigantic bill will almost certainly lead to him losing the property. It’s the highest major refurbishment works bill that the Leasehold Knowledge Partnership – a charity that helps leaseholders – has ever seen. And it could be viewed as a warning to council tenants thinking of using the right-to-buy scheme to purchase their home at a discount. Before going ahead, they need to bear in mind that a few years down the line, they could well be hit with a demand to contribute towards costly repairs or maintenance, particularly if it’s an old tower block. Onuoha bought his flat on the Tustin estate in Peckham in 2004 using right to buy. Back then, the flat was valued at £93,000 – it’s worth about £250,000 now. In 2010, he moved out of the property and started letting it out, as it was not big enough for his growing family. Onuoha says: “The flat is in a high-rise block. The whole project is about £27m and, as a leaseholder, my share is nearly £147,000. The bill was a terrible shock. We’ve had major works bills of £5,000 or so before, but nothing like this.” Southwark council is planning a major regeneration of the Tustin estate, with work including brickwork and concrete repairs, balcony and roof work, drainage repairs, window and door replacement, and asbestos removal. There are 22 leaseholders who own property on the estate, which is home to a total of around 225 flats spread over three tower blocks. According to Southwark council records, 20 leaseholders have received estimated bills of up to £151,000. The other two received bills of £12,000 or £15,000 as they are in the first five years of their lease. Only two of the estate’s 22 leaseholders are recorded as living on the estate, with the remainder letting out their properties. Once the bills are finalised, leaseholders will be invoiced in March 2020. Onuoha simply can’t afford it. “The council has given us the option for it to buy the flat back. It’s more or less the only option – no one else will buy it with a £146,000 bill on the way,” he says. “Another option is we move back there and the council would buy it back for 40% of the value of the flat. That’s terrible. How can anyone feel good about this? Even if they reduce the bill, it’s unlikely to be to anything reasonable – it would still be about £100,000 or something.” Southwark council rejects any suggestion that it neglected the estate in the past, and says it saved up work to do in one package to take advantage of economies of scale. It says it has consulted with residents about the work and offers “extensive payment options”. For those leaseholders who live in their property, the council has offered to buy their home for 40% of its market value and offer them a secure tenancy. Another option for owner-occupiers is an interest-free loan for up to 72 months. But paying £146,257 over 72 months would mean monthly payments of £2,031 – unaffordable for most workers. Southwark is also offering to buy back properties of both residents and landlords at full market value. Stephanie Cryan, a Southwark council cabinet member for housing management and modernisation, says: “Unfortunately, right to buy does not allow councils to means-test tenants when they wish to exercise this right, and they are often those who are least able to afford what can be extremely high bills when estates need repairs. “Despite this, we have some of the best repayment options for leaseholders in the country. Most leaseholders in this case are not resident leaseholders but private landlords. If they were not to pay their share of the estate bills, council tenants would have to pick up the cost as well as the share they have paid in their rent. “I feel genuinely sorry for any leaseholder faced with these high bills, and we do our very best to support them with the options we offer to them.” Southwark has sent section 20 consultation documents to leaseholders on the estate. Normally this notice would give leaseholders the right to nominate contractors and obtain alternative quotes for the work. However, because Southwark has a “qualifying long term agreement” (QLTA) in place with an existing contractor, leaseholders can only make observations rather than suggest other contractors. The Leasehold Knowledge Partnership is heavily critical of Southwark council and suggests QLTAs rarely offer value for money. Sebastian O’Kelly, a trustee of the charity, says: “This is by far the highest major works bill that we have encountered, and it is no surprise that it involves local authority leasehold.” He adds: “There is no contingency fund in social housing blocks, so the private leaseholders face huge bills that come out of the blue. Sometimes councils regard private leaseholders as a useful source of revenue to improve their housing stock.” O’Kelly points to a case in Oxford, covered by the Guardian, where 50 leaseholders received bills for £50,000 each in 2016. A tribunal eventually ruled that the major works were an enhancement, not repairs, so the council was liable for the costs.