Kylian Mbappé surprised the Ligue 1 awards ceremony audience on Sunday night by hinting that his future may lie away from Paris Saint-Germain. Despite pledging his future to the club following yet another early Champions League exit in March, when they were knocked out by Manchester United in the last 16, the striker cast doubt on his intentions for next season. When collecting his Ligue 1 player of the year award he spoke of wanting “more responsibility” in the future, adding it would be either at PSG or “somewhere else”. The 20-year-old, who has scored 32 goals in Ligue 1 this season, has been sharing the front line at PSG with Uruguay striker Edinson Cavani and Brazil’s Neymar. “It’s a turning point, it was the moment to say it,” Mbappé was reported stating in L’Equipe on Monday. “I am whole. When I say something, I mean it. I said it. If it is at PSG, that’s good, if it is elsewhere, it is elsewhere.“ L’Equipe published a transcript of the speech in which Mbappé said: “It’s a very important moment for me, I come to a turning point in my career. I have discovered a lot here, and I feel it is maybe the moment to have more responsibility. “I hope that can perhaps be at Paris Saint-Germain, that would be a great pleasure. Or maybe elsewhere with a new project.” Mbappé’s departure would be a huge blow for PSG, but it would, though, allow them to stabilise their finances after they were probed for an alleged breach of the financial fair play rules. Proceedings in that case were halted in March when the court of arbitration for sport upheld an appeal over a procedural error from governing body Uefa. The Frenchman’s influence at the Ligue 1 champions grew when Neymar was sidelined with a foot injury this year, but he has always said he would love to play at Real Madrid. Meanwhile, the Spanish club have agreed a contract extension with midfielder Toni Kroos. The new deal ties the Germany international to the Bernabéu until June 2023. Kroos joined Real from Bayern Munich in 2014 and has won 11 trophies during his five years at the club, including three Champions League titles and one La Liga crown.