The Duke and Duchess of Sussex showed their newborn son to the world on Wednesday, with Meghan declaring: “It’s magic, it’s pretty amazing. I have the two best guys in the world so I’m really happy.” Speaking in St George’s Hall at Windsor Castle as Prince Harry cradled their two-day-old child, she said of the baby: “He has the sweetest temperament, he’s really calm.” Harry said: “I don’t know who he gets that from.” The couple have not yet announced the name they have chosen for the seventh in line to the throne. By tradition, he could have at least one title, the Earl of Dumbarton, taken from one of the subsidiary titles of his father. The Queen is expected to meet the new baby – her eighth great-grandchild – for the first time at Windsor Castle later on Wednesday. He was born at 05.26am on Monday, weighing 3.3kg (7lb 3oz). Meghan said on Wednesday: “He’s just been the dream, so it’s been a special couple of days.” Meghan revealed that the Duke of Edinburgh may have been the first senior royal to see their son. “We just bumped into the duke as we were walking by, which was so nice. So it’ll be a nice moment to introduce the baby to more family, and my mum’s with us as well,” she said. Harry laughed as he said: “Another great-grandchild.” Harry said of their son the couple were looking forward to spending some “precious time with him as he slowly, slowly starts to grow up”. As they showed their son’s face to the camera, Harry joked: “He’s already got a little bit of facial hair as well. Wonderful.” The new royal, wwaddled in a white blanket and wearing a delicate white knitted hat, appeared to sleep throughout his first official photocall, with his father regularly looking down at him. Meghan, smiling throughout, said both parents were grateful for the support of the public, adding: “Thank you everybody for all the well wishes and kindness, it just means so much.” The baby made his debut behind closed doors, with a small press pool of only one reporter, one photographer, and three camera operators, as well as the couple’s own private photographer and a royal household press officer photographer. Asked who the baby resembled, Meghan said: “We’re still trying to figure that out.” Harry said it was great being a parent. “Parenting is amazing. It’s only been two-and-a-half, three days, but we’re just so thrilled to have our own little bundle of joy.” It has not been confirmed whether the baby was born at the couple’s Windsor residence, Frogmore Cottage. Some reports have claimed the delivery took place at the private Portland hospital in central London. There has been criticism from some quarters over the couple’s handling of publicity over the birth, with some complaining that the royal PR machine took the media by surprise with the announcement that the duchess had gone into labour, eight hours after she had actually given birth. Palace sources have said technical difficulties prevented crucial emails being sent to the media earlier. The Daily Telegraph’s associate editor Camilla Tominey wrote that the “palaver smacks more of a blunder than conspiracy”. But, like others, she questioned whether the announcements had been timed to “catch the US morning news shows”. Some have suggested the couple are preoccupied with US outlets. The Mail reported that a coveted spot on the photocall had been granted to CBS, the channel fronted by one of Meghan’s best friends, Gayle King. It said the decision to include a CBS camera alongside one British TV camera, one photographer and one reporter, had come “as a surprise to British television channels including the BBC and ITV – not to mention many at Buckingham Palace”. Meanwhile, George Clooney, who was a guest at the couple’s wedding, said he hoped for “kinder” treatment towards the duchess now that she had become a mother. The US actor and his lawyer wife, Amal, who have holidayed with the royal couple in Italy, told the Associated Press: “It’s never about the media following you around, because that, in part, if you’re a royal, that’s part of what you have to do. “It’s the other versions of it: going to interview people’s parents, that kind of stuff. It starts to step into a really dark place. “I think people should be a little kinder. She’s a young woman who just had a baby.”