1) There was plenty of top-quality snooker at the Crucible last week, but there was no shortage of comedy moments. Kyren Wilson potted the white from a break, which he will not be putting in his showreel. Wilson then put John Virgo to shame with a trick fluked shot going into the pocket, although David Gilbert got his own back with something a little more choreographed. Gary Wilson’s snooker on Judd Trump was just majestic. 2) It’s play-off semi-final time across the Football League, which means, naturally, a careful review of Watford against Leicester. Ipswich versus Bolton back in 2000 was pretty tasty, too. The key thing in play-off semi-finals is to keep it tight ... unless you’re Swindon or Sheffield United. And reprising last week’s ups-and-downs theme, here’s that Jimmy Glass goal in table-top game form. 3) While play-off hopefuls eye promotion, others lament relegation. On which subject here’s an urban hymn from Cardiff: Neil Warnock’s intense touchline stare set to the video of The Verve’s Bittersweet Symphony. And more musical fun, with the week’s most talked-about goal: Alexander-Arnold and Origi v the Please Sir theme tune. Bittersweet Symphony feat. Neil Warnock pic.twitter.com/eKJxOpAURY 4) The Premier League drama will be revved up to the max as either Anfield or the Amex crowns the champions. Manchester City won the most dramatic title of the Premier League when Sergio Agüüüeeeeerrrroooooo scored the winner against QPR back in 2012. In Spain, Miroslav Djukic missed the penalty which would have won Deportivo the title in 1994. What we really need is a play-off between Liverpool and Manchester City, like the one Bologna and Internazionale played out in 1964 after finishing level on points. 5) Newcastle Falcons were relegated from the Premiership last weekend but at least they showed what they were capable of with one of the tries of the season. At Allianz Park meanwhile, pity poor Gareth Steenson of Exeter, playing against the bigger boys. 6) Jofra Archer has already given a taster of what England can expect from their new searingly fast bowler; Ireland were the first victims, before Pakistan found out about his bouncers and direct hits. 1) The highest-scoring college basketball game of all time, Troy beating Devry by a whopping 258-141 in 1992. 2) A jaunty song for Jimmy Glass, after his last-day heroics were spotlighted last week. 3) Last-day nailbiters you say? For Arsenal fans there can be no other. Spotters’ badges: GrahamClayton, Ollib, SonnyDay. Do subscribe if you fancy. Do subscribe if you fancy.