Ben Foakes has a knack of delivering on debut. And so while he may not be part of England’s World Cup plans, the wicketkeeper with the brightest of smiles still ensured this all-important summer did not begin with frowns all round. Given the opprobrium surrounding the Alex Hales affair leading into this one-off ODI against Ireland, Eoin Morgan needed a response on the field; a reminder that, while seven first-team players may have been missing due to rest or injury, there is still a solid base beneath the world’s No 1-ranked side. What followed threatened to undermine this notion, however, as in pursuit of 199 in a 45-over game England stumbled to 101 for six in the 27th. Josh Little, rather than Jofra Archer, was the bowler enjoying the dream debut with four wickets and, with Tom Curran for company at No8, Foakes had his work cut out. The gloveman’s temperament had already been established, of course, with a century on his Test debut in Sri Lanka over the winter. Here, despite knowing he will make way when Jos Buttler returns, he delivered an unbeaten 61 that, allied with 47 not out from Curran, took England to a four-wicket win with 18 balls to spare. Both men had brushes with disaster along the way. Foakes should have been given out lbw on 37, while Curran was dropped by Lorcan Tucker in the deep on 39. Nevertheless their stand of 98 in 15 overs was ice-cool in its execution, not least given the top-order collapse that had preceded it. “Three or four of us batted poorly. But we found a way to win today, which is nice,” said Morgan. “Ben Foakes batted superbly on debut and he and Tom Curran got us over the line.” Morgan had himself been removed for a third-ball duck when gloving a brutish lifter from Little behind – a third victim for the Dubliner after removing James Vince and Dawid Malan for scores of 18 and 24 (the latter seemingly hampered by a groin issue). With Joe Root trapped lbw for seven by Tim Murtagh in familiar fashion and Joe Denly’s first ODI innings in 10 years ended by Boyd Rankin it sparked fears of an upset to match last summer’s defeat by Scotland. These were only mildly allayed by David Willey adding 20 from No 7 before becoming Little’s fourth. If the batting disappointed in the main – Ireland’s catching deserves credit here – the bowlers at least impressed. The debate over England’s World Cup seamers was never going to be settled by this match but it is clear that some of those threatened by Archer’s fast-tracked promotion are not going simply to wave him through. To Archer first. The 24-year-old admitted to nerves before the toss – delayed by two hours due to a damp outfield – and after being thrown the new ball, he saw his first delivery in international cricket driven square for four by Paul Stirling. An initial spell of four overs none for 21 was tidy enough, though. His speeds were promising, touching 90mph, as he strove to find the right length. But it was his second spell that caught the eye, both through his variations and a scorching yorker that detonated Mark Adair’s off-stump in spectacular fashion. But for all the delight of watching Archer’s effortless action, he was not the standout among Morgan’s attack, with the Surrey pairing of Liam Plunkett and Curran sharing seven wickets for 70 runs, splitting the runs in half and the former picking up the extra wicket. Plunkett’s worth has been debated of late amid scrutiny over his recent bowling speeds, while some have pondered whether Curran, for all his abundance of skill, offers a significant point of difference. Here Curran kept his tricks up his sleeve and settled in on a probing line, breaking an opening stand of 55 between Stirling and William Porterfield when the former chipped to a diving Archer at mid-on. Plunkett, fresh from technical adjustments and bowling in the mid 80s, then capitalised, snaring Porterfield down the leg side before a smart slower ball that stuck in the surface saw Tucker chip to extra cover. When Curran claimed his second thanks to a flying catch by Denly at backward point, it sent the dangerous Kevin O’Brien packing and left Ireland 77 for four. From there it was over to England’s two leg-spinners. Adil Rashid claimed one for 27 from his allocated nine overs – Gary Wilson edging a googly to slip – while Denly, playing his first ODI for 10 years, also claimed his maiden scalp. There was some debate over it. Foakes stumped Andy Balbirnie when the right-hander missed a sweep. But with the wicketkeeper waiting a good while for the back leg to lift, Irish voices in the press box felt it stretched the concept of fair play and comparisons with a Mankad dismissal followed. With Curran and Plunkett snuffing out the tail England’s mission looked straightforward. Only Willey went wicketless but it was more misfortune than misfiring. The same cannot be said for England’s top order, however.