Remember Total Wipeout? Of course you do. At the time, it seemed like nothing short of the end of days; a shrieking, brightly-coloured Saturday teatime cluster-headache comprised exclusively of people slipping up and falling over and bouncing off things while swanee whistles and fart noises played in the background. To watch Total Wipeout was to feel as though a stranger had scooped out your cerebrum, splattered it on the floor and started to tapdance in the mess. Flinch makes Total Wipeout look like The Seventh Continent. Flinch is easy enough to describe – it’s a new Netflix game show where contestants are placed in stressful situations and punished if they visibly react – but almost impossible to explain. What is Flinch for? Who is Flinch for? Why does it simultaneously feel like the longest and shortest television programme ever made? Who decided that an integral component should be Seann Walsh honking on a hay bale? Am I being punished? Does Flinch exist as a cruel cosmic prank to penalise me for the sum total of all my past mistakes? Because, if it is, it seems quite excessive. Essentially Fear Factor (if Fear Factor were part of a Clockwork Orange-style aversion program for dimwitted sub-TOWIE gits) Flinch operates by strapping contestants into a number of elaborate tableaus and waiting for them to muck up. A whistle goes off next to their face; if they flinch, they’re submerged in water. An anonymous gunman fires paintballs at their head; if they flinch, they receive an electric shock. A portion of rancid meat is passed under their nose; if they acknowledge the smell in any way, someone clocks them in the ribs with a cattle prod. That’s it. That’s the entire show. It’s like a Saw movie, if Saw had been designed as a pre-wilderness Justin Lee Collins ITV2 vehicle. Nobody ever explains why they’re taking part, either. Every contestant on Flinch has been culled from the overlap of two Venn diagrams labelled ‘wacky’ and ‘desperate’ – they all look like they were born specifically to make you sigh in dismay the moment you realise you have to share a train carriage with them – but none of them stand to win anything meaningful from their appearance. If there’s a grand prize on Flinch, it comes a distant second to what may well be the stupidest rule of any television series in history. Let me explain. The contestants are arbitrarily split into three groups, each headed by comedians Desiree Burch, Lloyd Griffith and Seann Walsh. When a contestant flinches, a point is added to the comedian’s score. At the end of the episode, the comedian with the highest score is forced into a hellish flinch-based tableau of their own. In essence, they have to stay still to protect their leader. You see the problem with this, right? Imagine you’re hauled into a television studio and told that, by failing to remain tranquil, you will actively increase the likelihood of causing Seann Walsh physical harm. You wouldn’t even try to restrain yourself, would you? Nobody would. Your entire motivation to do well would be completely shot. You’d just stand there jerking around like meat on a wire, screaming things like ‘THIS IS FOR WHAT YOU DID TO YOUR NICE GIRLFRIEND, YOU PIG’ and ‘YOU ARE HISTORY’S WORST MONSTER SEANN WALSH’ and ‘THAT SECOND N IS AN AFFECTATION’ until he ended up having fireworks shot at his face at the end of the episode, wouldn’t you. The whole concept of Flinch is built on the colossal misapprehension that anybody on Earth is even remotely on Seann Walsh’s side. More than anything, though, Flinch just isn’t as good at all the other things it wants to be. It aims for the horror of Fear Factor, but only wants its participants to blink rather than puke. It aims for the nihilistic camaraderie of Jackass, even though everybody involved looks like they’ve just met for the first time. It aims for the self-conscious silliness of Total Wipeout, but can’t even summon that show’s instinct for comic flair. Instead it just sort of sits there, wasting your time while you edge closer to death. Just try not to react too much as you realise how completely inessential Flinch is. That’s what the show wants.