Alex Hales will return to cricket with Nottinghamshire on Friday for the first steps of what his club have called “a long road back” to redemption. The opener was removed from England’s preliminary World Cup squad on Monday morning in response to the 21-day ban for recreational drug use that was first revealed by the Guardian last week and expires on Thursday. But while Hales has been left devastated by the call, it has been decided he must get back to playing as soon as possible following talks with Nottinghamshire’s chief executive, Lisa Pursehouse, and director of cricket, Mick Newell, on Tuesday. It means on the day he was meant to be facing Ireland in a one-off ODI in Malahide – the start of England’s build-up to their World Cup opener against South Africa on 30 May – Hales will instead take on Durham at Grantham CC in the Royal London Cup. In announcing this comeback – the white-ball specialist’s first game of the English summer after sitting out six 50-over matches while banned for a second such violation of his career – Nottinghamshire made it clear his off-field behaviour has been unacceptable. While immune from the sack under the terms of the England and Wales Cricket Board’s recreational drug policy, Hales must now spend the remainder of the season making amends if his contract is to be renewed when it expires at the end of the season. A club statement read: “Following his withdrawal from all England squads this week, we have met with Alex to express our concerns and to reiterate that such actions cannot continue. “The meeting was open, honest and constructive and a way forward was agreed between both parties. Alex has expressed a great deal of regret and contrition for his actions and he has ultimately paid a heavy price. “He accepts that the position he finds himself in is of his own making. He knows he has a long road back to redeem himself in the eyes of many people, but that now has to be his aim. “After much deliberation, we believe it’s in the best interests of all concerned for him to get back to playing cricket for Nottinghamshire as quickly as possible.” Hales, who on Monday accused England of reneging on assurances he would not be dropped in response to the ban, will face one of his international team-mates, with fast bowler Mark Wood due to play for Durham as he steps up his return from recent ankle discomfort.