Alexei Ratmansky says he’s been making dances to the music of Shostakovich ever since he was a student at the Bolshoi Ballet school. “I’ve always felt this very personal connection. It’s hard to explain but when it plays, my brain responds. I have steps in my head, I see images and drama. Even in Shostakovich’s symphonies, which some people consider heavy, I find a dramatic sense to the melodies that is very beautiful.” During his 25 years as a choreographer, Ratmansky reckons he has set nearly a dozen works to Shostakovich scores, the most recent of which is his acclaimed Shostakovich Trilogy, comprising Symphony No 9, the Chamber Symphony and Concerto No 1 for Piano Trumpet and Strings. Performed by San Francisco Ballet in London this month, it is regarded by Ratmansky as his most personal statement yet about the composer, one in which he’s been able to parse the complexities of its formal invention most thoroughly, to revel in its layers of melancholy, lyricism, satire and farce. A busy work schedule makes the choreographer hard to track down. Talking via Skype, Ratmansky explains that as a student it was the simple danceability of the music that inspired him. “Shostakovich loved ballet and knew it very well – he played piano for dancers and taught music at the ballet school. He also had a real love of popular dance music – marches, polkas and folk.” It was only slowly, as Ratmansky began to learn more about the composer’s life and times, that he began to feel the creative pull of Shostakovich’s personality. Around 2002, he began researching two ballets that Shostakovich created with the experimental Soviet choreographer Fyodor Lopukhov in the early 1930s. The Bolt and The Bright Stream had been part of a sparkily pioneering movement to reinvent ballet for communist Russia, yet several decades later the two were all but lost. Ratmansky, excited by “how much potential was there”, used his choreographic imagination and archival research to bring them back to the stage. He was impressed by the wit and invention with which the two collaborators had managed to pit themselves against the diktats of political correctness. But he realised how precarious a line they were treading between artistic freedom and brute survival. The criteria by which Stalin and his cultural apparatchiks made the distinction between “true” communist art and bourgeois formalism were constantly shifting. The Bright Stream was admired when it premiered in St Petersburg, but in Moscow the following year it was denounced as “ballet falsehood”. The librettist was sent to the gulag, Lopukhov was exiled to the provinces, and Shostakovich never wrote a full ballet score again. The more Ratmanksy learned about the composer, the more he realised how fraught his career had been. He would be denounced several times and would sleep with a suitcase ready packed, awaiting the dread dawn knock. Yet still he continued to push his music forward, experimenting with new forms, playing with tonal nuance to muddle his Soviet censors. His Ninth Symphony, composed to celebrate Russia’s victory in the second world war, was “a slap in the face of what was expected” says Ratmansky with pleasure – since in place of the required triumphalism, Shostakovich delivered music of a mocking acerbic jauntiness. Shostakovich experimented because his art demanded it, but he did so, too, in memory of all those who had died for their integrity. “The majority of my symphonies are tombstones,” he once said, and Ratmansky has nothing but admiration for the risks he ran. “He realised how powerful a tool his music was. At times, people felt that his was the only voice in opposition to the state.” In Trilogy, without imposing an actual story he has attempted to embody the unfolding emotional and political dramas of Shostakovich’s life: the sensuous pleasures of his love affairs and marriages, the hardening threats to his life, the rapture of creative inspiration. “It’s by far my most political work,” – one he admits he has only been able to make as a mature artist. As a young man in the early 1990s, Ratmansky says he had no interest in politics: “We were inoculated from an early age, we didn’t believe anything in the news was true.” He was exhilarated by the culture of openness that emerged towards the end of the decade, when “suddenly we had the taste of freedom, we felt the wind behind our back”. In 2004, when he was appointed director of the Bolshoi Ballet, he was able to present previously forbidden western ballets, to attack the dead wood of bureaucratic tradition. But he says his own political consciousness did not come into focus until more recently. “These are turbulent times,” he says, both of Putin’s Russia and Trump’s United States, where he now lives – and it makes him value even more the courage and the necessity of Shostakovich’s acts of rebellion. “More than any other composer, his music reflects his life, his situation, his country and his times,” Ratmansky affirms. Yet while he’s tried to communicate the historical context in his choreography, he insists that it’s the music that comes first. Presenting not one but three Shostakovich ballets in a single programme he hopes to immerse his audience within the composer’s music, to make its riches sing through the medium of his own steps. “I want to take my audience deep into the meaning of the music. Balanchine really helped the public to understand Stravinsky with ballets like Agon, and if I can help spectators to appreciate the music of Shostakovich more fully, then that’s a real result.” San Francisco Ballet is at Sadler’s Wells, London, from 29 May to 8 June. Programme A: Shostakovich Trilogy is on 29-30 May and 2 June.