I am struggling to get my head round the use of the term “overeducated” in reference to graduates (A third of graduates are overqualified says ONS, 30 April). The fact that many people in the first 10 years of their career have higher qualifications than their current job requires is because it is rather early in their working lives to decide what skills they will need, and the fact that many immigrants are in jobs unsuited to their high qualifications is surely less a matter of overeducation and more one of undervaluing and prejudice in the employment market. But, above all, I struggle with the idea, much pushed by recent governments, that education is, and should be, purely a matter of preparation for a job. Had I been “evaluated” 10 years after graduation, having taken time out to have children, I am sure I would have seemed overqualified, but luckily I knew that the higher the level of a mother’s qualifications, the better her children’s life chances. Later I went on to have a career as a teacher and then as a university lecturer, and in retirement I am keeping my mind sharp with further study. Education is for life, not just for employment, and no education is ever too much. Jill WallisAston Clinton, Buckinghamshire • The suggestion that it is possible for individuals to be “overeducated” could only have been made by those who have a narrow, utilitarian view of the purpose of education. While universities have a responsibility to provide their students with advanced knowledge of their subject, and in some instances should indicate how this may be effectively deployed, they have an equally important responsibility to develop versatile critical thinkers. In his seminal work The Idea of a University, published in 1852, Cardinal John Newman proposed that the purpose of a university education was to encourage students “to think and to reason and to compare and to discriminate and to analyse”. With these skills he believed that graduates would be well prepared to make a positive impact on their communities in whatever capacity they might serve. The changing nature of employment and the challenges we face in today’s society will increasingly require individuals who are adaptable, and capable of making a critical appraisal of complex situations. Could it be that it is not the level of education that is disturbing those who contributed to the ONS report, but the possibility that universities may be producing increasing numbers of graduates able to challenge the status quo?Professor Richard RoseUniversity of Northampton • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition