Mick Schumacher has said his father Michael remains his greatest inspiration as he attempts to emulate the career of the seven-time Formula One world champion. Schumacher, 20, will be racing in the Formula 2 series at this weekend’s Spanish Grand Prix after joining the Ferrari driver academy this year – the team for whom his father won five of his world championships – as he pursues his ambition of competing in Formula One. When asked which drivers he looked up to on the current grid, the 20-year-old was open minded and instead chose to specifically reference his father, who remains in recovery after a skiing accident in 2013. “I can learn from everyone,” he said. “There is no one person I will go to and talk to and try to be as him, the one person I would want to is my dad.” He added that while it was difficult to watch his father’s races, they were motivational. “It’s never easy,” he said. “What my dad did was extraordinary. I appreciate it more every day.” Michael Schumacher won five consecutive championships for Ferrari between 2000 and 2004 and Mick revealed his father’s close involvement in his racing began when he was a child. “I was three years old. I had a go-kart that my dad had on a leash so I would not go too quick.” Schumacher Jr began karting in 2008, graduated to single-seaters in German Formula 4 in 2015 and has since made steady progress. He spent two seasons in F3, winning the title last year before signing to the Ferrari driver academy in January. Speaking in Barcelona it was clear that he shared his father’s love of, and commitment to, the sport. “It is a passion; we love doing it; we love the competition; we want to see who is the best at it,” he said. “Trying to find the limit of yourself and the limit of the car and sometimes to exceed it and see the real limit. If you find that sweet spot and are able to repeat it, it is one of the best feelings. If you do a good lap you know it is a good lap, if you get that feeling it is addictive, you want more and more.” Schumacher, is racing for the Prema team in F2 this season. He finished eighth and sixth in the opening two races in Bahrain but had a more difficult meeting in Baku, spinning out of the first race. “It was a mistake that was going to happen someday,” he said. “I have learned from it. It won’t happen again hopefully and I will take that as a lesson and try and grow from that.” He is currently ninth in the championship and is eager to use every possible avenue open to him to improve. He revealed that he enjoyed watching races from previous years to ascertain the best strategies and overtaking possibilities, an attention to detail for which his father was famous. He is also using his Ferrari connection to the best effect. “We have very close communication with engineers and the drivers are very helpful too,” he said, “Seb [Vettel] and Charles [Leclerc] for example, they talk with us and give us tips. I like to go and speak with the drivers and try to see their expectations of the weekend and my expectations for the weekend and try and see how I can prepare myself even better.” Schumacher made his debut in a contemporary F1 car at the first in-season test in Bahrain in April and set the second fastest time of the day, behind only Red Bull’s Max Verstappen. As a Ferrari academy driver there is the potential for him to take part in an F1 practice session for the Ferrari-affiliated Alfa Romeo. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Elsewhere,the Brazilian president, Jair Bolsonaro, has said that as of next year the Brazilian Grand Prix will be held in Rio de Janeiro. São Paulo has hosted the race at the Interlagos circuit since 1990 and still has a contract to run the race in 2020. However Bolsonaro said it was no longer viable to hold the race there and that the new meeting would be financed by private money. “The management of F1 has decided to maintain a grand prix in Brazil, but São Paulo has become impractical because of the event’s public financial support and the debt that exists over there,” he said. “The new racetrack will be built in six or seven months.” Organisers in São Paolo however remain committed to hosting the race in 2020, citing their contract with F1.