Eintracht Frankfurt’s supporters were still bellowing out deafening praise long after the final whistle had been blown but, as the team lined up in front of the ultras to show their appreciation, all who lingered in this arena knew the momentum in this tie had been stolen by Chelsea. Maurizio Sarri would warn of the threat the Germans will pose back in London, but his side had passed the first real test of this schlep of a Europa League campaign. They may have cursed an inability to translate a dominant second-half display into an advantage to show for their efforts, but they could still point to Pedro’s away goal, pilfered at the end of an awkward first period, and the belief that, even with Eden Hazard granted less than half an hour on the field, they appear to have the measure of these opponents. Eintracht’s players were cramping before the end, labouring as a slog of a season overcame them. Had their captain, David Abraham, been more accurate with a late free header then they might have claimed a lead upon which they could cling in London next week, but it would have been scarcely merited. They had been overrun after the interval with Ruben Loftus-Cheek freed from back trouble and imperious in stamping his authority across midfield, and Jorginho tidy and, for once, obviously influential. With N’Golo Kanté busy alongside the pair, there was an enviable balance and even rare efficiency to Chelsea’s midfield. “Loftus-Cheek is a very important player for us and has improved a lot during the season,” said Sarri, whose decision to rest Hazard ended up appearing justified. “When he is at the top, physically, he’s a very important player. He’s always in trouble with his back, and it’s not easy for him to have training with consistency. But in this match he was really fit.” Eintracht never came to terms with his gliding, powerful runs through the middle, with Jorginho’s ability to pick a swift pass and cut out opponents providing space in which the 23-year-old could thrive. The England midfielder had helped shrug the visitors from their rather timid first-half performance back when the ultras’ din had been at its vociferous best, and Eintracht’s intent at its most menacing. It had been Loftus-Cheek’s burst and shot, fizzed marginally wide, which roused Chelsea. Moments later, he was there to take advantage of the hosts’ inability to scramble away a corner, controlling the ball under pressure from a trio of opponents before calmly slipping a pass to Pedro at his side. The Spaniard, an unsung hero in his team’s progress to the last four, took a touch before ripping his shot through a muddle of bodies and beyond Kevin Trapp. That could prove a pivotal moment in the tie, though Chelsea, in truth, should have added to their goals tally after the interval. Trapp, once of Paris Saint-Germain, would deny Loftus-Cheek and tip David Luiz’s free-kick from distance on to the crossbar, before thwarting the Brazilian again as he guided a sharp header towards the near-post from Hazard’s set piece. Doubt rippled through the home ranks in that period as opponents sliced through them at will on the counter. They must fear Chelsea will be more ruthless at Stamford Bridge. Eintracht, too, should be bolstered for the return with Ante Rebic back after suspension – his replacement, Mijat Gacinovic, was ineffective – and even Sébastien Haller may potentially be involved after injury. Their restoration would benefit Luka Jovic, who showed only flashes of his quality in a reshaped lineup. The Serb, coveted by Europe’s elite clubs, had forced the hosts ahead after Olivier Giroud, with whom he is competing to be this competition’s leading scorer, had surrendered possession deep inside Frankfurt territory. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Three passes through midfield liberated Filip Kostic down the left, and his rasping centre was met by a stooping Jovic, between centre-halves but standing beyond the penalty spot, who placed his header delicately across Kepa Arrizabalaga to skim in off the far post. It was the 21-year-old striker’s 26th goal of the season, as many as he had managed in his previous five campaigns combined, and ninth in this competition. It would be his only opportunity of the night. The parade in front of the supporters after the final whistle had ostensibly been to thank the fans for their backing during a resurgent Europa League campaign, with Eintracht unbeaten at home in the competition. Yet it also seemed like a collective acceptance that, after seeing off Internazionale, Marseille, Shakhtar Donetsk and Benfica, they had finally met their match. “Everything is still possible,” said their manager, Adi Hütter. “After the goalless draw here against Inter, no one thought we could go to Milan and win. That’s how we have to act in London: be confident, brave and courageous.”