Not all chickpeas are created equal. Many people I know say they don’t like them, but I’d argue that perhaps they haven’t tried the right ones. Some pre-cooked, tinned chickpeas can be hard as bullets, so I plump for jarred: the pricy Spanish ones if I am feeling flush orthe cheaper, tall jars from my local corner shop. As a rule, I find they are more carefully cooked and expertly seasoned. Or have a go at cooking your own – there are few more affordable meals. Chickpeas are always in my kitchen, and these dishes show off their best side. Go on – give chickpeas a chance. This lemony, coconut and herb-topped stew has a freshness I crave, but it is hearty and filling at the same time. You add the halved, squeezed lemons to the stew as it cooks, which imparts a great, citrussy zing. If you have leftovers, remove the lemon skins before storing, otherwise the flavour will become too intense. Serves 4Prep 15 minCook 30 min Coconut or groundnut oil 1 bunch spring onions, thinly sliced2 garlic cloves, chopped1 small bunch coriander, stalks chopped and leaves picked 2 tsp turmeric2 x 400g tins chickpeas, drained200ml hot vegetable stock 1 x 400ml tin coconut milk 2 unwaxed lemons, zested and cut in half 2 shallots, peeled, halved and very thinly sliced1 small handful basil, leaves torn 1 small handful mint, leaves picked1 pinch dried chilli flakes (optional) Put a large saucepan over a medium heat, then add a little oil, the spring onions, garlic and coriander stalks. Cook for about five minutes, or until the spring onion is soft and sweet. Add the turmeric and cook for a couple of minutes to toast and release the oils. Add the chickpeas, stock and coconut milk, the zest and juice of both lemons, and the squeezed lemon halves to the pan. Bring to a boil and simmer on a medium-low heat for 20 minutes, until slightly thickened and a vivid yellow. In a separate pan, heat three tablespoons of oil, and fry the shallots over a medium-low heat until golden and slightly crisp. Remove with a slotted spoon and drain on kitchen paper. Once the stew is ready, scoop out the lemon halves, stir through most of the herbs and serve topped with the crisp shallots, chilli flakes and remaining herbs. A variation of this goes into our oven at least once a week. I pinched this way of cooking halloumi from the brilliant cook Georgina Hayden’s new book, Taverna. Ras el hanout is a north-African spice mix that I always have on hand, but if you don’t have it, try a mixture of ground cinnamon, cumin, and smoked paprika or chilli powder. Vegans could swap the halloumi for a block of firm tofu rubbed with more ras al hanout and olive oil. Prep 20 minCook 20 minServes 4 2 x 400g tins chickpeas or 1 x 700g jar, drained1 heaped tsp ras el hanout1 unwaxed orangeOlive oil240g block halloumi3 tbsp tahini250g purple sprouting or Tenderstem broccoli1 large handful pumpkin seedsSeeds from 1 pomegranate1 small bunch parsley, leaves picked1 heaped tsp honey, to serve4 flatbreads, to serve Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/ 425F/gas 7. Spread the chickpeas on a large roasting tray, sprinkle with the ras el hanout, the zest and juice of half the orange (grate the remaining zest into a bowl), drizzle with olive oil and season. Roast for 10 minutes.Meanwhile, score the top of the halloumi block with 5mm-deep criss-crosses, then set aside. In a bowl or jar, mix the tahini, remaining orange zest and juice, and a tablespoon of olive oil – if your tahini is thick, it might need a really good stir. Once the chickpeas have had 10 minutes, take them out of the oven and turn on the grill. Add the halloumi, broccoli and pumpkin seeds to the tray, toss everything together, so it is all coated in the orangey spiced oil, then put under the grill for 10 minutes, until the halloumi is golden, the broccoli spears are softened and the florets are crisp. Sprinkle over the pomegranate seeds and parsley, then drizzle the halloumi with honey and serve with flatbreads.