Your editorial (While Brexit lingers, big political parties are losing out to smaller rivals, 4 May) says the most notable winners from Thursday’s elections were the Greens. I am pleased they did well, but baffled by your failure to acknowledge the most obvious conclusion from the results. The Liberal Democrats, the one party that has been consistently pro-remain, gained over 700 seats, despite limited financial resources and indifferent or hostile news media. The Tories and Ukip were hammered, and Labour, who haven’t got a clue about Brexit, performed poorly despite the public disillusionment with the government. How can you fail to see this as being a rejection of Brexit, now that the electorate understand the lies they were told in 2016 and the disastrous future that lies ahead if Brexit ever happens?Roger FiskenAshampstead, Berkshire • I am sure I am not alone among lifetime Labour members and supporters of Jeremy Corbyn in voting with a heavy heart on Thursday for Green or Liberal Democrat councillors because of Labour’s ambiguity about a people’s vote (Tory election losses are party’s worst in 24 years, 4 May). Labour is now working with the Tories towards a Brexit that they hope parliament will agree is best for Britain. They should also insist that the electorate be asked if they think the deal is better than remaining in the EU. Without a people’s vote, can we be sure the deal won’t result in Scotland and Northern Ireland, which both voted remain, leaving the UK to rejoin the EU? The Labour leadership should respect the conference’s backing for a people’s vote and clarify its support before the European elections. Another Labour performance like Thursday’s would result in big gains for the far right.Emeritus Prof Keith BarnhamFrome, Somerset • I am a Labour voter who voted Lib Dem in the local elections to register my anger at and disappointment in Jeremy Corbyn’s refusal to back a second referendum. I clearly was not alone, but I had forgotten that politicians interpret any result in the way that suits them. So Theresa May and Jeremy Corbyn have decided that their parties’ loss of council seats means people want them to get on and deliver Brexit. This is the opposite of what I want. They still don’t understand why the electorate is so sick of the political class. They are still using the same weasel words they always do for interviews in which they tell us that “most people think X”, when X is what they want people to think. I thought the electorate had delivered a powerful message, but once a politician, always a politician. I wonder what it will take for them to actually listen to the people they are supposed to represent.Cherry WestonWolverhampton • Labour lost control of Bolsover (71% leave in the referendum), Burnley (67%), Darlington (56%), Hartlepool (70%), Lancaster (51%), Middlesbrough (66%) and Stockton-on-Tees (62%), while the Conservatives gained outright control of Walsall (68%) and North East Derbyshire (63%). This is the effect on traditional Labour areas of talk about rerunning the referendum under the guise of a “confirmatory vote” in the hope of overturning the result. The commitment to respect the result of the referendum, under which all Labour MPs fought the 2017 general election, should not be treated as something that was said just to get elected and can now be discarded.Christopher ClaytonWaverton, Cheshire • It is difficult to work out who Owen Jones’s “ultra-remainers” are (Ultra-remainers could score a spectacular Brexit own goal, Journal, 2 May). Remain doesn’t have an extreme option: if you want to remain, you want to remain. Has he intelligence of “hard remain” groups threatening to drain the English Channel to force an ever-closer union with the continent? We should be told. Furthermore, how “ultra-remain” plays into the hands of the Faragistes is not spelled out: they are hardly likely to come trooping into the Labour camp on the promise of a “Brexit betrayal” customs union. The Corbyn position again has Labour sitting on the sidelines: “We firmly commit ourselves to perhaps doing something later on” is not catchy enough to grasp the public imagination. Certainly it’s not enough to keep up with the overwhelming view of the Labour party rank and file (in what is meant to be a newly democratised party), who are unlikely to be galvanised by mealy-mouthed maybe-isms. Even if we try hard, we’ll struggle to find anything constructive to say on the doorstep. From the radical Corbyn we hoped for a principled stand. May’s Brexit has so far pleased no one. If it limps home abetted by Labour apparatchiks, that will prolong the wilderness years for the party.Prof Paul BootonLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition