The weather at Taunton spoilt the golden-ticket game between the champions, Surrey, and top-of-the- table Somerset. In a stuttering day Surrey lost three wickets, including Dean Elgar who batted despite suffering from kidney stones. Stumps were drawn at 4.40 after the rain and damp proved intractable, with Somerset pocketing 11 points and Surrey 12.“The match did credit to the Championship First Division,” said Andy Hurry, Somerset director of cricket. Hampshire beat Warwickshire by 314 runs as Warwickshire’s batting again proved a fragile shell. There was succour only from the 10th-wicket partnership of 34, between Jeetan Patel (10) and Oliver Hannon-Dalby (17), which took the total past a hundred. Hampshire’s ruthless bowlers shared the spoils. Kent did their damndest to hold off Yorkshire in an absorbing day at Canterbury. Yorkshire’s bowlers went wicketless in the first session after the nightwatchman Fred Klaassen, prodding and poking, and Daniel Bell-Drummond, dropped twice at slip, put on a crepuscular 54. Klaassen was eventually out for a 110-ball 13 just after lunch and Bell-Drummond followed seven overs later for 41. The late-middle order did their best but Ben Coad proved irresistible, finishing with six for 52, and Yorkshire won by 172 runs. In Division Two Lancashire knocked off the 16 runs they needed in 16 balls to defeat Northamptonshire by 10 wickets. It set up a top-of-the-table meeting with Worcestershire at Old Trafford next week, with both teams winning both matches this year. Worcestershire, though, had a scare at New Road. Set 81 to win, they were 55 for five after Chris Rushworth found his mojo under heavy cloud cover. It was up to Ross Whitely and Ben Cox to inch them home just before lunch. For Durham it was back to the drawing board after their third successive defeat. There was a thriller at Lord’s as Leicestershire battled both Middlesex and the weather in an attempt to chase down 305 to win at that ground in a Championship game for the first time since 1980. They were eventually stranded on 226 for five, needing another 79, when rain kept the covers on. Colin Ackermann finished on 70.