Marcelo Bielsa is to stay at Leeds after the club activated an option to extend his contract for a second season. The club’s owner, Andrea Radrizzani, said Bielsa has “unfinished business” at Elland Road after Leeds came close to sealing a Premier League return. Fans had feared Bielsa could leave following the 4-3 aggregate defeat to Derby in the Championship play-off semi-finals. After that game, Bielsa said he would consider an offer to stay on but gave no guarantees. “We were close and next season we will work harder to achieve our goal,” Radrizzani told the club’s website. “So, let’s have another go. I am delighted that Marcelo has agreed to stay for another year – we have unfinished business.” Defeat to Derby brought a bitter end to a tumultuous season, in which the Argentinian endeared himself to Leeds supporters by mounting a promotion bid with a team playing free-flowing, high-tempo football, despite a lack of investment in the squad. There were controversies too, with Bielsa apologising for his involvement in the spying row with Derby – then offering journalists a tactical masterclass at an impromptu press conference days later. In April, the former Chile and Argentina manager allowed Aston Villa to equalise after Mateusz Klich’s controversial opener had sparked a melee at Elland Road. “The players have made me proud every week and the staff have gone above and beyond day after day to ensure we are a well-run club at the heart of the community,” Radrizzani said. “A special mention also for the academy and for their achievements over the past two years, the quality of the homegrown talent we have seen this year is outstanding. Finally, the support from our fans has been the best in the country once again.” Leeds said in a statement: “Bielsa penned a two-year deal in June 2018, with the club maintaining the right to extend or terminate the deal at the end of year one.” Bielsa became the highest-paid manager in the Championship when he succeeded Paul Heckingbottom in June last year on a reported salary of more than £2m a year. He must work with limited resources again next season, with Radrizzani stating Leeds will be restricted in the transfer market owing to financial fair play rules.