It’s more than 8,000 years since the North Sea swept over Doggerland, the land bridge that connected Britain to the continent until the end of the last ice age. But in this age of climate change and Brexit, the setting for Ben Smith’s dystopian debut could hardly be more timely; just this week, scientists set off on a voyage to map what remains of the lost land mass, with the hopes of finding evidence of stone age settlements. But Smith’s novel, simply titled Doggerland, finds an old man and a boy in a bleak near-future world, trapped on a decaying wind farm in the middle of the North Sea: From a distance, they all looked identical, but up close each tower was marked with dark blooms and scabs of rust. There were seepages of oil and grease creeping downward, streaks of salt corrosion reaching up, forming intricate patterns of stalactites and stalagmites. Some of the turbines had slumped down at an angle, their foundations crumbling like silt. Some had damaged blades and threw their remaining limbs around in jolting arcs. Others were missing their blades and nacelle entirely, leaving only the towers standing, like fingerposts marking the steady progression of malfunction and storm. Employed by a shadowy company on contracts they can’t escape, the old man and the boy patch up the rusting machines as best they can. Their only link with the mainland is the ship that occasionally brings them tins of spiced protein and re-formed vegetables. But a hint from the ship’s pilot sets the boy on the trail of his father, who disappeared from the array years before. It’s not as outlandish as it sounds: as Smith discovered, power companies are currently building platforms on remote wind farms in the middle of the North Sea where engineers can stay for weeks. “If people were living on these wind farms, these would be the first human inhabitants of Doggerland for 8,000 years,” he says. “Which purely from a psycho-geographic standpoint is kind of amazing and fascinating. I just loved that idea of having this life of people on a wind farm layered directly on top of this massive flooding, climate-change event that occurred in the distant past.” Woven through the boy’s search for his father are brief chapters charting Doggerland’s 10,000-year story: the ice sheet retreating, the water rising and a final submersion: “It ends with a wave. A single wave spreading across the horizon. A neat crease in the surface of things.” Smith wants his readers to “think about human activity at those other scales … You don’t need them for the plot, but if you don’t have them, it’s only a human story. If you’ve got them, it becomes a story about place and change and about recognising the scale of these events.” Global transformations have been an abiding concern for Smith for years. Born in 1984, Smith grew up in a village on the border between Warwickshire and Oxfordshire, and studied English literature and creative writing at Exeter before submitting his PhD – a set of poems about birds, augury and climate change. He tried to write poems about Doggerland, but they were “terrible,” Smith says. “Awful, awful things. I never showed anybody.” His attempts to move the subject from poetry to prose was fraught; as a teacher of creative writing, he was faced with the prospect that he might be unable to do what he taught. “I was thinking ‘But I might be a failed novelist’, which is a bit sad,” he says. “You’re living with that very real pressure.” The pressure eased last year, when Smith discovered he’d managed to sell his novel; desperately waiting for word while on holiday at a remote farmyard in the Brecon Beacons, he finally managed to receive the good news when a phone signal came. It was, in his words, “a very, very nice day.” More used to writing poems for “maybe a few hundred people”, Smith didn’t hold back from tackling pollution and climate change in his novel: “I always think if you worry too much what hypothetical readers will think you’ll never write anything. I just wrote the book that I most wanted to read, dealing with stuff that I found interesting and then trusted that other people would find it interesting, too.” Not that fiction is an adequate response to climate emergency, he admits: “Honestly, if you actually want to help, then petition your local MP incessantly, go on marches – that’s what potentially will make a difference.” “Writing a novel is different. It’s a much slower process. It’s not about changing things as they are now, it’s thinking about how things could be in the future so that it can help people make longer-term decisions. But if you want to make drastic changes, spending four years on your own writing a novel is probably going to be a bit too late.” • Doggerland is published by 4th Estate (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.