Democrats are reluctant to impeach Donald Trump but he may provoke such a move by continuing to obstruct congressional efforts to oversee his administration, a senior lawmaker said on Sunday. Adam Schiff, chair of the House intelligence committee, told ABC’s This Week impeachment by the Democratic-run House would be divisive and unlikely to succeed in the Republican-run Senate. “But [Trump] may get us there,” Schiff said. “He certainly seems to be trying and maybe this is his perverse way of dividing us more … he thinks that’s to his political advantage, but it’s certainly not to the country’s advantage.“ Trump’s stonewalling of congressional oversight does add weight to calls for impeachment, Schiff said, adding: “But you know, part of our reluctance is we are already a bitterly divided country and an impeachment process will divide us further.” Democrats have confronted the Republican president and his administration for refusing to cooperate with at least six congressional investigations of his turbulent presidency, his family and his business interests. A Democratic-led House committee on Wednesday approved a measure to hold the attorney general, William Barr, in contempt for refusing to hand over an un-redacted copy of the Mueller report on Russian election interference. Trump invoked the legal principle of executive privilege to block its disclosure. Democrats are divided, some calling for impeachment and others backing continued investigations. Republicans have accused Democrats of grandstanding for liberal voters. Some Trump allies believe impeachment could prove unpopular and help the president as he seeks re-election in 2020. But even the Republican-controlled Senate intelligence committee has subpoenaed the president’s son, Donald Trump Jr. On Sunday, Schiff reiterated his suggestion that Congress could levy fines of $25,000 a day on administration officials who refuse to cooperate with demands for witness appearances and documents. “Look,” he said, “I think if you fine someone $25,000 a day to their person until they comply, it gets their attention. “I don’t know how many are going to want to take that risk for Donald Trump.”