In July last year Metro Bank didn’t have to break sweat to raise £300m from investors. It got its money at £34.22 a share, close to the prevailing market price. This year’s exercise has been excruciating. The need for £350m was announced at the end of February, weeks after the confidence-shaking saga in which Metro confessed it had placed £900m of loans in the wrong risk bracket. It has taken almost three months to get to Thursday’s position: confirmation that the placing of new shares is under way. The placing price of 500p was ugly, and the advisers’ fees may be more so. Still, Metro got there eventually, it might be argued. Yes, it did, even if the long-term dilution of earnings will be severe since Metro’s pre-placing valuation had slumped to a mere £570m. But one doubts this will be the end of tale. Until now, founder Vernon Hill has proved untouchable as chairman despite outsiders’ criticisms about governance. One concern has been the millions Metro has paid to Hill’s wife’s firm for designing the branches, but the deep worry is lack of independence in the boardroom. Metro is mainly backed by US investors, and they do governance differently over there. Even the Americans, though, can surely now see that Hill should go. Welcome to another Thomas Cook mystery tour. The last one ended happily in 2012, in the sense that shareholders emerged intact when the group was able to sell a collection of Spanish hotels as part of a restructuring to ward off a debt crisis. But here we are again, with the directors warning of a potential “material uncertainty” created by the terms of a new short-term £300m borrowing facility that is designed to buy time to flog all or part of a more important asset – the airline. The good news, of a sort, is that the £300m facility exists. The new borrowing terms (undisclosed) will be gruesome, but that’s life as a corporate pauper. Net borrowings were a colossal £1.25bn at the end of March, £361m higher than a year ago, and Thomas Cook reports an “uncertain consumer environment across all markets”. Brexit was blamed in the UK but even Germans and Swedes, supposedly the most reliable seekers of winter sun, stayed at home in greater numbers this year. The other big number in the half-year figures was the £1.1bn write-down on the value of the acquisition of MyTravel in 2007. But, since the accounting whack has no cash impact, it really served as a reminder of how life was gentler in the days before online hotel-booking sites became a serious nuisance for old-style tour operators. Nothing will change on that front, which is why chief executive Peter Fankhauser’s “differentiation” strategy, which involves owning and opening better-quality hotels, seems correct. But the extent to which he can throw investment at his plans depends on the proceeds from the airline sale. City analysts’ estimates run from £500m to £1bn, which is a mighty range when you see that Cook’s equity is valued by the stock market at only £350m. Therein lies the mystery element for shareholders – the short-term future is all about the price achieved in the disposal. Multiple bids have been received, said Fankhauser. Great. But, remember, European skies are crowded with ailing airlines, so this a terrible moment to be a forced seller. If Cook gets close to £1bn, it will have done well. Stand down the relationship councillors: Waitrose is declaring commercial war on Ocado instead. That seems to be gist of Waitrose’s response to being jilted by its online partner. The John Lewis-owned supermarket chain will open three “state-of-the-art automated customer fulfilment centres”, which are clearly intended to be copycat versions of Ocado’s vast constructions – even the CFC lingo is the same. Waitrose has also gone into partnership with Jonathan Faiman, one of three former Goldman Sachs traders who founded Ocado two decades ago. Faiman’s firm, one can speculate, will look to hire a few members of Ocado’s software team to build its robots. This scrap could become lively. Ocado’s lofty share price was untroubled, presumably on the thought that the technology pioneer is so far ahead that imitators are irrelevant. Ocado, of course, also has its prized collection of partnership contracts with supermarkets around the world, which is where most of its stock market value resides. Yet Waitrose clearly thinks it can build its CFCs under its own steam, or rather with Faiman’s help, and achieve reasonable investment returns. If it succeeds, surely that would dent the thesis that Ocado is unique?