After 56 mostly glorious years the last domestic Lord’s final – and the first one to be played in May – takes place on Saturday. This little bit of history may not be lamented by the England and Wales Cricket Board but it is a source of despair for many existing fans, who feel increasingly alienated. At least a fine match is in prospect as the two best sides in the country this year, Hampshire and Somerset, meet to decide the destiny of the Royal London One-Day Cup, the first trophy of the summer. It would be an even better match if both sides were at full strength. There is no good reason why Hampshire should not be able to play their two World Cup squad members, James Vince and Liam Dawson. But as ever common sense takes a back seat and is trumped – unnecessarily – by the regulations. In this instance the ECB is not to blame (though it did schedule this match). It would have been happy for the two Hampshire stalwarts to play but the ICC cannot countenance any flexibility. Hampshire’s anger is justified. In Vince’s absence Sam Northeast will lead Hampshire, who can replace Dawson with another international, Mason Crane. Their bowling attack is experienced and cosmopolitan; they just need someone to step up to compensate for Vince’s absence. They can take some comfort from the fact they gave Somerset a good thrashing at Taunton earlier in this tournament without Vince in their side. Somerset should be at full strength though Tom Banton, who has been keeping wicket and opening the batting most impressively, did have to retire hurt with back spasms in a second XI game this week. Lewis Gregory and Craig Overton have both been in outstanding form, whatever the colour of the ball, and they provide a potent engine for their impressive young captain, Tom Abell. He is 25 and yet in his third year in charge except when Gregory takes over for the T20 Blast. His was a brave appointment and Abell struggled so much to maintain his form in 2017 that he had to drop himself. But with immense resolve and bags of enthusiasm and intelligence he survived that ordeal and is now prospering. So there are many bright young cricketers on view, including Tom Alsop (23) and Aneurin Donald (22) for Hampshire, and many of them may never play another 50-over game again unless they are selected for England. One would think this might be a source of some concern for Ashley Giles and Ed Smith as they plot England’s 2023 World Cup campaign. But they do not seem too bothered.