It was disappointing to see our older and younger generations once again being pitted against each other (“Old folk will be a burden, but must our young shoulder it?”, Phillip Inman, Economics). Far from being a burden, older people contribute a significant amount to our economy and our communities, as taxpayers, carers and volunteers, with research by the Royal Voluntary Service predicting that the economic contribution of over-65s in the UK will grow to £77bn by 2030 (up from £40bn in 2010). The fact we are an ageing society, and the opportunities this brings, is something that should be celebrated. Too often, however, the debate around how the country will meet the needs of all of its citizens as demographics continue to change is oversimplified and sensationalised, creating resentment towards older people and reinforcing negative attitudes that lead to ageism. Successive governments have failed to deal effectively with many of the issues that are affecting older and younger people today and in addressing the challenges we now face it is essential that we do not end up engaging in an unpleasant and divisive race to the bottom, a race in which there will be no winners.Heléna Herklots, older people’s commissioner for WalesCardiff Phillip Inman, referring to Tony Bennett and Bernard Haitink, asks: “What are these people thinking when they hog the stage and push out younger performers?” He goes on to quote the National Institute for Economic and Social Research to the effect that the costs of an ageing population were going to wreck the public finances. Older citizens who no longer work are a burden, while older citizens who support themselves by working are pushing out younger workers. Isn’t that having it both ways? To single out Haitink for such criticism is surely very unfair. Few have done as much for the arts and, in particular, for young people in the arts as Haitink. He has led masterclasses for young conductors for several years and he has been conductor laureate of the European Union Youth Orchestra since 2015. Your Fiona Maddocks had it right. Reviewing the first of Haitink’s three 90th birthday concerts with the LSO in March (“Birmingham Opera Company excels with an unforgettable Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk”, The New Review), she wrote: “He will take a sabbatical in the 2019-20 season. We must hope this means à bientôt and not farewell.”Peter RickettsLondon WC1 The population of Britain did not suddenly age over the weekend; life expectancy has been increasing steadily over the past century, so governments of all political stripes have had plenty of time to prepare. In this, they have manifestly failed. Today’s “old folk” were once building, or trying to build, the productive capacity that would provide their pensions. In this, they were frustrated by political ineptitude and ideology. Had governments directed more financial resources into building productive capacity rather than shovelling it into the perpetually gaping mouth of the financial institutions then we might not be in this mess. I will accept no responsibility for the current malaise since, in 45 years of voting, I have never managed to elect a government that I want. The best I can achieve is to get rid of a government that I don’t want, which is to say all of them. The Brexit fiasco is yet another example of the failure of our political class. In the meantime, Britain’s productivity continues to languish in the third division while the government lauds the pernicious policies that have increasingly delivered nothing more than precarious part-time, casual, zero-hours contract work of low added value. Berating the old will not solve Britain’s economic problems. Neither will leaving the EU. Chris WallerBristol In his excellent review of Guy Shrubsole’s book Who Owns England?, Tim Adams quotes the author on ways of “taking back control” of our land and refers to buried pieces of legislation such as everyone’s “statutory right to an allotment” (“The landgrab that time forgot”, Books, New Review). Our land was originally all ours, the “commons”, stolen from us in the enclosures so long ago it has been forgotten. I would love to see a new Labour government create a strong public education programme in the fruitful use of allotments and gardens. I can envision information about growing and cooking being everywhere, from food banks to surgeries to schools to advertisements. Packets of seeds and maybe discounts for simple tools could be handed out with every food bank parcel, to every schoolchild, to every patient. Benefits to diet, health, community building and general wellbeing would be vast. Digging for victory again in a different war – one against poverty, isolation, poor diet, ill health, disconnection from nature. There is immense power in a piece of land.Freya HartleyTorquay, DevonWrong message to Trump Granting Donald Trump a carriage ride down the Mall with the Queen is not in the national interest. Donald Trump’s America is a state that has, in effect, declared war on Iran with its economic embargo (“Love, hate… indifference? A special relationship”, Special report). It threatens to punish any country or company that does business with Iran. Our invitation sends the wrong message that Washington’s insatiable urge to exercise extraterritorial jurisdiction is OK with us. So much for a rules-based international order.Yugo KovachWinterborne Houghton, Dorset It is all the more important to be reminded that democracies “have the right to change their minds”, given media and party-political insouciance about “the massive electoral fraud” highlighted by Carole Cadwalladr on the one hand and continuing allegations of democratic betrayal on the other (“Time has run out. Labour must seize its last chance to take a stand on Brexit”, Will Hutton, Comment). We may also need reminding that it has all along been inherently unclear just what could be said to have been minded by the electorate (voter and non-voter) in 2016. This is critical because referendums, much more than general elections, depend for their democratic validity on being on well-defined questions whose ramifications are well and widely understood, which no one could plausibly claim to have been the case in 2016. But since the comparative information vital for authentic choice is now available, democratic commitment demands it be widely disseminated and discussed. This is the nub of the case for both a people’s vote and citizens’ assembly. It is boosted by news of the Swiss supreme court’s unprecedented annulment of a recent referendum result expressly on account of “incomplete detail and lack of transparency”. If an electoral result based on insufficient and dubious evidence necessitates a rerun in Switzerland, why not in the UK? Here’s hoping that the new Commons sub-committee on disinformation will take due note of the Swiss verdict, along with the Mueller report, and make early proposals for monitoring political campaigning, in addition – it’s to be hoped – to setting in motion radical constitutional reform.Richard BrydenCraig-y-don, LlandudnoConwy, Wales Martin Daubney, a new Brexit party candidate, states that “Nigel will lay out our policies after the election (interview, News)”. Doesn’t that just say it all?Clive WhittingtonBollington, Cheshire