In 2015, my best friend, Elizabeth Uviebinené, sent me a picture of Solange Knowles at Paris fashion week, basking in the pre-release glow of a seminal album and coming into her own after years under the moniker “Beyoncé’s little sister”. She captioned it “Slay in Your Lane”. I rang Elizabeth to say it would be the name of the book we were going to write – a guide to life aimed at black British women, featuring advice from trailblazing interviewees. We hadn’t come across the phrase elsewhere and thought it was clever, so in 2018 we trademarked it. The BBC thought it was clever, too: last week, our readers began to notify us of billboards they had seen emblazoned with the slogan. Most who contacted us assumed, since it used a bold font like the one on the cover of our book and was fronted by Dina Asher-Smith, a successful black British sprinter, that there was some affiliation or that we were at least aware of the BBC’s use of the slogan for its campaign. We weren’t, and immediately made contact with the BBC. We received no response for four days. Imagine being a white woman creating an 'eMpOwErInG WoMeNs' ad campaign for @BBCSport, and choosing to rip off the *TRADEMARKED* name of a book specifically aimed at uplifting black women (in an almost identical font 🙃) pic.twitter.com/nojQRMX1Bq Frustrated by the wall of silence, I tweeted about it. What happened next may as well have been ripped from a page of the book whose title the BBC seemed so keen to rip off. Almost immediately, I was branded a “bully” by one of the creative directors of the campaign for making my grievance public on Twitter (he has since deleted his tweet). There were scores of men like him in my mentions, though, more angry at me than the breach; they said the tone of my response wasn’t right, the fonts weren’t actually that similar, it was an honest mistake and I needed to calm down. The most persistent form of derailment was colour blindness. The advert was devised by the corporation’s inhouse media agency and led by an all-white creative team of directors. Our book was specifically a project to uplift black women. When I pointed this out, I received dozens of messages asking what “race had to do with it”. The answer is simple: everything. White men and women co-opting a phrase trademarked by two black women for a campaign, then fronting it with a black woman to feign some form of affiliation is shocking. But this behaviour is historic and often intentional – aggressive erasure peddled as inclusion, followed by the silencing of our dissent. We are expected to be grateful for plagiarism masquerading as a nod. The truth is that a trademark does not protect you from the arrogance of large corporations and advertising executives bereft of original thought. The BBC claims it sought legal advice and was told: “The use of the headline was sufficiently far removed from the goods and services covered by the trademark registration in place.” Even the lines of attack by those involved in the ad were painfully predictable: accusing black women of aggression when expressing any emotion other than placidity is a tale as old as time. The “angry black woman” trope has been wielded for years to tone, police or entirely silence. When the creative team members were held to account on social media, they deleted their tweets, blocked those dissenting on our behalf, or made their accounts private – suddenly, it was them who were the victims. The irony of having spent the best part of a year discussing the hurdles black women face in Britain (including on the BBC, as Radio 4’s Book of the Week and on BBC Breakfast) is not lost on me. As faux diversity dominates, I have no doubt this will be one of many experiences like it, where, in a bid to appear progressive, companies are the very opposite. • Yomi Adegoke is the author of Slay in Your Lane and a Guardian columnist.