Nigel Farage has been hit by a milkshake in Newcastle city centre, after a spate of similar incidents against far-right candidates in the European elections campaign. The Brexit party leader appeared to be furious after the incident and was heard to mutter, “it’s a complete failure, you could have spotted that a mile off” as his security team led him away. A 32-year-old man was arrested on suspicion of common assault, Northumbria police said. Paul Crowther, who was dragged away and handcuffed, said: “It’s a right of protest against people like him.” Standing in handcuffs outside a Waterstones bookshop in Newcastle city centre, Crowther said he did not regret his actions. He told reporters it was a banana and salted caramel milkshake bought from Five Guys. “I was quite looking forward to it, but I think it went on a better purpose,” he said. Sean Seddon a reporter from the Newcastle Chronicle filmed the aftermath of the incident when passersby could be heard laughing at Farage. He reported that Farage asked his security team: “How did that happen?” Chaotic scenes in Newcastle city centre as Nigel Farage hit by a milkshake. He’s been whisked away by his security. This is the aftermath. pic.twitter.com/qxz8yay492 Farage blamed remainers. He tweeted: “Sadly some remainers have become radicalised, to the extent that normal campaigning is becoming impossible. “For a civilised democracy to work you need the losers’ consent. Politicians not accepting the referendum result have led us to this.” Sadly some remainers have become radicalised, to the extent that normal campaigning is becoming impossible.For a civilised democracy to work you need the losers consent, politicians not accepting the referendum result have led us to this. Theresa May’s spokesman said: “The prime minister has been clear that politicians should be able to go about their work and campaign without harassment, intimidation, or abuse. “In this case, I understand, an arrest has already been made, so I can’t comment further. “But, the prime minister supports efforts to stamp out unacceptable and unlawful behaviour, and where incidents of harassment and abuse constitute a criminal offence this should be taken seriously by the police.” Last week police asked a McDonald’s restaurant near an Edinburgh venue where Farage was speaking not to sell milkshakes because of concerns protesters might throw them. The request followed a series of incidents in the campaign in which far-right figures such as Tommy Robinson and the Ukip candidate Carl Benjamin have had milkshakes and other food thrown at them by protesters. Benjamin, who is under police investigation for comments he made about raping the Labour MP Jess Phillips, has been doused in milkshake at least four times during the campaign. Exeter Cathedral banned Benjamin from taking part in hustings saying he might be a risk to public order after he was hit by a milkshake in Salisbury. Brendan Cox, the widower of Jo Cox who was murdered in the run-up to the EU referendum in 2016, condemned the incident. He tweeted that he disliked Farage’s politics profoundly, but said: “I don’t think throwing stuff at politicians you disagree with is a good idea. It normalises violence and intimidation and we should consistently stand again it.”