The pound is on course for its worst week in 2019 after dropping to the lowest level in four months following the collapse of the Brexit talks, as business leaders warn that failure to break the deadlock is damaging the economy. Sterling lost about half a cent against the US dollar on Friday to slide below $1.28 on the international money markets, compounding the steepest weekly decline for the currency since October as the talks between Theresa May and Jeremy Corbyn ended in acrimony. The pound had been as high as $1.32 earlier this month, when there was greater hope among City investors that the cross-party talks might break the Westminster impasse. Sterling also lost ground against the euro, slipping by 0.3% to trade at about €1.14 on Friday afternoon. Andrew Wishart, UK economist at the consultancy Capital Economics, said: “If you have been enjoying the respite from incessant Brexit headlines over the past few weeks, I’m afraid it’s bad news. “There is little to inspire hope of a well-managed political resolution.” Business leaders warned that the failure of the talks would likely inflict new damage on the economy, as the lingering uncertainty over leaving the EU leads firms to redirect investment decisions and orders away from the UK. Stephen Phipson, chief executive of Make UK, the manufacturing lobby group, said: “The consequences of this [failure] are almost daily announcements of the great damage being done in terms of lost orders and an evaporation of confidence in the UK as a place to invest.” Stockpiling in preparation for a no-deal Brexit has bolstered growth in recent months, while a disruptive exit was avoided in March and April. However, lack of clarity over the UK’s future trading relationship with the EU has also held the economy back. Carolyn Fairbairn, director general of the CBI, said: “Another day of failed politics, another dispiriting day for British business. Six wasted weeks while uncertainty paralyses our economy. “Business and the country need an urgent resolution to this mess. This is no time for holidays. It’s time to get on with it.”