This article contains spoilers for season eight, episode four of Game of Thrones. Oh Jon. How trusting of you to believe your sisters would pinky-swear and keep a Seven Kingdoms-changing secret to themselves. I guess that’s karma for sending your direwolf away without so much as a hug.As it is, in Game of Thrones’s latest instalment, “little bird” Sansa – freed of her sibling loyalties and more protective of the North now that House Stark is shrinking – uses the very first opportunity to tell Tyrion about Jon’s true identity as the son of Lyanna Stark and Rhaegar Targaryen. And when chief gossip Varys uncovers this, the secret is officially out: Daenerys has less of a claim than Jon. This revelation has shaken up the game at its final hurdle, compounded by Daenerys’s suitability for the job also being called into question. Game of Thrones has long been about good v evil and Lannisters v well, everyone else in Westeros. Now, there’s a bigger question at play: can the allied forces prise Cersei off the Iron Throne, and if so, who should replace her?While grappling with battle strategy on one hand, this episode centres on Daenerys’s growing insecurities and her resolve to hang on to her claim. It doesn’t help that, with Euron’s nautical ambush and Rhaegal’s demise, the power she yields has drastically diminished: she’s now commander of one last dragon, and a fraction of the Unsullied and Dothraki she once had. It’s clear she’s reaching desperate times. A few episodes ago, perched up high on her temporary throne, she demanded that Jon bend the knee. Here, she looks at him doe-eyed, explicitly begging him to keep his claim a secret. But her concern of “what happens when they demand you press your claim and take what is mine” suggests that whatever the shift in dynamic, she’s not up for changing her belief that the throne is rightfully hers.It is a compelling argument. The times are a-changing in Westeros: it’s now a place in which a woman can be a knight and a bastard can be elevated to a Lord. But are times changing quickly enough? Even if she were technically the heir, there’s the question of whether the Seven Kingdoms would willingly replace the Mad King with a Mad Queen. Whether she becomes one remains to be seen. As it stands, in the Hodor-to-Cersei evil-o-meter, Daenerys is still swaying: she’s reasonable enough to heed the advice of her Hands that King’s Landing should be taken with minimal damage (more justice than Cersei has shown), yet greedy enough to shoot looks of fire and ice at the same time when events work against her. In this transition period, Emilia Clarke is immense in her role – with barely a muscle moved, Daenerys’s agitation, megalomania and unshakeable belief that she’s on the side of justice shines through. Game of Thrones hasn’t always been able to rely on the subtlety of its actors, but this performance at least is turning out to be a thing of beauty.With Daenerys’s heavy-handed decisions, questionable claim, and understanding she’s not up for sharing the Iron Throne (it looks uncomfortable enough for one person, let alone two), it is perhaps inevitable that Varys switches allegiance, as seen in two glorious scenes between the Spider and Tyrion. For his part, Tyrion, along with love-blind Jon, is one of the last to stand by his queen – although when he tries to convince Sansa of her good intentions by stating that “she wants to make the world a better place. I believe in her,” we can see he kind of doesn’t.Still, just as in the Battle of Winterfell, any tensions are put on hold as the northern troupes unite under Daenerys and head south to deal with the matter at hand: Cersei. Whoever might lay claim to the throne afterwards, Daenerys is Cersei’s competitor now, and the warring factions appear to be equal, both in army size (Cersei might have more troops, but Daenerys does still have one dragon) and power-hunger. Even Daenerys and Cersei’s blood-red aesthetic is beginning to merge. Cersei, however, remains the more ruthless, as chillingly demonstrated by the beheading of Missandei. What a power move. It’s Dany’s turn next, and with the loss of her dragon and best friend fresh in her mind, as well as Missandei’s last words of “Dracarys” (“dragonfire”), we’ll soon see just how ruthless the Tarly-burning Daenerys has become.So what now? Well, if the series plays out in a standard structure, next week’s episode will reduce the candidates from three to two, and the very final episode, from two to one – when that last person standing will get to take their seat. But as we all know, this has never been a show to play by the rules. Dracarys!