Get off your backside and get a job!” “Can you even spell father?” “Put something on the end of it!” For 14 years, The Jeremy Kyle Show was a hotbed of insults, poverty porn and lie-detector-facilitated humiliation. A dark jewel in ITV’s daytime crown, it was once described by a judge sentencing a former guest as “a form of human bear-baiting”. It was, however, just one wave in the tsunami of mean-spirited TV entertainment to emerge over the past two decades, ranging from the fiscal misery of Benefits Street and The Repo Man, to talent-show contestants milked for cheap laughs, to reported emotional abuse on augmented reality shows. It is all a far cry from the turn of the millennium when Big Brother was billed as a revolutionary social experiment. Since then, reality TV and factual entertainment has taken on an often nasty and voyeuristic tone. But does the high-profile cancellation of Kyle’s show – following the death of recent guest Steven Dymond and stories of two further participants killing themselves – spell the end of vindictive reality shows? Or are we doomed to see the continuation of what was described by one producer in a recent article for the industry magazine Broadcast as a “wild west of pantomime villains”? Despite a seemingly blase attitude towards past guests (it is only since Kyle’s downfall that the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport has launched a probe into production companies’ duty of care during and after filming), there has been a shift in the attitudes of both programme-makers and audiences when it comes to antagonistic TV. Love Island – a show that has seen two former contestants, Sophie Gradon and Mike Thalassitis, kill themselves in the past year – was criticised in 2018 as a result of contestant Adam Collard’s behaviour towards Rosie Williams. Domestic abuse charity Women’s Aid claimed he was “gaslighting” his former love interest, a story that made national news. Collard was still depicted by the redtops as a “playboy” in the aftermath of the show, “when really there was a girl in there that got really emotionally hurt and scarred by what he did,” Williams tells me. Women’s Aid also addressed alleged abusive behaviour on The Only Way Is Essex, claiming that cast members Myles Barrett and James Lock had verbally abused their respective girlfriends with words such as “slag” and “playing the victim”. Meanwhile, the treatment of Love Island 2018’s sole black female cast member, Samira Mighty, also made headlines, with Guardian writer Yomi Adegoke advocating a “script flip of epic proportions” to ensure the situation was not repeated. Even the original and biggest purveyor of provocative reality TV, Big Brother, found itself canned late last year after 19 series, with former winner Brian Belo telling the BBC that “the direction they were going in was so salacious that the true fans of Big Brother couldn’t be with the show any more”. Meanwhile, reality’s original Mr Nasty, Simon Cowell, has toned down his brand of side-eyeing villainy (“I think being in love and having a little boy, Eric, has made him more mindful of people’s feelings,” fellow Britain’s Got Talent judge Amanda Holden stated in a recent interview). Cowell’s shows have stopped giving a platform to novelty acts in recent years, having previously offered up the likes of Honey G and Wagner for public ridicule. Jo Hemmings, a psychologist who consults for reality TV makers and who has worked on programmes for the BBC, ITV and Sky, says that while the fear with consulting psychologists is that they’ll “come along and just weed out all the really interesting, colourful characters”, arguably the talent circuit was in need of a cleanup. Among various X Factor controversies, the family of a vulnerable repeat auditionee, Ceri Rees, reportedly launched legal proceedings against the show in 2011, claiming she had been “put under undue pressure to take part in the show again”. Lucy Spraggan, a former contestant who has been open about the strains of going on the show at a young age (she was 21 when she competed in 2012), sees its limitations clearly. “I don’t watch reality TV – for me it’s tainted,” she says. “But when a clip pops up online of an audience laughing at what I would deem a mentally ill person, I am reminded of the dangers of mob mentality. We have something of a tear-down culture here in the UK: as much as we love seeing an underdog succeed, we thrive on watching them fall from the top. Our newspapers, mass-market television and our social commentary in general can be pretty negative and that was so difficult to deal with. It took me a very long time to adjust to my new life and I’d say, seven years later, I am only just getting there.” Over the years, many academics have pondered the economic undercurrents of the TV industry, the commodification of reality contestants and the middle-class dominance at the top of the chain. At a time of high-profile austerity-era tragedies such as Grenfell and the chaotic rollout of universal credit, this sense of working-class subjects versus bourgeois programme-makers feels all the more grim, perhaps explaining why Jeremy Kyle was one of the few “poverty porn” shows still standing. Despite this, Dave O’Brien, chancellor’s fellow in cultural and creative industries at the University of Edinburgh, cites Britain’s continued social inequality as a reason why the genre might not disappear. “We can trace this long historical demand for essentially judgment-based media as far back as Victorian constructions of badly behaved women or views about the working class,” he says. “You might say that there are ebbs and flows [in TV], but it seems there’s something inherent in British culture which means that this kind of stigmatisation – like this idea of a dangerous, criminal lower class – is probably going to stay with us.” While we might not see the end of often cruel reality TV, then, could an emergent new breed of much gentler reality and factual entertainment prevail in the long run? The Great British Bake Off – whose biggest row remains a puddle of baked alaska in series five – can draw up to 8 million viewers as it reaches each season finale. Meanwhile, this year’s Baftas shortlist for the reality and constructed factual category was a who’s who of similarly tender series, among them Old People’s Home for 4 Year Olds, a sentimental show about the benefits of young and old people socialising; and The Real Full Monty: Ladies’ Night, in which TV personalities including Coleen Nolan and Victoria Derbyshire stripped off to raise awareness of women’s cancers. Another nominee was I’m A Celebrity … Get Me Out Of Here!, which has for several years managed to top TV ratings with little controversy, bar the occasional row over animal rights (ITV was fined in 2009 when chefs Gino D’Acampo and Stuart Manning killed and ate a rat in camp). Its most recent series saw Anne Hegerty, best known as one of the resident quizzers on ITV gameshow The Chase, embraced by fellow camp-mates as she struggled to adapt due to Asperger syndrome. The overall Bafta winner was First Dates, the hugely successful, often tearjerking dating show that is now on its 14th run (including spin-offs). Among the newer additions to this burgeoning category of feelgood shows are BBC Three’s 21 Again – where a group of mums try to pass themselves off as girls half their age – and The Circle, a surprise hit for Channel 4 last year, which was snapped up by Netflix for international remakes. In it, a group of strangers bond via an instant messaging app, despite living in the same shiny new-build block in west London. If it initially sounded like another bleak, Big Brother-style panopticon, the result was a series that highlighted the frivolity of most online communication while also being cleverer than your average reality show. Sian Owen made it to the final three, building up a friendship with her fellow contestant Freddie Bentley, even though they had both altered aspects of their personalities during the show (Owen was projecting the “plain Jane” version of herself, while Bentley was pretending to be straight, in order to shake off stereotypes around being a gay man). “What was good about the show was that you didn’t have anyone telling you what was the right or wrong thing to do,” says Owen. Despite the fact that some of her fellow contestants could have been – and were – playing as entirely different people, Owen didn’t have any sense of foreboding when she met them. “I didn’t really care what they looked like or who they were. Because you’ve got no one else, you build such strong bonds. You’re going through this experience together so you need each other.” Between the rise of more empathetic shows and indignation at recent events, change could be afoot. The Kyle backlash might also link to a wider cultural movement towards understanding the difference between reality and “reality”, with the integrity of online influencers being similarly probed in recent months. Some of the ideas floated on Twitter as replacements for Kyle’s show include a finance-themed programme hosted by Martin Lewis and a show featuring inspirational stories from around the nation. While he remains pessimistic about the end of Jeremy Kyle-like formats, O’Brien thinks there is room for people to challenge “industry lore”, the received wisdom of TV’s gatekeepers who are so unrepresentative of the population at large that the former head of Big Brother makers Endemol Shine, Tim Hincks, was prompted to call them “hideously middle class” in 2015. “There are often these baked-in assumptions of what would or wouldn’t sell, like in Hollywood where some people thought a predominantly black superhero film [like Black Panther] wouldn’t work,” says O’Brien. “Contemporary media has all this data about what audiences will and won’t watch. But what academics are finding is that sometimes the biggest barriers as to what works and what doesn’t might be in people’s imaginations.”