What were you hoping for?Someone straight-acting and sexy whom I would have a crush on. First impressions?I thought he could have made more of an effort – he wore a leisurely jumper, hadn’t shaved, hadn’t done his hair. What did you talk about?He was really excited when I told him I had seen Duncan Bannatyne off Dragons’ Den every year at the Portuguese resort I holiday in. Any awkward moments?No. Good table manners?When I came back from the toilet, he had his coat on, ready to go. I think at that point we were just relieved we’d got through it. Best thing about Freddie?His attitude: very polite and pleasant, and he had a big smile all the time. Would you introduce him to your friends?I wouldn’t; we come from completely different worlds. Describe Freddie in three wordsFeminine, pleasant, excitable. What do you think he made of you?He probably thought my personality was a bit mature. I wouldn’t be surprised if he thought I was posh. Did you go on somewhere?No, I did hope to go to a nice bar in Mayfair, but we would never be friends, let alone date. And... did you kiss?No! Freddie wasn’t my type, and I think he felt the same way about me. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I wouldn’t have gone on about how we should be friends, when I knew we never would. Marks out of 10?4.5. He is a lovely guy, but our lives couldn’t be further apart. Would you meet again?Not a chance, sadly. What were you hoping for?Not a disaster. First impressions?He shook my hand (I prefer to hug). What did you talk about?Our families, his Britain’s Got Talent and Greatest Dancer auditions. Any awkward moments?When he revealed that he’d never been on a date before. Good table manners?At one point, he pointed his knife at me while he was gesticulating. Best thing about Josh?He was quite weird, which I liked, because that’s how some people describe me. Would you introduce him to your friends?No, but it was fun to spend time with someone different. Describe Josh in three wordsEnthusiastic, quirky and fun. What do you think he made of you?I hope he liked me. Did you go on somewhere?No. And... did you kiss?No, I didn’t fancy him. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I was disappointed when my steak came on its own. Marks out of 10?6. Would you meet again?No, sorry! • Freddie and Josh ate at The Soak, London SW1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.