Euripides’ Medea is not just a bloodthirsty barbarian princess fuelled by preternatural powers and “black hatred” to take revenge on a husband who spurns her. She is also an Asian woman and foreigner who makes huge sacrifices for Jason only to find herself alone in the hostile west. In Julia Pascal’s modern reconception of the ancient Greek tragedy, she is reborn as a former fighter for the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK). Writer and director Pascal took inspiration from the late Asia Ramazan Antar, a symbol of the feminist struggle in the fight against Islamic State (Isis) who was, somewhat reductively, dubbed the “Kurdish Angelina Jolie” in the western press for her physical likeness. It is an inspired transposition, and the themes of exile and female agency resonate in the modern day. Medea’s military past is creatively reimagined in flashbacks, although the transitions from present to past are fast and sometimes dizzying. There is much else that is effectively conceived. James Peter Moffatt’s soundscape switches from airport sounds to reports of Isis bombings and the rattle of gunfire to create aural drama on a static set. Multicultural London is drawn with economy in scenes such as a tube journey in which two people press up against each other, a bus with British women in hijab and Medea’s UK citizenship classes that bring a hint of comedy. A small, martial chorus singing or speaking lines in unison creates a doom-laden, ancient atmosphere despite their modern army fatigues. Not all the parts come together though. Some scenes are striking for their non-naturalistic symbolism, especially Medea’s infanticide which is slickly done with images of her twins on paper that is slowly screwed up in her hands, accompanied by a silent scream. These bristle awkwardly against the play’s naturalistic content. So too does the script’s occasional lyricism which is out of key in the mouths of some characters, particularly Medea who at other moments speaks in broken English. Perhaps as a result, some of the interplay between characters lacks potency. Ruth D’Silva’s Medea has a naturally imperial quality despite her wide-eyed wonder at a city and language she barely understands. She meets her Jason (Max Rinehart) at a boxing gym where she is a cleaner. He is a cocky, British-Iraqi in a trendy T-shirt, telling her “I speak London, man” when she challenges him on identity and belonging. He feels so contemporary, in fact, that it jars against her grace and stateliness. And while the generational clash between Jason and his Muslim father is well evoked, his turning away from Medea seems too quick and unconvincing. Nevertheless, this is still an engaging and dynamic production, admirable for its risk-taking and originality of vision. Blueprint Medea is at the Finborough theatre, London, until 8 June.