Channel 4 has found itself caught up in a self-censorship row over its popular legal drama The Good Fight, which had a segment that referenced Chinese state censorship cut when it aired in the US last week. The British broadcaster is in discussions with CBS – the American network which shows the drama in the US – about why the animated section was removed from the show. “We are seeking discussions with CBS to understand why they’ve taken this decision,” a spokesperson for Channel 4 said. During the episode, which was broadcast on 2 May in the US, place-holding text that read “CBS has censored this content” was shown on screen in place of a short animated segment that satirically explained Chinese state censorship. The show is a spinoff of The Good Wife, and is known for its ripped-from-the-headline narratives, which are often inspired by contemporary real-life figures, including Donald Trump. Set in a predominantly African-American law firm in New York, The Good Fight has been described as “entertainment for the resistance” by the New York Times, which said it is “the only TV show that reflects what life under Trump feels like for many of us who abhor him”. According to the Hollywood Reporter, the segment began with a reference to China’s decision to ban The Good Wife from video providers including Sohu TV, iQiyi and Youku in 2014. It also alluded to how American studios remove content from international releases to avoid upsetting Chinese censors. “We had concerns with some subject matter in the episode’s animated short. This is the creative solution that we agreed upon with the producers,” representatives for CBS All Access said in a statement. The show’s creators Robert and Michelle King originally threatened to quit, according to the New Yorker’s TV critic Emily Nussbaum, who first wrote about the row, after CBS wanted the animated segment to be removed. The Kings initially planned to keep the placard on screen for the full 90-second segment but eventually opted to shorten it to eight seconds, with many viewers believing the decision was a satirical one. “It did not occur to me that people would think that it was a joke – until, literally, we saw our family this weekend and people didn’t realise it had happened,” Michelle King told Nussbaum. The animated segments have become a recurrent feature of the drama’s third season and act as short explainers on topics including Russian troll farms and the logistics of impeachment proceedings. The Guardian’s Lucy Mangan said The Good Fight’s third season “takes shards of the zeitgeist, holds them up to the light and examines them, twisting and turning them this way and that in its scripts until they are fully illuminated”. The Channel 4 spokesperson said that because The Good Fight is an acquisition for the broadcaster – rather than an original show created in-house – the channel has no control over the version of the episode they are sent. The episode, titled The One Where Kurt Saves Diane, is still scheduled to be broadcast on 16 May at 9pm on More4.