The former Sri Lanka batsman Kumar Sangakkara has been appointed as the first non-British president of Marylebone Cricket Club. Sangakkara will begin his one-year tenure in October, having been nominated by the incumbent, Anthony Wreford. The 41-year-old, who retired from playing in 2017 and is already an honorary life member of MCC and has sat on its influential world cricket committee for the past seven years, said: “It is a huge honour to be named the next president of MCC and it is a role that I am thoroughly looking forward to. “For me, MCC is the greatest cricket club in the world, with its global reach and continued progress for cricket on and off the pitch.” MCC, which owns Lord’s and acts as the guardian of the laws of the game, was founded in 1787 and lists 168 presidents in its history. That number includes one member of the royal family, 13 knights and six baronets but, until now, no one from overseas. Wreford said: “As MCC looks to broaden both our horizons and international reputation, I’m delighted that Kumar has accepted the invitation, which he did in January this year, to be the next president of MCC. “He is an outstanding individual both on and off the field and will make a huge contribution to the club. In a World Cup and Ashes year he will also have a significant role to play as president designate.” The Worcestershire all-rounder Wayne Parnell returned his best List A bowling figures in England as Nottinghamshire lost their 100% record in this season’s Royal London Cup. The Outlaws were skittled in only 32 overs and went down by five wickets at New Road. The South African, who has signed a three-year contract as a Kolpak player with Worcestershire, finished with five for 24 as the Outlaws, who chose to bat, were dismissed for 121, with Paul Coughlin having to retire injured. Three of the 29-year-old Parnell’s victims came in one over as part of a disciplined performance by the Worcestershire seam attack, which included Pat Brown, the bowling star of last summer’s Vitality Blast triumph, for the first time in 2019. Tom Fell then followed up his first half century of the season against Warwickshire at the weekend by hitting an unbeaten 48 as the Rapids triumphed with 24.5 overs to spare. Victory reinforced Worcestershire’s hopes of securing a place in the knockout stages of a competition in which they have topped the North Group for the past two years. The race to reach the knockout phase in the South Group also grew tighter as a Sam Robson century guided Middlesex to a 118-run win over Somerset at Radlett Cricket Club in north London. Yorkshire kept alive their hopes of progressing after they emerged from yet another close contest with a rain-affected five-wicket win over Northamptonshire at Wantage Road. The Vikings have tied two games and lost to Roses rivals Lancashire off the last ball but this time emerged victorious with just two deliveries to spare after they kept their composure in a rain-hit pursuit. Northamptonshire had posted 351 on the back of Ricardo Vasconcelos’ maiden List A century but after Yorkshire’s target was revised, Gary Ballance hit three successive sixes in the penultimate over before Jonny Tattersall completed victory.