Whether the Rangers support display appreciation towards Steven Gerrard or slink off quietly at the conclusion of their Ibrox season inevitably depends on the previous 90 minutes. It is difficult to place a more irrelevant Old Firm game – Rangers will be second in the Scottish Premiership and Celtic are the champions regardless of Sunday’s derby outcome – but so much of the Glasgow story is viewed through the prism of a single fixture. Gerrard does not seem to view 2018-19 as anything special for Rangers, which raises questions as to how to assess the manager appropriately. He has wasted little time in glancing forward to next season. As Rangers confirmed the runners-up berth, he asserted that second place was “not enough”. Yet it is the key indicator of Gerrard’s positive influence that Rangers have separated themselves as a second force. Those who believe such a scenario should be a formality with a budget in excess of that of every team bar Celtic paid little attention to the disastrous tenure of Pedro Caixinha in 2017. An exhausting introduction to the frontline for Gerrard began with a Europa League qualifier in mid-July. Progress to the group phase was an early success but the exertions triggered domestic inconsistency. As a limited Rapid Vienna side ended Rangers’ European run, a home defeat by Aberdeen and a draw at struggling Dundee made up a wounding eight-day spell. Aberdeen’s dismissals of Rangers in both domestic cups were the most damaging occasions of Gerrard’s first season. The former England captain has been notably, sometimes brutally, critical of his squad. In the longer term, this will not prove a smart policy. The arrival of Ryan Kent on loan from Liverpool has been a recruitment high point, alongside Scott Arfield and the returning Allan McGregor. When Gerrard found a way to deploy Steven Davis and Jermain Defoe in his starting side, form improved. The smart money would be on Joe Worrall and Lassana Coulibaly, both loanees, vanishing without trace, a fate that may yet befall Kyle Lafferty, Gareth McAuley, Eros Grezda and Borna Barisic. Umar Sadiq must be on any list of all-time Rangers flops. Signing players, though, is far from an exact science, as Brendan Rodgers at Celtic, with considerably higher leeway, regularly illustrated. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels Alfredo Morelos remains far too selfish and ill-tempered for his core ability to be represented by high value. Gerrard’s patience snapped in April when a red card at Celtic Park forced his manager to concede: “I can’t defend him any more.” Any sale of Morelos must play a key part in the squad improvement Gerrard clearly seeks. If Morelos’s troubles were isolated, there would be no need to look much deeper. Yet in general, Rangers have been ill-disciplined all season, to the point where Gerrard is audibly exasperated: last week’s red card issued to McGregor, when the goalkeeper kicked the back of Hibs’ Marc McNulty after a clearance, was the 12th of the campaign. On the plus side, the three Old Firm encounters have been decided by a single goal – with Rangers winning in December – where the previous two had seen an aggregate of 9-0 in Celtic’s favour. Gerrard has admitted certain elements of the Scottish game had taken him by surprise for all the wrong reasons. Assuming the 38-year-old’s long-term goal is to beat a path back to Liverpool and the manager’s post there, frequent calculations must take place within his mind as to how well served he is by remaining in Glasgow. Whether or not he can build on progress, as unquestionably exists, into season two will determine how well served Rangers are by Gerrard.