It has been claimed that the Baileys will be the first black family in Coronation Street (‘Overdue’: Coronation Street introduces its first black family, 6 April; Shortcuts, G2, 9 April). However, bus conductor Johnny Alexander, played by Thomas Baptiste, appeared in several episodes in January 1963, alongside his family – the actual first black family to feature in the soap. In 1991, when interviewed by Stephen Bourne, Baptiste noted that while he had been famous for about a year, he was now “forgotten”. As the actor, who died in December 2018 (Obituary, 11 January), and had prominent roles in The Ipcress File and Play for Today, said: “I am not remembered in its history, in the books they publish, or in its celebrations, yet I was the first black actor to appear in the programme. It’s like I never existed, and that is a corruption of history.” On numerous occasions Baptiste’s film performances didn’t receive an on-screen credit. It seems he and others have been done a further disservice by claims of a representational “first” that was actually achieved 56 years ago. What we should really be addressing is how and why Baptiste and other BAME actors’ contributions have been so neglected. In the meantime, historical amnesia sadly persists.Tom MayPhD researcher in television history, Northumbria University • Your report highlights the invaluable contributions African people made to British exploration during the 19th century (Diary of explorer David Livingstone’s African attendant published, 24 April). The presence of Jacob Wainwright, an African man, in a formal role at David Livingstone’s funeral marks the recognition of some of this work. During the 1870s, a number of the other African members of Livingstone’s expedition were also recognised with medals and awards from the Royal Geographical Society. The RGS’s Hidden Histories of Exploration project, developed in partnership with Royal Holloway, University of London, reclaims their work for a 21st-century audience.Prof Joe SmithDirector, Royal Geographical Society (with IBG) • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition