Following a delay of more than 12 months, Edward Timpson’s review of school exclusions was published this week (Heads urged to expel fewer pupils amid link to vulnerable children, 7 May). The review reinforces existing knowledge showing that children from African-Caribbean, Irish Traveller and Gypsy/Roma backgrounds are three to four times more likely to be excluded than other groups. It also shows that if factors such as poverty are considered the differences between ethnic groups are substantially reduced. However, higher exclusion rates between African-Caribbean or Gypsy, Roma and Traveller (GRT) children remain even after taking account of such factors. In fact, the odds of African-Caribbean children being excluded still remain significantly higher than other groups. While we agree with the report’s analysis that “the causes of exclusions are complex and wider than just focused on ethnicity”, we do not agree that racism and racial inequalities are insignificant factors in exclusions. There is nothing to indicate that racial prejudices and racial stereotypes are not affecting exclusion decisions, nor can we assume that reasons for excluding white pupils are the same for excluding black or GRT pupils. We feel the overall experiences of African-Caribbean and GRT children within schools should be considered, not just exclusions. We know that children from these backgrounds experience considerable racist abuse and bullying in schools, and there are issues with teachers stereotyping and marginalising children from these ethnic groups. There are also problems with the low proportions of BME teachers, senior leaders and headteachers. Racial disparities in exclusions has been a long-term issue and is getting worse with deep cuts in the education sector. There has been little attempt by the Timpson review to engage and consult with the race equality sector and this is clear from the absence of any recommendations relating to racial disparities – such as schools collecting better data around ethnicity and exclusions, Ofsted holding schools to account for racial disparities in exclusion or the DfE ensuring schools close the exclusion gaps between ethnic groups. We are disappointed with the Timpson review because it has missed an important opportunity to address the “burning injustice” of racial inequalities in exclusion rates. Zubaida Haque Runnymede Trust, Tebussum Rashid BTEG, Zoe Matthews Friends, Families and Travellers, Asif Afridi BRAP, Edie Friedman Jewish Council for Racial Equality, Charles Kwaku-Odoi Caribbean & African Health Network • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition