The UK could lose large swathes of classic British rock photography to private collectors unless it preserves them in a dedicated museum, according to one of the country’s most celebrated music photographers. Jill Furmanovsky, who worked with bands including Pink Floyd, Joy Division and Oasis at their peak, believes that despite huge public interest in rock exhibitions, without a stable space, photographers may be forced to sell their archives outside of the UK to buyers in countries such as China and the US. “There needs to be a permanent home for British rock photography,” said Furmanovsky, who started rockarchive.com in 1998. “At the moment collections are sold, or put to auction – in which case they can go anywhere: to a private collector or an institution that might just sit on them.” UK attempts at rock museums such as the British Music Experience at the O2, which closed in 2014 before moving to Liverpool in 2015, have been inadequate, according to Furmanovsky, who said there was “a general cultural blindness” on the importance of preserving British musical history. “I think rock fans deserve a place to put this stuff which gives it a bit of gravitas and reflects its place in cultural history,” she said. “We’re the envy of the world and we’ve got nowhere to put this stuff.” She pointed to the retrospective of the NME photographer Chalkie Davies at Cardiff Museum in 2015, and Dean Chalkley and Harris Elliott’s Return of the Rudeboy exhibition at Somerset House in 2014, which were successes but then went into storage and have struggled to find a new home. “We initiate these exhibitions, they go up and then they go into storage,” said Furmanovsky, who at 65 wants to secure her archive’s future and that of her peers before retiring. “I don’t know how much longer I can carry it on. I haven’t got anywhere to pass this on to. It’s the same with quite a lot of major photographers and where will this stuff end up? Probably America or China.” Furmanovsky made her name working for magazines such as Melody Maker, Sounds and the NME before becoming Oasis’ photographer of choice in the mid-90s. Speaking to the Guardian in 2016 she explained her approach to rock photography. “I’d sit in the shadows, take pictures and give the prints to Melody Maker,” she said. “If they got used, I got £30, which financed the next load of film and processing.” Furmanovsky – whose work was included in the V&A’s hugely successful Pink Floyd and David Bowie exhibitions – believes that there is a duty to preserve classic British rock photography from the 70s, 80s and 90s for a new generation of fans. “You need to collect this information now or it gets lost forever – it’s like corporate amnesia,” she said. “You need to make sure that it’s available as an historical document for the next generation. It’s an era that inspires people and will do in the future.” The photographer is currently crowdfunding in order to revive Rock Archive’s most recent exhibition, There is a Light That Never Goes Out, which was on display at the Central Manchester Library until the end of February 2019. The University of Manchester has agreed to show the exhibition, which was put on in collaboration with the Manchester Digital Music Archive and the pop culture writer Jon Savage, but Furmanovsky needs to raise funds to pay for it.