Name: Libby ThornhillAge: 60Income: £15,000 plus an allowance of £9,074Occupation: full-time foster carer Two weeks after my husband and I were approved to be foster carers, we received a call to say that two brothers, aged seven and 10, would be coming to live with us in less than an hour. Within that time we had to find an extra bed – luckily a local shop that supports foster carers quickly delivered one – and friends helped us by rushing out to buy clothes for the children. The boys were placed with us on a short-term basis first, but within a year it was determined that they would be here long term. That first year was a vertical learning curve. No matter what training you’re given, every day you’re learning. Even though I’d had three grown-up children of my own, it was a very different but still joyous experience. I remember the little one was so fearful of books when he arrived, so it was really lovely seeing him start to enjoy learning to read. I’d initially considered foster caring in my 40s when I was the chair of governors of a local school. There was a range of children with all sorts of vulnerabilities, some with poor communication skills, others with complex needs. I have a passion for education and have seen what difference it can have on a child who is vulnerable. I wanted to wait until my three children had left home. When my youngest child was studying for her A-levels, I decided to contact a local foster service. It’s been nearly eight years since we fostered the boys. It’s enriched our lives. The oldest is nearly 18 and moved out in 2017; the youngest is 15 and is still here. He just completed the Yorkshire Three Peaks Challenge on his 15th birthday with my two sons who are 40 and 36. I just think these young people are amazing. Often they’ve come from such a challenging background, and it’s wonderful seeing them realise what they are capable of. With love, support and mentoring, they learn that they can do anything. As a level four foster carer, trained to look after children with complex needs, I earn £15,000 a year, plus an allowance of £9,074 for a young person aged between 11 and 15. The fostering allowance is supposed to cover everything for the child, including housing, food, pocket money, clothing, sundries, hobbies, all equipment, travel, internet, birthdays and holidays. There’s no national fee for foster carers, so people receive a different amount depending on who they foster for and where they live. Some foster carers get paid nothing. As president of the Fostering Network, which is a voluntary position, this is something I’m trying to rectify. I don’t think how much you receive as a foster carer should be determined by where you live. I used to work in a school, but had to give that up when I became a foster carer, due to the needs of the children we fostered. Fortunately, we had paid off our mortgage a few years ago. I do spend a lot on gas and electricity – those bills probably come to about £150 a month. My biggest outgoing is probably food. I think I probably spend £75 to £100 a week on food. When we started fostering, we had to buy a people carrier to help transport the kids and their friends. The bus, as I used to call it, would cost me £400 a month in petrol. However, I’ve recently changed to a hybrid, so now my petrol has fallen to about £250 a month. When it comes to holidays, I try to stay in the UK. We took the boys to Malaysia once, but most of the time we rent a caravan or a house. We’ve just spent a long weekend in Yorkshire with the family, and that cost about £400. I probably spend £2,500 a year on holidays. I might spend £100 a month on clothes. Having reached 60, I have most things I need in life. There’s not much I’m saving up for. Although saying that, I am saving up for an electric bike. I’ve had my knee replaced and need to do more exercise. At £1,500, it’s horrendously expensive, but it will enable me to go cycling with my young person. Now I’ve turned 60, I’ve decided I won’t take another young person long term. However, I have been approved as a respite carer, so if any child’s foster family needs a break, they can stay here. The young people have made us proud and changed not only my life but that of my adult children and extended family, too – actually they were page boys for my brother. They have taught us all about situations that we may never have come across. Fostering has enriched my life immeasurably. To find out more about fostering, visit thefosteringnetwork.org.uk