They say “write what you know” and Tina Fey knows a lot about work. Specifically, working in live TV (she was on Saturday Night Live from 1997 to 2006). She turned that experience first into the Emmy-winning 30 Rock, and later brought it to her producer role on another workplace sitcom, Great News. Even her non-office-based projects – Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt and Mean Girls – revolve around power dynamics, people management and everyday stresses; stuff that’s not funny until Fey turns it into a Netflix hit. It is no surprise she’s now something of an expert. Recently, on David Tennant’s podcast, Fey recounted the time David Cameron invited her to help save the UK’s television industry. “I said: ‘Well, we’re actually all very jealous of the model of where Ricky [Gervais] made 13 episodes of The Office and Greg Daniels and Steve Carell made like a thousand … so I sort of said I can’t.” Really, though, there was no need to fly her in as a de facto management consultant; she has been imparting her special brand of workplace wisdom for her entire screen career. Here are the main take-aways … Our comedy heroes are often self-destructive standups or seditious characters in sitcoms, but what if you’re not the loose cannon getting taken to task for menacing an office junior? What if you’re the poor sap stuck filling in all the HR paperwork afterwards? That’s Fey’s refreshing perspective, and it makes sense when you consider that her first step on the road to international superstardom was simply deciding to act professionally. While performing improv with the Chicago-based Second City in the mid-90s, Fey began dating her director. “I thought: ‘Well, I’m going to have to leave because it’s not going to be fair to the ensemble … So, OK, this is the right thing to do, I’m going to try and get a writing job at Saturday Night Live.” That job was the launchpad for her career and that director is now her husband. There is a running joke on 30 Rock about how Liz Lemon (Fey) lacks any sort of home life beyond “night cheese”. It seems that’s at least partially based on Fey’s real-life workaholism, but it’s not merely hustle that got the woman where she is. Fey also knows how to recycle and repurpose for maximum efficiency. Her experience as SNL’s first female head writer became 30 Rock; she turned her 2004 film Mean Girls into a 2018 Broadway musical; and all of it went into her bestselling memoir Bossypants. Fey’s ultimate twofer win must have been marrying director and composer Jeff Richmond. He co-wrote the Mean Girls musical, composed theme tunes for both 30 Rock and Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt, and – most nobly – gave the world “Peeno Noir” AKA “an ode to black penis”. “Children’s party clown” isn’t the only top profession that requires juggling skills. Since having two children while working all the hours as producer-writer-star of 30 Rock, Fey has become an expert juggler of “it all”. Fey’s solution, as revealed in Bossypants, is to employ a full-time nanny (whom she refers to as “our Coordinator of Toddlery” because the word “nanny” “gives me class anxiety and race anxiety”) and also occasionally break down in tears at the office. Although, as she points out, “I have friends who stay at home with their kids and they also have a triannual sob, so I think we should call it even.” This might not in itself be hugely revelatory, but the fact that even a person of Fey’s unusual wit, wealth and industriousness is yet to land on the perfect work/life balance somehow really is. To Fey’s way of thinking, the odd at-work meltdown isn’t just inevitable, it can also be a get-ahead tactic: “Some people say, ‘Never let them see you cry.’ I say, if you’re so mad you could just cry, then cry. It terrifies everyone.” Liz Lemon’s everyday work look could best be described as “schlubby”, but considering what she wears at home (a Slanket), maybe jeans and a food-stained fleece does count as making an effort. At least Jack Donaghy (Alec Baldwin) can be relied upon to bring the glamour, as when Liz asks him why he’s wearing a tux and he responds: “It’s after six. What am I? A farmer?” Tina Fey and Amy Poehler are shining examples of women supporting women, and that’s only the start of Fey’s feminist influence on Hollywood. She mentored Lindsay Lohan on the set of Mean Girls, got Tracey Wigfield’s Great News into production and the likes of Lena Dunham, Mindy Kaling and Amy Schumer cite her as an inspiration. But Fey’s feminism is not uncomplicated, nor is her sisterly support unconditional. There’s proof of that in the episode of 30 Rock where Liz Lemon arranges to meet with a female colleague outside, by a statue of Eleanor Roosevelt, to tell her to “drop the sexy-baby act … You represent my show and you represent my gender in this business and you embarrass me!” Then there’s the awkward fact that Fay has been instrumental in the comedy careers of several men, too, including former 30 Rock writer Donald Glover. Just because Fey’s characters often self-define as “creatives” doesn’t mean they won’t snatch at any pay rise going. It is from these episodes that we’ve learned how to give an inspirational resignation speech (“Suck it monkeys, I’m going corporate”) and how useful the prefix “business” is as a way to smarten up any ordinary conversation. As in: “Well, it’s business drunk. It’s like rich drunk. Either way, it’s legal to drive.” Or, “I don’t think I can return this suit, because I got business-sick on it when I got home.” Over the course of four seasons (Unbreakable) Kimmy Schmidt goes from mistreated employee of irrational socialite Jacqueline to head of HR at tech startup Giztoob. This is but one example of Fey’s ability to see workplace dynamics from both sides of the employer/employee divide. In real life, her management philosophy of “hire talented people, then get out of their way” seems to be working out, but her on-screen alter egos are often anxious about getting it right. They learn that doing your thing without caring what others think is the biggest power move there is. Something Mean Girls’ Regina George could have taught them in high school. Wine Country is out now