Rory McIlroy is expected to compete for Ireland at next year’s Olympics after revealing a change of stance regarding his participation. McIlroy was one of a number of high-profile male golfers who opted out of golf’s return to the Games, in Rio three years ago, amid concerns relating to the Zika virus. His position on 2020 had been unclear until now. Speaking at Bethpage on Tuesday as he prepared for the US PGA Championship, McIlroy explained that he plans to retain a team commitment to Ireland that has existed throughout his golf career. “More likely than not I will play,” said the Northern Irishman. “I think it would be a great experience. We’re going to play the Open [at Royal St George’s] and then probably go back to Memphis [for a World Golf Championship] and then go to Tokyo. So it’s sort of going to be one of those deals where we probably get in on Tuesday, tee it up on a Thursday, and then we’ve got to get ready for the rest of the season. It’s just one of those things where it’s just in the middle of a really busy stretch. But yeah, right now in my mind I’ll most likely play.” Because of his nationality, the 30-year-old could have opted to play for either Ireland or Team GB, which covers Great Britain and Northern Ireland. McIlroy made it plain that the latter was never a realistic option. “As a young boy it was always my dream to play for Ireland,” McIlroy explained. “I was very proud to put on that shirt or that blazer. “It’s the same as like the rugby players, right? There’s players that play for Ulster but they want to play for Ireland. It’s seen as a whole island sport, just like hockey is, just like most of the sports are. “So then obviously when you put the Olympics into the equation and there’s a choice to be made, you really have to start thinking, what are your beliefs and your values. “I had an unbelievable amateur career – and I don’t mean that in terms of results – but I mean that in the experiences I had, the trips that I had, the friendships that I made and the friendships that I still have to this day. That was all because of playing for Ireland and getting close to some of those guys. I’m excited to be going to the Olympics. I’m excited to play for Ireland.”