As numerous articles in, and even the title of, your excellent Mental Health supplement (15 May) made clear, the key to addressing any mental health issue is so often an opportunity to talk about that issue: daily, weekly, but – most importantly – on a regular basis. In my opinion, what was never really recognised as being crucially important, and was criminally whittled away as a consequence of austerity, is access to professionally trained support workers, available in the community, who can visit patients in their homes and with whom patients can share their concerns. Mental health issues include many fears and questions around hospital, medication and possible relapse. The people with those questions are often isolated and confused; friends and family are often similarly confused. The voluntary sector is like a resistance movement in an occupied territory. Appointments with professionals are limited to perhaps once every six months or when a person relapses and returns to hospital. A consistent and regularly available link between clinician and patient needs to be put back in place, rigorously maintained and recognised for what it really can achieve. It should be placed at the centre of mental health care and support, second only to the service user or patient themselves.Mike SmartLondon • Having known little about dementia until recently, I have become acutely aware of how unkind it is to isolate sufferers (Number of people living alone with dementia likely to double by 2039, 15 May). The illness is a cruel one: people with dementia can be very aware of their loss of mental ability. Given the right environment sufferers can experience a good quality of life, but company is the key. I have attended music therapy classes – at the start when asked what song they would like, Show Me the Way to Go Home was suggested. Everyone was relaxed, joined in and laughed. Exercise classes were similar. When told to row a boat, the comment came: “I get seasick!” Craft classes, where in a group a picture was completed by incorporating work done by everyone, was both engaging and satisfying for the group. Sadly, the day centres that provide this quality of life are closing. It is the group camaraderie, with wonderful, well-trained staff who provide a safe and caring environment, that makes them. No amount of private care makes up for that. There is no such thing as community? Thatcher is still haunting us!Catherine DunnSt Andrews, Fife • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition