There was little to lure West Indian fans to the cricket in recent times. On the field performances were discouraging; flashes here and there, but mostly it was dispiriting. Events off the field were malignant; the administrative body had become entrenched in a battle over ownership of the players and the right to control the game’s fortunes and the feuding mentality became almost permanent. It was bound to affect morale. But something enigmatic happened when England toured the West Indies earlier this year. West Indies played competitive cricket … consistently. The English team are at the top of the ICC rankings in one-day internationals, fourth in Tests, and second in Twenty20s; West Indies hang about at around eighth and ninth; the series seemed dismally predictable. It turned out to be riveting. Jason Holder seemed to have emerged as a captain commanding the respect of his players and distinctly more strategic in his approach. Following closely on that surprise came another when the controversial president of Cricket West Indies, Dave Cameron, was replaced after many years by Ricky Skerritt, a former team manager. It led to immediate changes within the management structure. A new selection committee was named, the coach was replaced and players who had found themselves out in the cold began receiving welcoming overtures. It might yet be a mixed bag given a new coach and support staff just before the World Cup will bring its own challenges for a team who have still not found consistency. ICC world ranking 8 (as of 6 May)Captain Jason Holder, leftCoach Floyd ReiferWorld Cup best Winners 1975, 1979 Fixtures (10.30am unless stated)31 May v Pakistan, Trent Bridge6 June v Australia, Trent Bridge10 June v South Africa, Southampton14 June v England, Southampton17 June v Bangladesh, Taunton22 June v New Zealand, Old Trafford (1.30pm)27 June v India, Old Trafford1 July v Sri Lanka, The Riverside4 July v Afghanistan, Headingley The squad has a mix of experience and form and will need senior players to step up. The Bangladesh encounter at the Tri-Nation series would have exposed weaknesses. With the old hands Andre Russell, Chris Gayle, Kemar Roach and the Bravo brothers around to help Holder rally younger members such as Shimron Hetmyer, Nicholas Pooran, Oshane Thomas and Shai Hope, there should be enough to put up a fight. It would have been nice to see Kieron Pollard and Dwayne Bravo in the squad as their experience is invaluable. The reserves include players who shone at the Tri-Nation series with Bangladesh and Ireland. Roston Chase, John Campbell, Sunil Ambris and Keemo Paul made the cut, which adds some options. Overall though, this World Cup is crammed with batsmen in form. A strong batting battalion is not going to be enough. The West Indies pace attack looks penetrative but their spinners may not have the edge required should the weather conditions get quirky. The challenge then would be to respond quickly enough on game days and find the balance in the bowling strategy. The fielding could use some tightening up. They would do well to remember that bowlers will need extraordinary support because this World Cup looks set to be a festival of runs. With the English weather heating up, plus reports that pitches are flat and there isn’t much swing, West Indies might look to launch an all-out aggressive pace attack using Shannon Gabriel and Oshane Thomas, with backup from Sheldon Cottrell and Roach, and Holder, should the ball begin to turn. They are going to have to go hard and fast inside the first powerplay. Gayle has slowed down his scoring but if he bats deep he is sure to amass big scores. They will have to wallop their way from early on and then make sure that they have a substantial total by the 40th, because even high scores might not be enough. Among the batsmen Shai Hope stands out for confidence that does not get in the way of judicious strokeplay. He can easily hold his own against medium pace and spin and he has now moved up the ODI rankings to No 4. Should Darren Bravo find form, the two could be a bedrock that allows batsmen freedom. The experience of Gayle and Russell will be needed to temper the impetuosity of Hetmyer, Lewis and Pooran. Roach is a key bowler who can turn matches around, and he is in the form to make it happen, but Gabriel and Thomas might be the ones to watch. The last time West Indies won a World Cup was 40 years ago; not even Gayle was born. They stand down in the lower order of team rankings in every format of the game. What could take them out of the realm of underdogs? On paper the team are solid except for the absence of wicket-taking spin bowlers, but it might turn out to be the place for pace. The batting order offers much promise and if the fielding holds up they have a good chance of surprising a world that gives them only a 50% chance. It’s all in the spirit they muster because that could be the game-changer. Vaneisa Baksh is a freelance cricket writer and editor based in Trinidad.