Late-night hosts focused heavily on the currently beleaguered attorney general William Barr and his much-criticized testimony. After intentionally misleading the public through his initial letter summarizing “principal conclusions” of the Mueller report, Barr faced the music from the Senate judiciary committee and, as it turns out, Mueller himself. Seth Meyers went in for a closer look at the Barr hearings, tracing the past few weeks since the public got word of the Mueller report. “This thing [the Mueller Report] was more highly anticipated than the last Avengers movie,” said Meyers, cupping his mouth with his hands to suggest secrecy, “and almost just as long”. Calling Barr’s letter summarizing the report “infamous”, Meyers admonished Barr for the four-page letter: “Right off the bat, [it’s] impossible. You can’t boil a report that long down to four pages and you shouldn’t try. It’s like saying the Battle of Winterfell is about a dude who smoked too much weed and thought he was a bird.” He then poked fun at Trump for saying the Democrats were on life support, after the release of Barr’s letter that seemed to exonerate him. “They need mouth-to-mouth? Every time you do a rally, you look like a guy that got locked inside a sauna overnight?” But Meyers also criticized the lies of the attorney general when he said he didn’t know how Mueller felt, even though he got a letter from the special counsel himself. “There’s no way you just forgot about a letter from Robert Mueller. That’s like forgetting about a note on your windshield that says: ‘I know what you did last summer.’” During the monologue, Meyers targeted Senator Lindsey Graham and his fellow Republican senators who did not focus on the issue at hand. Meyers compared Graham’s current stance on obstruction to his former stance during the Clinton presidency, using clips of Graham reprimanding Clinton. “First of all, how is it that young Lindsey Graham looks like more of an adult than current Lindsey Graham? Now he looks like a 12-year-old boy that just dyed his hair green for a school play.” At one point in the proceedings, Graham read out texts from FBI agents, one saying “Trump is a fucking idiot”. Meyers took delight in this particular clip, using it over and over again. “America, I feel like I found a fundamental flaw in your democracy: You have no defense against someone just being a dick.”William Barr shows up to his Senate testimony with his middle finger held high. pic.twitter.com/41j5OsdqeA On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah’s monologue focused on the circus Barr’s testimony to the Senate judiciary committee turned out to be. “Barr’s letter was basically the justice department’s equivalent of every announcement on the subway,” Noah said. With Barr doubling down on his letter and the inconclusive conclusions, many of the senators attacked the way he seemingly protected the Trump administration. With the graphic onscreen showing a digitized green Barr and a caption calling the attorney general the Un-credible Hulk, Noah credited Barr for holding his own. With Barr maintaining he wasn’t trying to summarize the explosive Mueller report, but summarize the “principal conclusions” (a summary), Noah called the exchange between Barr and Illinois senator Dick Durbin “the most exciting boring fight”, dubbing it the opposite of Star Wars: “Semantic Wars”. But regarding his subsequent phone call with Mueller, Barr told the committee the two were on the same page about the report. After Barr admitted notes were taken of the phone call in question, the Connecticut senator Richard Blumenthal asked for these notes. Barr declined. When asked why, Barr told the senator: “Why should you have them?” Noah found the response funny, telling his audience: “America, I feel like I found a fundamental flaw in your democracy: You have no defense against someone just being a dick.” Dubbing the day “Happy Bill Barr Day”, Colbert tore into the Senate hearing. “It was incredibly frustrating to watch. Filled with legalistic hair-splitting and political ass-covering,” he said. Colbert condensed the hearing this way: “The senators began the Q&A. They asked the Qs. And what [Barr] lacked in A, he made up in hole.” Using a clip of Barr saying the letter Mueller had written to him was a bit “snitty”, Colbert responded “I can imagine Mueller was a bit snitty because your four-page summary was a steaming pile of snit.” Colbert also called Senator Mazie Hirono’s commentary during the hearing “cold-blooded” but did not suggest it was inaccurate: “Madam. How dare you imply that Kellyanne Conway ever had a decent reputation!” But Hirono was only a starter to the “true star” of the hearing, California senator Kamala Harris, said Colbert. Playing clips of her questioning, Colbert made light of Harris’s thesaurus-like questions, pulling out a thesaurus of his own and continuing the list of words. “Sir, I’ve got a thesaurus and I’m not afraid to use it!” closed the host.