England’s netball captain, Ama Agbeze, has spoken of her frustration and disappointment after being left out of Tracey Neville’s 12-strong squad for the upcoming World Cup. Agbeze, 36, who led her country to an historic gold medal in the Commonwealth Games in Australia only 13 months ago is now facing the end of her international career although she has been included in a group of players on standby for the squad. The trained lawyer been recovering from a significant knee injury which caused her to miss the Quad Series at the beginning of this year. Having moved to the Superleague this season to join London Pulse, she struggled to be selected when fit. She told the BBC, however, that she felt she would have been ready to play with six weeks between the announcement of England’s World Cup squad on Thursday and the start of the tournament in Liverpool on 12 July. “I was told that if I just try to get on court, everyone knows I’m not where I need to be, but we’ve got the whole of May, the whole of June, and the first two weeks of July to get me to where I need to be,” she said. “It wouldn’t be fair for me to go not to my full capacity. I did think I had time but obviously that has been taken out of my hands. I think I’m dealing with it quite well but I’m really disappointed. “I feel like my netball career has been a rollercoaster. I got the top of the rollercoaster at the Commonwealth Games and now I’m plunging down that drop.” In a statement on Sunday, England Netball said Agbeze was part of a long squad of 20 on standby to be called up to the final 12 if required. Neville, England’s head coach, said: “The selection process began last July, since that time Ama has faced many challenges including ongoing injuries which have meant that she has missed out on several playing opportunities, which are crucial leading into selection. “Ama is a valuable player … and we will be working very hard with her over the next few months to ensure she is in the best possible shape as she is one of the 20 players in our long squad and could be called up to play at the World Cup at any time.”