The only issue I really have with 15 Days (Channel 5) is timing. With its brooding air and claustrophobic setting (a huge Welsh farmhouse where the cosiness is rendered toxic by so many family members and their poisonous secrets) it is perfect midwinter rather than springtime fare. But – and particularly for someone temperamentally better suited to colder, bleaker times – ’twas no matter. Channel 5’s four-part English-language remake of the Welsh production Diwrnod 35 (35 Days) is simultaneously satisfying and moreish at any time of year. It is intriguing without being overcomplicated and – perhaps in view of its instant digestibility – someone has made the wise decision to strip it over four nights rather than four weeks. I should think everyone who sticks with it will breathe a deep sigh of gratification rather than frustration at the end. We begin with the crime – a young man shot investigating a noise outside the house as his wife and baby wait within – then flash back 15 days (I have no notion what happened to the missing 20; Cambrian brooding must just take longer in its original tongue) to reconstruct how we got from here to murderous there. Four estranged siblings gather at the family estate to scatter their mother’s ashes (Dad is already dead and not very much lamented) and read her will. Oldest brother Gareth (Geraint Morgan, who played the same role in the inaugural version) has housing development designs on the farmland, while sister Sara (Catherine Tyldesley, having a much more rewarding time here than she did during her decade-long stint as Eva Price in Coronation Street) has a more sentimental attachment to the place. Other sister Nia (Mali Tudno Jones, also in the original) is more interested in seeing if she can shag Sara’s antagonistic husband, Michael (David Caves), again, and troubled youngest sibling Rhys (Tom Rhys Harries) is consumed by flashbacks, suggesting a past almost as complicated as his hair. He is the one who will end up bleeding his last on the flagstone floor; an ending one suspects may have something to do with his fragmented recollections of pushing his father’s head underwater in a lake. But there is so much else to suspect, that we are rarely detained by one person’s potential culpabilities for long. There is the early death of a fifth sibling, Owen, allegedly run over by Daddy in the drive – when he was too furious to check none of his children were in the way before he pulled out – and now possibly haunting the house. There is the hatred for Gareth’s irritating new wife. There is their uncle Hugh, currently farming some of the land (technically illegally), who fell out with their father years ago when he inherited the bulk of the family estate, but who, I’d wager in light of the first episode’s conclusion, remained very close to their mother. Hugh’s son Tom is perpetually in need of money, and, when his relatives are out scattering the ashes, helps himself to Grandma’s jewellery. This includes a turquoise and silver bauble, known to the rest of them as “the Stone of Tears”, from, presumably, the Cardiff branch of Simply Gothic – “for all your foreshadowing needs!”. I think that is where they got the gnomic Mabli from too, unless she just came with the house, as I didn’t see her arrive with any of the siblings and she seems very in tune with the lingering spirit of Owen. Join the characters in just about any combination, and there is no love lost between them. This is a splendidly wrought mass of bitterness, resentment, lies and secrets – stuffed into a single house and festering under the pressure of grief and unwanted presences. Every scene tells us more about them, while beautifully and maddeningly suggesting that the new titbit is just the tip of a whole new iceberg. It is the kind of thing that makes you not want to meet anyone incapable of enjoying it. The performances (with the possible exception of Caves’ Michael, which so far is a one-note thing) are uniformly good, and as a drama it is a solid piece of craftsmanship. Everything is planed and sanded to a nice finish, the joints are stable and you can relax around it, secure in the knowledge of its perfect functionality and drawn to its pleasing nature above and beyond that. Beware the Mabli, though. I reckon she is behind everything.