Unfortunately, my sweet tooth hasn’t skipped a generation and my son is as keen on ice-cream as I am, but I try to keep sugar at home to a minimum. These little squares are sweetened with dried fruit and maple syrup, and, as sweet things go, are pretty healthy. Most kids love to have some choice in what they eat, so a lot of successful dinners, snacks and treats centre around a big platter for us all to choose from. I have made one like this for a family afternoon movie and for the end of a grownup dinner with equal success. Who says a carrot can’t be a treat? Sometimes I mix up the spices and use a little cardamom in place of the cinnamon. Prep 20 minCook 45 minMakes 16 4 tbsp chia seeds200g rolled oats150g dried fruit (I use a mixture of dried apricots and raisins)1 medium carrot1 apple100g desiccated coconut 100g pumpkin seeds6 tbsp maple syrup1 tbsp vanilla extract ½ tsp ground cinnamon1 pinch ground ginger 70g coconut oil, melted Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/gas 6 and line a 20cm × 30cm baking tin with greaseproof paper. In a small bowl, soak the chia seeds in four tablespoons of water, then set aside. Put the oats in a food processor and blitz until you have a scruffy flour, then tip into a large bowl. Put half the dried fruit into the food processor and blitz until broken down and a little mushy. Scrape into the bowl with the oats. Grate the carrot and apple (no need to peel them) into the bowl, and add the remaining dried fruit, coconut, chia mixture, pumpkin seeds, maple syrup, vanilla, spices and melted coconut oil. Mix well. Spoon into the tin, smooth the top with the back of a spoon, and bake for 40–45 minutes, until golden brown. Leave to cool a little in the tray, then turn out on to a wire rack and leave to cool completely. Slice into pieces. Use whatever seasonal fruit and veg your family likes. Any leftover veg can be stored in cold water in the fridge for future snacking, and fruit can be frozen for smoothies. Prep 40 minChill 20 minServes 6-8 1 apple1 orange1 small punnet of strawberriesA few baby carrots2 baby/Persian cucumbers1 handful sugar-snap peasA few radishes, with their tops½ lemon For the date caramel225g medjool dates, pitted 125ml hot water 1 small pinch salt For the chocolate truffles 100g coconut oil, melted100ml maple syrup125g cocoa powder, plus 2 tbsp for rolling170g almond butterPinch of sea salt Wash the fruit and veg, cut into dippable pieces, then squeeze a little lemon over any that might discolour. To make the caramel, put the dates, hot water and salt in a food processor, and blitz smooth. Pour into a small bowl. Next, make the truffles. Mix the melted coconut oil, maple syrup, cocoa powder, nut butter and sea salt in a bowl. Pour into a wide, shallow dish (the wider the dish, the faster it will cool), then put in the freezer for 20 minutes, or until set. Use a tablespoon (and dry hands) to roll the mix into large, marble-sized balls. Put two tablespoons of cocoa powder on a plate and roll each ball until covered on all sides. Store in the fridge until needed. When you’re ready to serve, arrange the fruit and veg on a platter with a bowl of caramel and the truffles.