Te Awa Left Field Albariño, Gisborne, New Zealand 2018 (£10.95, The Wine Society) In a competition for the Iberian Peninsula’s greatest white grape variety, albariño (or alvarinho) would certainly be among the leading contenders. But it’s only really in recent years that it’s started to get a foothold in other countries. The results are getting better by the harvest, as the vines, often in coastal sites, mature, with the variety’s natural salty-freshness, white flowers and peachy fruit being given a local twist from Uruguay to California, Australia and New Zealand. That country’s Gisborne region, on the east coast of the North Island, is home to one of the most consistent albariños around: squeaky clean and bright with its ripe, floral-inflected fruit, it has a textural kinship with the country’s sauvignons, but a refreshingly different range of flavours. Pazo de Señorans Albariño, Rías Baixas, Spain 2017 (£15.95, Hennings; Virgin Wines) The climatic influence of the Atlantic is strong on albariño in northwest Spain and Portugal; and no less so on the other side of the ocean in Uruguay. Certainly, there’s something saline in the tongue-tingling raciness of Bouza Albariño, Montevideo, Uruguay 2018 (£19.95, Jeroboams). It’s a wine that stands up well to comparisons with the best of Spanish albariño from Rías Baixas in Galicia, such as those made by the excellent Pazo de Señorans. The company’s straight Albariño 2017 is a textbook combination of breeziness and fleshiness with a shellfish-ready citrus-and-mineral edge. Pazo de Señorans Selección Añada Albariño 2007 (£39.50, The Wine Society) is still more magnificently minerally, spicy and herbal-honeyed. It’s a seriously fine white wine. Casa de Vila Nova Alvarinho, Minho, Portugal 2018 (£9.69, Rannoch Scott; Wines of Interest; Kwoff) In the supermarkets, albariño does a nice line in affordable easy-drinkers from Rías Baixas, with the own-label versions by Sainsbury’s (Taste the Difference), Waitrose (Viña Taboexa) and Aldi (Exquisite) each being pretty good in an easy-breezy way without touching the heights. Waitrose also has one of the first French examples of the variety, Laurent Miquel Albariño 2017 (£11.49), which has a distinctly pink grapefruity citrus tang. Then there is the other part of the variety’s original home, across the border from Galicia into northern Portugal, where alvarinho is widely used as a blending component in the improving, zesty, often-gently spritzy, light whites of Vinho Verde, but is also increasingly made as a single-varietal, such as the graceful, vital, subtly floral Casa de Vila Nova. Follow David on Twitter @Daveydaibach