Okwui Okpokwasili wants to shake you. Up and down and to your core, six times a week. In Bronx Gothic, a dance-theatre hybrid that is heading for London’s Young Vic, the New York-born polymath spends the first 30 minutes shaking, shuddering, shivering, quavering – a quake-like movement that begins in her belly and extends to fingers and toes, eyes and mouth. She calls it “break body” or “twerking gone horribly wrong”. As the audience enters, fussing with programmes and phones, her dress darkens with sweat. Her breath goes frayed and ragged. “I hope the mirror neurons get going,” she says, “where you’re just like, ‘Am I shaking, too?’” A week before she leaves for London, I meet Okpokwasili for breakfast a few subway stops from her home in Brooklyn. Sheathed in a grey scarf and a puffy vest, she looks regal, stately even as she sits, straight-spined, in a diner behind a plate of bacon and eggs and salt-and-peppered avocado. (She also tried to order a plate of oatmeal, but the waiter, unaware of the show’s physical demands, talked her out of it.) Bronx Gothic, which became the subject of a documentary film, helped to earn Okpokwasili a MacArthur “genius” grant for “making visible the interior lives of women whose stories of resistance and resilience have been left out of dominant cultural narratives”. The show began in 2012. Okpokwasili was pregnant then – she and her husband, the director Peter Born, now have a seven-year-old daughter – and the changes that experience wrought reminded her of early adolescence “and a body kind of shifting and coming apart and becoming known to itself”. After those first 30 minutes – another way of forcing a body to shift and come apart – she reads notes passed between two barely pubescent girls. The gothic in the title refers to the form – the show, like many gothic novels, is largely epistolary – and also to the darkness that often underlies sexual initiation, the catcalls, the come-ons, the assaults. The daughter of Nigerian immigrants, Okpokwasili grew up in the Bronx, and as she was imagining the piece, she recalled the whistles, the taunts, the middle-school classmates “dry-humped against the fence. No one was there to protect them.” When she was pregnant, she knew she was carrying a girl, she says, “and I was thinking about girls and sex and the nature of innocence and what is it going to be like to have a brown girl in the world who may not be perceived as innocent.” The show isn’t directly autobiographical. Notes she once passed back and forth with a sexually active friend inspired some of the text, but the characters are invented. And it “isn’t necessarily a black play,” she says. “It’s purely a relationship between these two women.” Still, the lived experience of growing up in a black female body permeates the piece. Is empathy her endgame? Not really. “It’s about having some moral clarity about what needs to be fucking done,” she says. But she won’t dictate how audience members receive or interpret the show. She knows that her style – highly physical, disruptive, unsparing – will invite different responses. “I don’t know where you’re going to go,” she says. “I don’t want to determine it. I want freedom and liberation for myself. And then possibly for you.” Okpokwasili first performed the completed Bronx Gothic in 2014, then toured it. She didn’t think she would do it again and didn’t want to do it again, until Kwame Kwei-Armah, the Young Vic’s artistic director, asked her. And even then she said no. She was older, she knew what it took to perform it every night, she had moved on to other pieces, including works of her own and Jay-Z’s 4:44 video, in which she performs. But she began to wonder if she could do it again and how it would feel. Even now she can’t entirely explain why she eventually said yes: “There’s something about the piece that captures me in a way that’s hard to describe.” Her newer work – Poor People’s TV Room, which entwines two Nigerian stories, a 1929 anticolonial action and the Bring Back Our Girls movement, and Adaku’s Revolt, a family show about a girl discovering the power of her natural hair – revisits the themes of Bronx Gothic in heavier and lighter ways. “It’s all one tree,” she says. Where are the roots? “Black ladies,” she says. Her work imagines women taking space and giving voice, looking at each other and asking: “What do you need? What do we need? How do we survive? And how do we make sure we’re treated with some kind of respect and heard?” • Bronx Gothic is at the Young Vic, London, 1-29 June