It’s time to attend to the pots in your life, particularly those that contain half-dead (or completely dead) remains. It is entirely possible to reuse old compost: the books tell you not to, but they are assuming you have money to spare/a car/easy access to a garden centre. Certainly, if the plant died from disease or soil pests such as vine weevil, then the compost is best sent elsewhere. But if it just looks very tired, use it as mulch. Bang out the compost from around the roots and use this on top of other pots or plants in the garden. It’s not going to have a great nutrient content, but it will suppress a few weeds and lock in moisture. If, however, it looks fairly good, there aren’t many roots and you can still happily dig around in it, then it can be recycled for another planting. For years, I would just top up pots with a good layer of new compost and continue to plant. But I have learned the error of my ways: the compost becomes compacted. You might initially get good growth, but it soon becomes lacklustre, however much you feed it. This is because roots need to breathe, and compacted compost has little room for air. Because it is made of organic matter, compost is always further decomposing. Add in heavy watering, and this process of breaking down leads to compaction. In large pots this might mean that the whole bottom half becomes very densely packed with little or no root growth. If you just add new compost to the top, you are condemning the bottom half to a no-grow zone. You need to dump out the compost, add new nutrients and fluff back up. To prevent compaction happening again, add drainage. Horticultural grit and sand are excellent, but not always easy to get hold of. Finer bark mulch is good, but add extra-slow-release fertiliser, organic chicken manure or seaweed pellets to counterbalance the nitrogen robbing that happens as the bark breaks down. If you don’t have a car then these might be hard to lug home, but there is a solution: non-clumping, unperfumed clay cat litter. It is made from partially fired clay, which means that it is super-absorbent but won’t fall apart. It’s cheap and readily available from any supermarket. You want a quarter of the overall volume of the pot to be drainage material. Ideally you then cut the old compost with some new stuff, 50:50, and add a good handful of slow-release fertiliser, mix it well and then place back into the pot, ready for it to be planted up.