If their play was largely under whelming, especially in a first half when they could make little impression on a well-organised Hearts side, the prizes for Celtic and Neil Lennon were immense. The interim manager took his side over the line to an unprecedented treble treble, and within an hour of Scott Brown lifting the Scottish Cup, the club’s chief executive, Peter Lawwell, announced that Lennon had earned his second full-time spell. “I’m delighted to announce that after today’s event we’ve offered Neil Lennon the job of being the permanent Celtic manager,” Lawwell said. “It has been a fantastic day, fantastic achievement – probably never to be repeated. “Neil Lennon in our moment of need stepped up to the plate. He’s done a fantastic job in difficult circumstances. He’s a Celtic man and is made for Celtic and he’s a winner. “Over the next few days we will work out the details. Today was a big occasion for him, but Neil would still have been the manager, no matter what happened. He didn’t know that before the game.” The announcement overshadowed all that had preceded it. Two goals in the last 30 minutes from Odsonne Édouard, the first from the penalty spot, quickly cancelled out Ryan Edwards’s opener for Hearts. While the game as a spectacle will be quickly forgotten, the occasion will forever be etched in the minds of the Celtic players and fans, and especially Lennon. He returned to the club for his second stint when Brendan Rodgers suddenly departed for Leicester in February. “There’s a good chance I will accept the job,” he said with understatement. “It’s probably one of the best days of my life. You won’t ever see it again [the treble treble] so you can see the emotion on the pitch. They stretched themselves to the limits to win. “The first half we looked flat and pedestrian. I did say to them that Hearts may score, but we would score too. There was no need to panic. The Hearts goal almost gave them a jag. The urgency and response from that was fantastic. “The players are immortal now. To win the treble three years running is unbelievable. It was a privilege to manage Celtic the first time and now it has come the full circle.” While the afternoon ended on a personal and professional high for Lennon, the Hearts manager, Craig Levein, who also faced speculation about his future in the run-up to the final was visibly deflated. He had watched his team stifle Celtic for 52 minutes, then go ahead through Edwards, but his hopes of what he had dryly described as the “single single” disappeared as Celtic finally mustered up some urgency. Remarkably, Levein, a fine central defender and also a former Scotland manager, remains without a career trophy. He set out his team well and he refused to blame his players for the goals. “Terribly disappointed to end up on the losing side,” he said. “I’m very proud of the way the players performed. I feel the pain they feel. “The plan was to try, if possible, not to give up any opportunities and that was going particularly well. It’s very difficult for me to be critical of anybody – they all tried ever so hard to implement the gameplan. “It’s a bitter blow, though I must congratulate Celtic. They have done the treble three times and it’s only right to mention it’s the first time it has been done in Scottish football.” Hearts took the lead when Arnaud Djoum played a short pass to Sean Clare and his clever back-heel allowed Edwards to beat Scott Bain from close range. The turning point arrived 10 minutes later when the Hearts goalkeeper, Bobby Zlamal, hesitated before coming out for a through ball and when he made a move it was to dive at the feet of Édouard and bring him down. Willie Collum gave the penalty and although Zlamal got a touch on the penalty he could not keep it out. The winner was one Hearts will want to forget. An ill-judged ball towards the halfway line was firmly headed forward by Mikael Lustig and the only player to react was Édouard. He was left with only Zlamal to beat and did so with aplomb.