Mauricio Pochettino comes from Murphy, a small town in the south of Santa Fe province in Argentina. The capital of Santa Fe, Rosario, houses two clubs, Rosario Central and Newell’s Old Boys. We spoke to figures in Pochettino’s early years, which led to a playing career as a centre-back with Newell’s Old Boys, Espanyol, Paris Saint- Germain, Bordeaux and Argentina, and managing Espanyol, Southampton and Tottenham. Piersimone grew up two doors away on the same street as Pochettino. He remembers Pochettino playing as a number 2, a number 5 and a 9. Piersimone followed on to Newell’s reserve sides and spent most of his professional career at Arsenal de Sarandí in Buenos Aires. He now coaches young players in Murphy. “This is such a small town that people ride around on their bikes and just leave them, no locks. Union Y Cultura [the club in Murphy] was our second home – we’d go to school, then to the vacant lot or the club. His first game for the first team he went on as a number 9 and scored. This is a town of 3,800 inhabitants and we’ve had 17 professional players [including Spurs’s reserve goalkeeper Paulo Gazzaniga]. “That passion, the love for the ball, you get in those hours kicking around is not something you can learn at football academies. We played for over two hours at a stretch, with older boys. We didn’t even need a ball: we would make a ball with our mother’s old stockings, with anything. Makeshift goalposts, jumpers, sticks, anything we could find. We’d play one-twos against the wall, spend hours dribbling. I think Mauricio still – above everything – tries to instil in his players that same passion we had as kids. That love for the ball above all else. “When we played at the club the full-sized pitch would be divided into four, and in those smaller pitches he already stood out both for his physique and his game. From early on everyone would pass the ball to him in the knowledge that he would be able to resolve. “We had gone to the same primary school in Murphy. He was hard-working, very responsible, quite serious. We all were, because we were brought up to finish school, do our homework, answer politely, all those things. But every spare minute we had we played football. “Although we haven’t stayed in touch much I did message him after the semi-final. I bet any amount of money that in order to reverse that result he had to appeal to some of that raw passion from the vacant lot. They [Spurs’ players] came out with a rebellion and a spirit that goes beyond a tactical talk. “We called him Conejo [Rabbit] and I said ‘Conejo, we are so proud of you’ (because we all called him ‘Conejo’, and everyone called me Careca). I’m hanging on to one line of his reply: ‘Careca, this is a tremendous madness’. “We’re really, really proud. We’re putting up massive screens around the whole town to watch the final. A coach who saw Pochettino play at Villa Cañás. “Mauricio was physically privileged, exceptional for his age. A good header, also strong, resilient, technically superlative. He was big for his age group. He shone in a league which is renowned for the high quality of its game. He was an extremely intelligent, very capable young man. He prepared himself for a move to Europe: learnt languages, knew what he had to do to adapt. Many players don’t realise how tough it can be. He had good teachers and learnt well from them. He had all the attributes to become a top leader and I have no doubt he will achieve great things. I’m happy, because he deserves this.” Hugo Lloris Goalkeeper  Season apps  43 He's captained France in more matches than any other, leading his country in 85 of 110 caps. Kieran Trippier Right-back Apps 37 Goals 1 Although his family are Manchester United fans, he joined Manchester City aged nine, signing a professional contract in 2007. Toby Alderweireld Centre-back  Apps 49 Goals 0 Played for Atlético Madrid in the 2014 final, which they lost to Real. He has represented Belgium at every level from Under-15s upwards. Jan Vertonghen Centre-back Apps 33 Goals 2 Belgium’s most-capped player with 112 appearances. He has represented them at the Olympics, Euros and World Cup. Danny Rose Left-back Apps 36. Goals 0 Scored a wonder goal on his Premier League debut against Arsenal as a 19-year-old. Ben Davies Left-back Apps 40 Goals 0 He is fluent in Welsh. He was part of Viborg’s academy while his family lived in Denmark for three years. Eric Dier Midfielder Apps 27 Goals 3 His family moved to Portugal when he was seven. In 2011, he spent six months at Everton, but did not play for their first team. Moussa Sissoko Midfielder Apps 43 Goals 0 Signed for £30m from Newcastle and has been a revelation this season. Joined his local academy, Espérance Aulnay, aged six. Victor Wanyama Midfielder Apps 22 Goals 1 He made his international debut aged 15, and became the first Kenyan to score in the Champions League when Celtic beat Barcelona. Christian Eriksen Midfielder Apps 50 Goals 10 He has scored the most direct free-kicks in the Premier League since joining the club. He started his career in the Middelfart academy. Dele Alli Midfielder Apps 37 Goals 7 Lived in Nigeria for two years from the age of nine. He grew up supporting Liverpool. Huge Fortnite fan. Érik Lamela Midfielder Apps 33 Goals 6 He scored 120 goals in one season when playing for River Plate’s youth side. Barcelona tried to sign him, offering his parents jobs and a house. Son Heung-min Forward Apps 47 Goals 20 His £22m move from Bayer Leverkusen made him the most expensive Asian footballer. Joined Hamburg’s academy aged 16 and recently said he will not get married until retiring. Lucas Moura Forward Apps 48 Goals 15 Won a silver medal for Brazil at the London Olympics. His hat-trick against Ajax was the first by a Brazilian in a Champions League semi-final. Harry Kane Forward Apps 39 Goals 24 Played for Arsenal and Watford before joining Tottenham. Has two Labrador retrievers, named after his NFL heroes, Tom Brady and Russell Wilson. Fernando Llorente Forward Apps 34 Goals 8 He was a member of Spain’s victorious 2010 World Cup and 2012 Euros squads. Caffa runs the local vet and commentates on local football on an FM radio station. He was a director at Union y Cultura, and is the father of Pedro José Caffa, now Spurs’ community manager. He was 14 when he was called to play in the first team. His father said to the coach 'He can't play, he's too young' “Jorge Griffa was in charge of the youth divisions at Newell’s. In those days – still now actually – they used to visit all the smaller towns in the area where six or seven boys would be selected for them to watch. In about 1986 Griffa came with a couple of assistants looking for players, including some guy called Marcelo Bielsa who no one knew at the time. They went to Villa Cañás. At the end of the day, when they’re having dinner [Hugo] Ribles mentions there’s a boy in Murphy who has already played in the first team: he plays as a 9 but he’s not a 9, Ribles told them. Rosario Central have a verbal agreement with him already. Griffa and Bielsa immediately asked: ‘How far is Murphy from here?’ “They drove the 51km that same night, arriving after midnight. The grandmother opened the door and woke the father up. Griffa says if he agrees to come to Newell’s he will guarantee participation in an international tournament that same season. “He was physically imposing. Often he was asked to prove his age because he looked much older than the other boys in his category. It was a good group, with Mauricio standing out. He would play in the centre of the pitch but two steps back, two steps forward, he resolved any situation. He was 14 when he was called to play in the first team. Murphy won 4-3 with two goals scored by Pochettino. His father had said to the coach, ‘He can’t play, he’s too young.’ But the answer came, ‘He may be young in age but physically he’s a bull.’ “He was a very responsible and conscientious lad. As a kid he went to the farm every day and worked there, helping his parents. I feel privileged that he has replied to a couple of messages, when I’ve greeted him for his birthday or when I congratulated him when they reached the final. In fact, I’m touched because this last time he texted Maca, with or without the cup we will get together for an ‘asado’ soon.’” “It’s truly a surprising phenomena that a small town like Murphy has provided so many professional players. Murphy is a very small town, but like everywhere I suppose there were divisions between north and south, the private and the state school. Union y Cultura as a club and its integral sports school (which really was just football, although nowadays girls are coming along too to play hockey and other sports) was where everyone gathered, so there was some sort of social levelling that happened there. “For many years the technical team was led by a guy who worked very well, very seriously called Zeferino ‘Tati’ Cossio, now deceased – his grandaughter Guillermina is an athlete – and I suppose to some extent as players like Pochettino made it in professional football that served for the next generations to have players and characters they could look up to and think ‘I want to get there too’.” Lala Samuel is sister of Walter Samuel, a centre-back for Newell’s Old Boys, Real Madrid and Argentina. “Mauricio was already playing for the first team at Newell’s when Walter was in the youth teams at the club. Walter decided to hitchhike to get there. Walter thought ‘Wow, this crazy guy in an expensive car stops for hitchhikers.’ It was Mauricio, and from then on he gave Walter a lift there and back every day. “They became good friends and one time when he [Pochettino] was already playing in Europe he dropped by to say hello. My sister Sol came to the door and said ‘Yes? How can I help you?’. He said he was looking for Walter and she said ‘Oh, he’s out.’ Just like that. She’s in a world of her own and didn’t recognise him! Mauricio told Walter later ‘She practically set the dogs on me!’ That’s the scandalous anecdote in our house, about the time Mauricio Pochettino came knocking and was turned away!” Former Newell’s Old Boys forward and World Cup winner. “He’s not committed to a single footballing idea. He adapts to the opponents, the surroundings, the context, the demands, the games, the absentees, and finds an answer to the equation. And from a human point of view, he’s able to manage a group in an exceptional way from normality, naturalness. And without signings. You have to actually coach to be able to see who has the ability to be a coach and who doesn’t. “I always had a good relationship with him; although we’re different ages, we’re from towns that are relatively close, and we connected. I admire him a lot. I didn’t imagine him as a coach but he was very intelligent. He wasn’t a player who had it all physically or in footballing terms; he had to think to be useful within the functioning of a team. But I didn’t translate that into him being a coach because there other elements that come into play, like communication, that you don’t always see when someone is playing.” Additional reporting by Sid Lowe