This month on the Reading group, for reasons that are obvious and clearly partisan, I want to celebrate Europe. I want you to nominate your favourite book published on the continent since the signing of the Treaty of Rome in 1957 – and let’s make it fun. By this stage in the UK’s national nervous breakdown, plenty of us are painfully aware of what we stand to lose in cutting ourselves off from our friends in Europe – but that doesn’t mean we can’t still celebrate them. Especially since there’s so much good stuff to talk about. In literary terms, there are 62 of the most productive years in world literary history to choose from. Our only stipulation is that your chosen book was originally written in a European language other than English, somewhere on the continent and that English translations are widely available. Off the top of my head that takes in writers as diverse as Italo Calvino, Antonio Tabucchi, Stanislaw Lem, Peter Stamm, Willem Frederik Hermans, Georges Perec, Karl Ove Knausgaard, Ivan Klíma, Thomas Bernhard, Chika Unigwe, Javier Marías, Elena Ferrante, Alain Robbe-Grillet, Goscinny and Uderzo – and, what the hell, Michel Houellebecq. But to start naming authors is almost pointless – there are so many in contention that any list I compile will only be notable for its omissions. I also know that the eventual list you come up with will be far bigger and far more interesting. Just in case you do need further inspiration, take a look at Richard Lea’s superb World Literature Tour series, which contains hundreds, if not thousands of recommendations. This New Statesman article contains some fine tips and if you start Googling the best books of the past 60 years by individual country there are endless rabbit holes to fall down – all of them full of delights. Just don’t forget to come back here and make your nomination when you emerge again. To get your favourite book – or books – into contention please post in the comments below. If you can include a reason for your choice, so much the better. I’m happy to accept multiple nominations – not least because part of the fun is passing on good suggestions to other readers. I’ll print out the candidates towards the end of the week and draw the winner from a hat. I’ll give Ode to Joy a good blast while I’m doing it.