Jed Mercurio’s cop drama Line of Duty is the UK’s most-watched series this year, drawing 13.2 million viewers for the first episode of season five. The thrilling plotline, which follows officers trying to root out corruption in the police force, has left one question on everyone’s lips: who is H? Sunday’s episode could finally answer that question. Bookmakers have offered odds of 2/1 against it being Ted Hastings, who has been mired in controversy after being arrested in the last episode. Fans are hoping the mild-mannered superintendent will be redeemed, but with his financial difficulties and the fact he misspells the word definitely, he is a clear contender for the role of bent cop. As the season finale approaches, we asked former police officers how close the show comes to reality, plus the pressing questions: does anyone actually say “bent coppers”? How often do police see dead bodies in the freezer? And who do they think H is? I only ever watched one episode of Line of Duty and thought it so far-fetched I could not stand any more. My wife hated me constantly pointing out inconsistencies and banned me from watching any police dramas.Peter Fahy, former chief constable of Greater Manchester police I have no clue who H is, but it can’t be Ted. He’s the sort of boss we’d all like to have – before he dropped himself in it. He’s supportive, wants to get the job done and is not afraid to get his hands dirty. But then there is this sort of dodgy business dealing that he’s been involved with. It’s a bit worrying, but I hope to see him emerge squeaky clean.Chris Hobbs, former officer in the Met I find it ironic that you never see this many minorities in specialist departments apart from in TV programmes like Line of Duty. I think it’s cynical, a marketing tactic where minorities are brought in to sell the programme. I was a gold commander and a firearms operator. There is a scene where firearm officers are waiting at the warehouse, after a tip that the main gangsters are planning to steal from it. The team suddenly get another call and just leave – but it’s so clearly a distraction call. That would never happen in real life. You would always leave at least one officer to stay.Dal Babu, formerly gold commander in the Met I was a detective superintendent in the Met’s anti-corruption unit, a role quite similar to Ted Hastings’. But I never came across any fridging – the practice of storing dead bodies in freezers – in my career. I advise on the script for Line of Duty. My job is to help make the series appear authentic, in terms of the language used, the acronyms, the uniforms, what the cars look like and the kind of firearms officers have – things like that. Some officers say to me: “Why is it so negative?” I’d have a different spin on that. I’d say it shows that there is a dedicated force who are there to root corruption out. It is a drama series not a documentary. But that’s the advantage of drama: if it was entirely accurate it would be far more plodding and less dramatic.David Zinzan, script consultant, formerly a police commander Line of Duty is great TV that hooks you in emotionally and intellectually. I have worked in professional standards departments and anti-corruption. With that experience, sometimes watching you can feel a bit affronted. Firearms operations and surveillance operations, the use of informants and undercover officers are so professionally managed with such a high level of accountability and scrutiny. You can’t help but think of your colleagues, who work hard in those units with great courage, and you sort of feel they are sold short. But then you have to laugh at yourself and remind yourself that it’s fiction and entertainment and it keeps so many of us, including police, hooked.Helen King, formerly assistant commissioner at the Met