Golden State beat Houston, 118-113, in Friday night’s Game 6 of the Western Conferences semi-finals, viewed by many as the de facto NBA finals. For the third straight year, the Warriors closed the books on a Rockets title bid. And they did so without Kevin Durant, the current holder of the best-on-earth moniker. The often contentious series seemed to have swung Houston’s way in Game 5, despite the Warriors taking a 3-2 series lead. Durant went down with a calf strain that ruled him out of the rest of the series and perhaps beyond. What had been previewed as a battle of two contrasting styles – the Warriors melodic ball movement v the Rockets staccato offense – had been misguided. Much of the Warriors offense through these playoffs have resulted in a late shot clock plea. Hey, Durant. Save us. The Durant-void loomed large over the series. Either we would see the old-school, pre-Durant Warriors: more fluidity on offense, the splash brothers – Steph Curry and Klay Thompson – shooting from anywhere and everywhere. Or, without Durant to bail them out, the Warriors would finally bog down, weighed down by years of playoff attrition. This was Houston’s best shot yet. The basketball Gods had finally shone some good fortune their way. This was supposed to be their year. Curry was a mess in the first half of Game 6. He played only 12 minutes, picking up three fouls and missing all five of his shots. No Durant, no Curry. And yet the Rockets went in tied up at the half. The onus fell on Klay Thompson to save the Warriors. Thompson has a penchant for Game 6 heroics. The Warriors previous big, bad foe was the Durant-Westbrook Thunder. With their historic season the line during the 2016 Western Conference finals in Oklahoma City, Thompson caught fire, unleashing one of the most preposterous barrages if shot making in the history of the sport. Thompson drilled 11 three-pointers and scored 41 points to force a Game 7. Golden State won’t need the seventh game this time around. Thompson kept Golden State in Game 6 in Houston, scoring 21 first-half points; Curry closed the deal. Curry scored his first basket with just under 10 minutes in the third quarter. In the end, he finished with 33 points, scoring 23 points in the fourth quarter alone. It was vintage Steph, scoring in every possible way: springing open off a pin-down and draining an open look; the pump-fake, sidestep, shimmy shake routine; and the off-the-bounce, off-balance, what-in-the-hell-did-I-just-watch rainbow shots, usually greeted with a snarl or a chest thump or a hanging tongue. When the buzzer finally sounded, Curry and Thompson had combined for 60 of the Warriors’ 118 total points. The old-school Warriors were back. “They just outplayed us,” Chris Paul said postgame. “They played smarter than us and made the big plays, and we didn’t.” This was supposed to be the year for Houston, with the Durant drama swirling around the Warriors; the incessant talk of his looming free agency had led to infighting and a dour mood that plagued the team all season. We’ve never seen five All-Stars (possible Hall of Famers) share the floor together in the modern era. They were expected to barnstorm the league. Yet they won just 57 games. Something with their chemistry felt off all season. This was supposed to be the year, with injury concerns to DeMarcus Cousins; Andrew Bogut creaking down the court; Andre Iguodala unable to bring it every night; Thompson battling a shoulder concern; Curry struggling with aches and pains; Durant slated to miss games six and seven. This was supposed to be the year, with the Warriors battling the attrition of four-straight trips to the finals, the Rockets still feeling the pain from last year’s improbable loss – 27 straight missed 3s cost Houston Game 7 of the Western Conference finals, and an ill-timed Chris Paul injury. This was supposed to be the year, where all the pieces in Houston finally fit. This Rockets team wasn’t just cooked up in a lab to shoot 3s and play ISO ball. They were put together to be rough and rugged, to bully a smaller, slender Warriors team. “They’ve got a lot of middle linebackers on that team,” Warriors coach Steve Kerr said after Game 4. “We’re built like volleyball players, long and lean.” This was supposed to be the year, with Harden determined to make up for his previous playoff struggles, Paul ready to overcome the narrative that his regular season production doesn’t carry over into postseason-wise. Harden went to another level during the regular season a year after winning the MVP. The Rockets played like a lottery team early in the year until Harden went supernova on the league, scoring 30-plus points in 32 straight games. And yet, in the playoffs, it still wasn’t enough. The talent level was the same for both sides during the second half of Game 5 and throughout Game 6. But the Warriors have a mental toughness that’s often overlooked due to their talent level. The Rockets have toasted all contenders this season. The title was right there for them. They had the look. But it’s clear they have a mental blockage when it comes to the Warriors. Last year’s loss was an embarrassing one. This year’s might be more painful. Any long-term hopes in Houston can now be boiled down to this: hope Durant leaves Golden State this summer and the remaining Warriors implode. Even then, there’s the small matter of Giannis Antetokounmpo out East. Kawhi Leonard could rock up with the Clippers. LeBron and the Lakers will reload and go again. For all their drama, the Celtics still have the outline of a young, exciting team. Philadelphia might figure out how to balance Joel Embiid and Ben Simmons – or ship one out. Anthony Davis will have a new home, immediately vaulting his team to contender status. Asking Harden to sustain the kind of mileage, punishment, and workload for another year is too big an ask, particularly if you want him at his apex come the postseason. Rockets general manager Daryl Morey, long considered one of the smartest, most innovative front office executives in sports, may finally be out of title-tilting chess moves. There aren’t many avenues for this Houston team to improve. They’re capped out, with minimal flexibility. Chris Paul is still due $123m over the next three seasons, with a deal that escalates to $41m in 2021 and $44m in 2022. Paul will be 36 years old in 2022; he’s already shown signs of decline. Paying a non-primary ball handler over $40m as they careen towards their 40s is a basketball apocalypse. There’s not much Morey can do. He made a gamble, and it was a worthwhile one. When the rest of the basketball world declared the decade was over, that the Warriors would sweep the next seven-to-10 titles, Morey said ‘game on.’ He bet on star-power and Harden. He knew the Paul extension would look ugly in the final two seasons. But he was paying for those first two, looking to cash-in on Harden’s prime. Houston deserves credit for that. They’ve come close to knocking off the greatest collection of in-their-prime talent since the ‘86 Celtics … twice. They did so by tipping the math in their favor: shooting a barrage of three-pointers, and choosing efficiency and raw output over stylistic beauty. Harden shooting 11 free throws a game and double-digit stepback shots may not be aesthetically pleasing, but it was David’s best path to taking down Goliath. It was still not enough. Houston missed its shot to force a do-or-die Game 7. And in doing so, watched the Harden-Paul championship window slam shut, probably for good.