Labor’s failure to pick up any marginal seats in Queensland has sealed its likely fate in opposition for the next three years, as the party reels from Saturday’s election result. The Liberal National party’s landslide victory in Queensland delivered it two extra seats, clawing back Longman and Herbert from the ALP while holding on to all of its marginal electorates in the state. After Saturday’s election, Labor is expected to hold only five of the state’s 30 electorates. Labor was on track to suffer a 4.4% swing against it on primary votes in Queensland, with about 65% of the vote counted. On a two-party-preferred basis, this translated to a 4% swing towards the LNP. And despite Clive Palmer spending an estimated $60m on campaign advertising, his United Australia party was able to secure only 3.4% of first-preference votes, with the result in Queensland on par with the national result. The shock extent of Labor’s losses was compounded by the fact tht party strategists largely failed to see them coming. “A lot of people are asking what went wrong, we just don’t know,” one Labor figure told Guardian Australia. “We thought we were in contests where we’ve been well beaten.” Until the close of polling, most believed Queensland would remain relatively stable, with any movement in marginal seats in central Queensland providing a counterbalance to those in the urban south-east. At one point, Labor had thought it could win up to six seats in the city. But at some booths in Brisbane’s northern suburbs, Labor’s primary vote was routed, down more than 20% compared with its state election result in 2017. The home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, comfortably survived a challenge from Labor’s Ali France in the northern Brisbane seat of Dickson, which was heavily targeted by GetUp campaigners as well as the ALP. “The negative tax messages, particularly the noise about the retirement tax, did seem to cut through,” a senior Queensland Labor figure said. The Adani coal proposal clearly helped the Liberal National party to win marginal central Queensland seats of Capricornia, Dawson and Herbert, where regional unemployment remains a key concern. But Adani would not have helped the Coalition to such considerable gains in Brisbane and its surrounds. On election night Labor was struggling to hold Blair, which it previously held on an 8% margin, and Wayne Swan’s old seat of Lilley, on 5.7%. Some in Labor had argued the party should have abandoned the ultra-marginal central Queensland seats and run a more focused campaign in the city, where the party has been popular at state level.Compounding the problems for Labor strategists, the only place where the party outperformed predictions was the inner-city seat of Brisbane, from which it had pulled most campaigning resources to focus on other races. Several Labor figures said the party would need to conduct a significant review of the election result because, as one put it, “at the moment we haven’t got a fucking clue”. In Victoria, where Labor was confident of picking up enough seats to win government, the party was in the hunt to win Chisholm – vacated by the Liberal MP Julia Banks – along with Corangamite and Dunkley, which were made notionally Labor by a redistribution. But the Coalition was yet to concede Corangamite on Saturday night, hoping that a strong postal and pre-poll results could allow the incumbent, Sarah Henderson, to cling on. With about half of the vote counted, the Labor party was only able to secure an increase in its primary vote in the state by 1%. The biggest swings against the Liberals in the state were in the party’s safe inner city seats. Josh Frydenberg suffered an 8.8% swing against him in the seat of Kooyong, but the move will not be enough for him to lose his seat in parliament. In Higgins, the Liberals’ Katie Allen was successful, despite the Coalition suffering a 6.9% swing against it. In New South Wales, Labor was on track to pick up the south coast seat of Gilmore, while the Coalition was expected to win back the seat of Lindsay. The Labor-held seat of Macquarie was on a knife-edge. The Liberals were also hoping to win back Malcolm Turnbull’s old seat of Wentworth, with its candidate Dave Sharma in a tight struggle with the independent MP, Kerryn Phelps. The former prime minister Tony Abbott lost the safe Liberal seat of Warringah to the independent Zali Steggall, who secured a primary vote of 45%. Statewide, Labor suffered a 2.5% swing against it on primary votes, translating to a 51-49 two-party-preferred result in the Coalition’s favour. Safe Labor seats across Sydney’s west also swung heavily against the party, with swings of more than 5% in some seats. Tasmania delivered another election-night shock, with the Coalition hopeful it could snare two seats from Labor – Braddon and Bass – on the back of a slump in its primary vote of more than 5%. In the Northern Territory, where the incumbent state Gunner government is deeply unpopular, the Country Liberal party was on track to secure a swing of about 3.75% across the territory. Despite bigger swings in key seats of Lingiari and Solomon, Labor was still expected to hang on to the two key marginal seats in the north. In Western Australia, where Labor was targeting up to four marginal seats, the Coalition was on track to hold all of them, with about 50% of the vote counted. The incumbent Liberal MPs Ken Wyatt and Christian Porter recorded swings towards them of almost 3%. In South Australia, the marginal Liberal-held seat of Boothby was on a knife edge, with the result likely to come down to a count of postal and pre-poll ballots.