English cricket can always find a toenail in a bucket of diamonds in the run-up to a World Cup contest, and the sad tale of Alex Hales was just the 2019 episode of a long-running saga. But whatever the drug that ruined his chances this summer, it is alcohol that causes English cricket more problems. In an unfortunate turn of phrase last year while trying to promote The Hundred, Andrew Strauss talked of making the game simpler for “mums and kids.” But in the raised eyebrows over his choice of words, a salient point was lost. The current T20 Blast is a cracking little tournament – spectator numbers are up, big games sell out, scoring rates increase year on year. However, plenty of cricket fans won’t take their children along despite the relatively family friendly timings. Anyone who has been to one of the derby games at the bigger grounds on a sunny evening – Lancashire v Yorkshire, Surrey v Middlesex, Warwickshire v Worcestershire for example– could tell you why. For a significant section of the crowd, the cricket is of secondary importance. For them the evening has segued into one huge beer-fest of staggering proportions, involving gallons of ale, noisy reeling between bar and seat, and pissing artlessly behind the stands. Most counties try to counter this unsavoury if profitable section of their crowd by having a family stand that is often alcohol free. This does what it says on the tin by separating the inebriated from the young or non-drinkers, but it isn’t the total answer. It doesn’t help in the aftermath of a game, or when searching for some food round the back of the stands. If you’re four feet tall, being trapped in a concourse surrounded by slurred chants of surrounding six-footers is a daunting experience. It’s the same reason children don’t like being out in the city centre late on a Friday night, or stuck on the train with carriage loads of returning football fans who have loaded up before boarding. Humans who have drunk a lot are unpredictable and loud, and children don’t like unpredictable – it frightens them. So, whatever you think of The Hundred – and the gripes are many- the creation of a more family friendly, less boozy, culture in English cricket is appealing. But how to do it when the fortunes of cricket and alcohol are so closely intermingled, from David Boon’s famous booze-cruise at 40,000 feet to the Bristol fracas that nearly ended Ben Stokes’s career. The list of incidents, slapped wrists, kissing and making up between cricket and alcohol is endless – the duration of the game making it irresistible for sponsors, profitable for the authorities and all too tempting for those of us who watch. The ECB chief executive, Tom Harrison, was famously knocked back by both the lack of drunks and the queues for coffee at the Women’s World Cup final in 2017- and there was a different yet febrile atmosphere at Lord’s that day – one that lacked nothing as the tension mounted in the final overs. Similarly, at the IT20 at Old Trafford last year which clashed with England v Colombia in the World Cup, a proportion of the ground emptied to watch TV coverage behind the pavilion, but the atmosphere was still exuberant as India romped to victory. Of course what the ECB really wants to do is recreate the IPL in the warm long evenings of the English summer holidays – but the truth is they do things differently there. Alcohol does not have such a hold on Indian society and at IPL games you can’t buy booze in the cheap seats, though it is available in the corporate boxes and the more expensive tiers. There is also a completely different cultural approach to watching cricket – the firepower of Mumbai Indians or Chennai Super Kings is more than enough for spectators to get high on. Alcohol advertising is banned in India too –though companies get around the rules with surrogate ads that ostensibly sell one thing, but actually sell another. Here in the UK, there is actually an official soft drink of the England team – Rubicon – but it exists alongside an official team beer, wine and champagne. How then, in the UK in 2020, do you run an evening cricket competition but make it more family friendly? How do you stop, say, Manchester Clouds v Leeds Artillery from becoming a White Rose-Red Rose Friday night piss up? You can hardly turn away the likely lads at the gate. The ECB thinks it can do it with marketing, by drawing in a whole new crowd, to a shorter game where there is less time to drink. There are certainly lots of things you can do with a marketing budget of £200,000 per fixture – but societal change? We’ll see. It will be especially hard as the counties are going to keep the revenues from food and beverages. How do you stop them from selling as much beer as they can to maximize profits? How much tea and coffee and soft drinks would they have to sell to make up the shortfall? Will they be compensated for selling less alcohol? We simply don’t know. If the ECB can pull it off, it’s got a chance of bringing in the fabled new audience – not just mums ‘n’ kids, but south Asian spectators and those who don’t like the rowdiness of a T20 crowd. But in order to do that, it’s got to alienate some of its own fans and sponsors. It’s a tricky rope to walk. • This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.