With whip-smart humour and a stellar soundtrack, SpitLip transforms a real British intelligence operation into a jazz-hands satire of government bureaucracy and the idiocy of war. Though it’s both fun and funny, this absurd new musical slumps from the weight of its overly indulgent content; in order to plough through all the full-bodied tangents, it often feels as if they’ve pressed fast-forward. Operation Mincemeat was a secret service attempt to dupe Hitler with a scheme involving a dead body and faked documents. David Cummings plays the brains behind the idea as the endearingly anxious Cholmondeley, his face so expressive that his eyebrows threaten to pop off his forehead. But this is an ensemble piece, and all five of the cast are strong, flitting between a baffling number of macabre characters with ease. SpitLip comprises members of the award-winning company Kill the Beast and skilled composer and band leader Felix Hagan. Together, they are expert piss-takers, mocking the secret service’s old-boys’ club and creating pastiches of musical numbers. The three-piece band borrow from a different genre for every song, ticking off hip-hop, ballad and jazz. In one highlight, they chuck in a group of stupidly funny, smooth-moving R&B Nazis, with the earworm “Step to the left / Jump to the far-right”. Towards the end of the first half, Sherry L Coenen’s brilliantly versatile lighting design is as quick as the cast’s wit, leaping between a London nightclub and a submarine in the Atlantic Ocean. However, despite an abundance of one-liners, the show lacks clarity – perhaps because the team devised it without a director. Some parts are too baggy and others are rushed through without leaving time to settle. A beautiful exception is Jak Malone’s tender solo as yearning clerk Hester; as the lights fade around her, it’s as if nothing else matters in the world. There’s a lot of talent on show in Operation Mincemeat, but it would need several significant cuts to have a real emotional impact. It runs for two and a half hours; there is a sharper, shorter show buried inside. At the New Diorama, London, until 15 June.