Lewis Hamilton has expressed in the past his admiration for Ferrari and in the paddock of the Spanish Grand Prix this weekend, questions of a potential future move to the Scuderia were once again bandied about. After his dominant victory for Mercedes at the Circuit de Catalunya and Ferrari’s capitulation to the once more all-conquering silver arrows, it is difficult to imagine any entreaty from the sport’s most historic marque that would currently appeal to the British driver. Hamilton completed his victory from his teammate, Valtteri Bottas, in second having beaten the Finn off the start. Having taken the lead through turn one it was not to be relinquished. Ferrari’s difficult weekend yielded only fourth and fifth for Sebastian Vettel and Charles Leclerc. It continues Mercedes’ record-breaking run of five-successive one-two finishes this season and has almost certainly ensured the title is now a two-horse race between Hamilton, who has retaken the title lead, and Bottas. Attempting to take a sixth world championship and third in a row, Hamilton’s form is ominously strong, with this 76th career victory. As things stand only Bottas looks like coming close to him. He leads the Finn by seven points and is 46 clear of Red Bull’s Max Verstappen, who was third here and is third in the championship. Most ominous, however, is the 48-point gap to Vettel in fourth which is a chasm after only five races. Strong as Mercedes have been, Ferrari’s challenge has been at best staccato and at worst a forlorn effort that looks increasingly as if it is falling away alarmingly early. Ferrari had brought an early engine upgrade and aerodynamic improvements to Spain and, with a straight-line speed advantage, had hoped to be strong here. But Mercedes had also brought aero upgrades and, with Ferrari still struggling with pace through the slower corners, they look to have found another step ahead of the Scuderia, who have been left once again trying to ascertain the best way forward for their car. Beaten here by Red Bull and off the pace of Mercedes all weekend they are floundering as the title slips away. The Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, said on Saturday the potential of a Hamilton move to Ferrari had been discussed with him and within the team. “You have to simply acknowledge that probably it’s in every driver’s head to drive at Ferrari one day,” he said. In the wake of this race Hamilton did not appear in the slightest bit tempted. With five championships he is closing in on Michael Schumacher’s record of seven and, should Mercedes take the constructors’ title this year, they will have beaten Ferrari’s record of five in a row. “I’m just enjoying driving with this team and enjoying growing with this team,” he said. “It’s incredible what we’re achieving and what we have achieved in these six or seven years. I plan on making this team and working with this team to make it the most successful team of all time. That’s my current goal and my sole focus.” Hamilton had a fine start from second behind Bottas on pole. He just had his nose in front and the inside line into turn one and Bottas could do nothing, losing the lead through the apex. The Finn had suffered a clutch vibration that cost him at the start and accepted that, with overtaking so hard in Spain, it had cost him the race. Hamilton had given the Finn room as they vied with one another through the opening turns in Baku but had warned he would not be so generous again and duly held his line and the lead through turn one. Bottas stayed with him but without sufficient pace advantage to challenge. Hamilton was calm and controlled and handled a late safety car which closed the pack up with ease. It was a consummate performance by the world champion, who also secured the extra point for the fastest lap. He refused to write off the threat from Ferrari and genuinely seems to enjoy the battle with an opposing team but it is hard not to accept that his desire to see it this season is increasingly wishful thinking. “I prefer it when they are in the mix with us,” he said. “I prefer the races where, for example Bahrain, they were on the front row. I like that. Especially when we’re intertwined, when it’s Ferrari-Mercedes or Mercedes-Ferrari. The last couple of years that’s what we’ve had and, from a driver’s or a team’s point of view, it’s much better when you’re competing with another team. “When it becomes more internal, it’s less exciting I would say but it’s still massively challenging for the drivers. We still have to deliver.” They are in every position to do so. Much as Hamilton may admire Ferrari’s road cars, he and Mercedes look to have put their F1 model already to the sword. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels “Obviously it was a disappointing weekend for us,” Vettel said. “We were hoping to be a lot faster. Now we find ourselves not so fast.” Ferrari employed team orders switching Leclerc in front of Vettel and later vice-versa but to no great effect in the overall result but Vettel said they would discuss it with the team “We will talk about it internally but inside the car we try to do our own race. I think in the beginning it was clear Charles was faster,” Vettel said. “When he was putting on more and more pressure I was happy to let him go.”