I see many Blairite Labour members and office holders rushing to defend Alastair Campbell and yell “disgrace” against the party leader Jeremy Corbyn (Labour expels Alastair Campbell for voting Lib Dem in EU election, 29 May). It’s as if this is something new. As a Labour party member since the 1980s, I decided to vote Green between 2003 and 2012 in revolt against the slide to the right the party was making under Blair and Brown. When I tried to rejoin Labour in 2015, my application was accepted, but suddenly I was expelled as part of the so-called witch-hunt against left-leaning members for presumably voting for another party. I was not given a reason for the expulsion until 2018. By this time I’d decided never to belong to a political party again, but to air my views from outside those constraints. Oh, and I will be voting Labour while Jeremy Corbyn cleans up the administrative procedures which were championed by Alastair Campbell less than two years ago.Nic OuttersideWolverhampton • Your editorial (29 May) says “Mr Campbell was clearly singled out, not because of what he did, but because of who he was”. No, he was singled out because he was the only Labour member to publicise his rule-breaking on live television. In my own constituency, members have been expelled for voting for another party; I wouldn’t expect Alastair Campbell to be treated any differently. As for the “speed” of the decision – Labour’s rulebook specifies automatic expulsion for publicly supporting another party, so it is always speedy in these instances. If Campbell really did have a “fanatically pro-Labour mindset”, he would have voted Labour – just as many members continued to do throughout the New Labour years despite being deeply unhappy about party policy on Iraq.Jane MiddletonBath • Unlike your letter writers (29 May), I can’t stand with Alastair Campbell. I marched in Glasgow against the Iraq war, wearing a magnified version of my party card around my neck reading “Joined 1966 – Quitting 2003”. The actions taken by Campbell and his master prompted that step, and any self-respecting party should have parted company with them years ago. Clever, personable and entertaining though he may be, I can’t forgive him for that, nor the Labour party for sitting on the fence over Europe for so long. I voted Scottish National party, as at least they had a clear message on this issue.Margaret SquiresSt Andrews, Fife • I may be the only person in the UK coming forward in support of Alastair Campbell who is totally against a people’s vote and in favour of leaving the EU. I have been a member of the Labour party since 1976 but have resigned over Brexit. The EU elections only happened by default because parliament ignored the Brexit vote. We should have left in March. I voted for Labour in 2017 because they said they would respect the vote. The people’s vote supporters in the Labour party have totally let down members like me. Despite this, it seems extremely mean to expel a member who voted against Labour in an election where we are not expecting the MEPs to remain MEPs beyond October.Pam MarumLondon • I voted Labour in my first general election in 1970. I have never, until last Thursday, voted for any other party. On Thursday, just like Alastair Campbell, I “lent” my vote to the Lib Dems in the East Midlands, because the leadership of my own party seems unable to decide where it stands on Europe. I therefore voted, in a European election, in line with my views on Europe. When it comes to the next general election, I shall again vote Labour as it best represents my views on UK issues. Jeremy Corbyn has been a longstanding rebel in the Labour party, and has frequently voted against his own party in parliament. I respectfully ask him why I should now face expulsion from the party, while he, with his record, leads it.Jonathan HarrisCalver, Derbyshire • I challenge the party to expel all members who, like me, withheld their vote from the party in last week’s EU elections in protest against its appalling stance on the Brexit catastrophe, and to watch their vaunted membership numbers plummeting.Jane CaplanOxford • Here’s another party member who has just resigned. This unwise strategy is going to hit Labour’s pockets! I’ve no sympathy for Campbell, but the absurdity of this expulsion when swathes of Labour members were forced to vote elsewhere because of the party’s failure to be clear about its position. I joined because of Corbyn, but it is clear he is not a man of principle. If he were, he would resign, given the party’s trashing in the EU elections – including in his own constituency.Catherine HendersonForres, Moray • Is the Labour party going to expel all the hundreds, maybe thousands, of members who felt there was no alternative but to vote for a remain party? I have been a member since 1973 and have never voted other than Labour, but had no choice as the Labour leadership have sat on the fence and let their members and MEPs down.Viv RoseSouthampton • I’m only 18 and have been a Labour member since 16. This was my first European election and only my third time voting. I too voted Lib Dem as they appear to be the only pro-remain and also pro-UK option in Scotland. The Labour leadership must quickly get its priorities straight or I suspect there will be an increase in the Lib Dem vote at the next general election.Andrew KinnellCowdenbeath, Fife • I have been trying to find out how to leave Labour for a few months, and finally have the answer. Fed up with its lack of commitment to a second referendum, I voted Green. I now look forward to my expulsion letter.Rachel JacksonLeicester • Disappointed that no one from team Labour has contacted me to inform me that I have been expelled for voting Green, I have cancelled my Labour party membership subscription and self-expelled.Carolyn BarkerLondon • Please let everyone know that, as a Labour party member, I voted Green. Then perhaps I will be expelled.Elizabeth FramptonNewton Abbot, Devon • I first voted Labour in 1964. This time I voted Green and cancelled my direct debit.Alan McPhersonGrantham, Lincolnshire • I am the chair of a local Labour branch. I voted Plaid Cymru and hang my head in horror at the Labour leadership’s failure to take a firm stand against Brexit bollocks.Rachel HurdleyTyddewi, Sir Benfro • I have been a supporter/member of the Labour party since 1957. If Alastair Campbell’s expulsion is confirmed, I will cancel my membership.Peter J SnapeLeyland, Lancashire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition