Breaking up is never easy, but letting your bandmate know that it’s over via a note read out by your publicist onstage at the Ivor Novello awards has to be one of the harshest methods in pop history. In 1993, Siobhan Fahey called time on Shakespears Sister as a duo. She and Marcella Detroit were supposed to be collecting the prize for best contemporary collection of songs for Hormonally Yours (double platinum in the UK, 55 weeks in the chart, three Top 20 singles including Stay), but the acceptance speech instead became a farewell to her musical partner, with Siobhan wishing her a ruthlessly serene “all the best for the future”. Marcella has since compared this experience of getting dumped as a “bomb” dropping. “I knew it was coming but I had no idea it was going to happen publicly,” she wrote on her website. “I couldn’t wait to get back to my seat. I just hung my head and sobbed silently for about five minutes.” The messy split was seemingly alluded to on Siobhan’s solo Shakespears Sister song Suddenly (“We were doomed from the start / I gave you a starring role, but you tried to take my part”), while Marcella’s I Hate You Now is thought to be about her former bandmate. All of which makes it even more remarkable that the pair are reuniting for a tour and two new songs as part of a greatest hits compilation, 26 years after the incident at the Ivors. We meet today in their publicist’s office. The pair have just landed in London from LA where they both live. Marcella lets Siobhan do the bulk of the speaking and the energy between them is warm, like two exes who have put the past behind them. A more cynical reader might think that this reunion is financially motivated, especially given that the pair didn’t speak until the end of 2018. But their comeback does seems deeper than a nostalgia cash-in. Siobhan emailed Marcella, asking for a coffee. “It had gotten to the point that it was long overdue,” she says. “Marcy had reached out but I wasn’t ready to go there, I was avoiding confrontation.” Shakespears Sister was initially a solo project set up by Siobhan in 1988. After her (first) departure from Bananarama, she was craving an outlet for something more “cool” and properly musical. She met musician Marcy Levy via a mutual friend and they became a duo at the suggestion of Siobhan’s then husband, Eurythmics’ Dave Stewart. Marcy renamed herself Marcella Detroit, got a sharp Louise Brooks bob and that was that. They set a prescient template for emo pop. In terms of their personalities, Marcella and Siobhan were very different – the former was aloof, contrasting with Siobhan’s more dramatic frontwoman qualities – and the relationship was far from frictionless. Marcella once recalled “petty bickering and jealousies”, saying: “I was accused of trying to steal the band away from her, ridiculed and pitted against constantly.” Their pivotal coffee took place as Siobhan was leaving Bananarama for the second time. “I knew I didn’t want to do a retro thing,” she says. “It was fun but it didn’t scratch the itch. But what it did do was act as a spark for this to happen. They will always be very special to me – they’re my first wives – but [reuniting with Marcella] has been very healing and it’s allowed me to inhabit a part of myself that I hadn’t been able to: the person who is a performer, a recording artist, a songwriter. “I was pensive going in,” she continues. “I didn’t know what to expect. It was calm at first and then it got a bit: ‘You did that, you did this.’ But it was great to clear the air.” Marcella says: “I’ve been busy trying to mop up those longstanding grudges, but this was a major one.” “It was unexpectedly emotional, and that took me by surprise,” counters Siobhan. The intention was not to make new music. But a mutual love for the desert drew them towards the idea. Once back in LA, the two rented an Airbnb in Joshua Tree with Marcella setting up a small studio to record. “As soon as we had written the first single, All the Queen’s Horses, it was ‘GAME ON!’” says Siobhan. The video tells their story: the ego struggle, the strained relationship, the paranoia; there’s a sparkly catsuit, eye-rolls. The Stay video is recreated on a pool table with drag queen Morgan McMichaels playing Siobhan. The only difference to the story is that this time the two walk into the sunset arm in arm. All the Queen’s Horses is out now. Shakespears Sister tour from 31 Oct to 20 Nov