My childhood shaped the person I became. It was artistic, musical and left-wing. My parents were activists and my mother was hugely involved with the anti-Vietnam War protests. I’m a “take no shit” kind of person. I’ve never kept my mouth shut, especially as my industry is so misogynistic. I’ve got a reputation as a troublemaker. The minute I rejected Harvey Weinstein’s sexual advances I knew it would impact my career. He told me: “You’re making a big mistake, Rosanna.” I’d gone to meet him in his hotel room to discuss a script and he came to the door in a bathrobe and asked me to massage his “painful” neck. Tarantino insisted on casting me in Pulp Fiction, which was produced by Weinstein. But it’s no coincidence I was the only actor not to make any money from it. He’s a bully and a predator. Madonna and I became close when we made Desperately Seeking Susan. It was frightening watching her become famous overnight. Even she wasn’t prepared. We went to a Prince concert once night and the fans literally swarmed her. She went into a panic and I felt like her bodyguard. I wrote Sally Field a fan letter after reading her book. Everyone made fun of her Oscars speech, but it was so pure I was really moved by it. She sent a beautiful letter back thanking me and told me I should write myself. Bette Davis took an instant liking to me when I appeared with her in my first film, at 19. She scared most people, but when I turned up to her cocktail party barefoot in jeans and T-shirt, she invited me to share her trailer. Bette warned me it was difficult to have a marriage and a career – and that haunted me for years. I feel offended when people bring up my four marriages. I was 19 when I first got married and I thought it would be for ever. But each of my marriages has added to my life and helped form me as a human being. My daughter Zoe is an extraordinary woman. She’s a wild, bohemian actor, poet and artist – and inspires me. I didn’t know she was going to go public about being raped as a child. She just did it when we were on the red carpet at a luncheon hosted by the Rape Foundation. I’m so proud of her. Post-traumatic stress hit me and my siblings after my transgender sister Alexis died three years ago from Aids-related causes. I started the Alexis Arquette Family Foundation in her memory. It’s a great legacy and every year on the anniversary of her death I hold a dance party to celebrate her life. Rosanna Arquette stars in Rory’s Way, opening in cinemas on 31 May