There is something delightfully anomalous about the fact that Jan Pieńkowski and Helen Nicoll used to meet up at Membury motorway services, near Marlborough, to work in a fenced-off part of the dining area as they dreamed up new adventures for Meg and Mog. The stories are so wonderfully batty – did Meg really have to leave Jess, Bess and Tess as mice for an entire year? – the images so joyfully vibrant, that a restaurant in a service station on the M4 feels far too prosaic as their birthplace. Pieńkowski’s beloved Meg and Mog books. At least the scatty witch Meg has her roots somewhere a little less run-of-the-mill. When I met the Polish-born Pieńkowski in 2008, he told me about how his next-door neighbour as a child first introduced him to Polish folk tales, and the witches who stalk them. She used to persuade him to drink his milk by promising him that if he did, she’d finish her story. Pieńkowski takes us through the steps of Meg and Mog, in his studio in 2010. “She’d tell me these totally unsuitable stories, get to a cliffhanger – and stop,” he said. “I used to have terrible dreams, nightmares, of this witch, always chasing me and trying to put me in a pot, and you know how you can’t run in a dream, you sort of freeze? It was all like that. I think in a way she gave birth to Meg, because I think Meg was really sublimating, isn’t that the word? Taking this terrible monster from my childhood and making it into a harmless toy.” The 82-year-old Pieńkowski, who is today being presented with a lifetime achievement award from the children’s book charity BookTrust, won his first Kate Greenaway medal for his silhouette illustrations in Joan Aiken’s 1971 novel The Kingdom Under the Sea, and his second for his pop-up book Haunted House, published in 1979. Pieńkowski’s Haunted House. Published in 1980, the pioneering title featured a crocodile in the bath, an octopus in the sink, and a black cat watching everything with its sinister moving eyes. But with more than 140 books to his name today, he is perhaps still best known – in this house, at least – for illustrating Meg and Mog. Celebrating an author or illustrator who has made an “outstanding contribution” to children’s literature, the BookTrust award has gone in the past to some of the greatest names in children’s books, including Shirley Hughes, Raymond Briggs and Judith Kerr. It is past time that Pieńkowski joins their number. Critic Nicolette Jones, who chaired the judges selecting Pieńkowski for the award, said he “brought magic to children’s illustration”, while her fellow judge, author SF Said, said that “books such as Meg and Mog have shaped so many generations now that they have become part of the fabric of British childhood and culture in general”. He praised Pieńkowski for his “vibrant originality and inventiveness, passionate devotion to craft, and perhaps above all for the seriousness with which he has always taken his audience”. Pieńkowski’s colour charts for Meg and Mog. Inside Pieńkowski’s studio, in west London. Pieńkowski grew up in Poland, Bavaria, Vienna and Italy before arriving in England in 1946. Initially unable to speak English, he went on to study classics and English at Cambridge, worked in the art department of an ad agency and did live drawing on BBC TV for a children’s programme before the book world discovered him. Along with Meg and Mog and his pop-up books, he is known for his illustrations of fairy tales by Perrault and the Brothers Grimm, The Nutcracker, and his recent The Glass Mountain: Tales from Poland. Written by his partner of 56 years, David Walser, it is illustrated in traditional Polish style with scissor-cut paper, drawing on stories told to Pieńkowski as a child in war-time Poland. A small reminder of Poland in his studio. Walser said it was “wonderful” that Pieńkowski, who has been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s, had won the award, which he’ll collect in person. “Jan hasn’t got a big ego, but I think it’s wonderful. He’s an exceptional children’s artist and writer. I think he’s given a huge number of children a lot of pleasure and perhaps it will go on long after we’re all dead. I’m so glad this recognition has come in time,” he said. “One thing I’ve noticed over the years is that Jan never treats children as children. It wouldn’t occur to him to talk down to them, he just behaves perfectly normally … When he works with children, he’s one of them.” Although the couple have collaborated on many titles, including the Meg and Mog books following Nicoll’s death in 2012, Walser said that they had “never worked side by side”. “We have been together for 56 years but he isn’t at all easy to work with [he] works much better on his own,” he added. Clockwise: Dinner Time (1981), In the Beginning (2010) and Little Monsters (1986). But Walser said he had “learned so much” from his partner. “He has been a terrible procrastinator and then often done things right at the last minute. At university, he would often work all night and on one occasion, as dawn was breaking, he propped up the artwork vertically to look at it from a distance. The ink ran. Rather than start again, he made a feature of it,” he said. “The lesson he taught me, which was absolutely invaluable, was that when you make a mistake, don’t fight against it. Go with it and take advantage of it. Never a week passes when that doesn’t help me.” As lacking in ego as Walser describes, Pieńkowski told me back in 2008 that his distinctive style initially stemmed from nerves, over how his drafts for Aiken’s A Necklace of Raindrops would be received. “Originally they were all proper people, then I said they’re not good enough,” he said. “You can see I haven’t got English features, so in a way if you do [silhouettes] it makes it anonymous, not obviously wrong.” His studio in west London, 2010. Children’s writer Smriti Prasadam-Halls, who was on the BookTrust panel of judges, agreed with the universality of the images – if not Pieńkowski’s damning judgement of his illustrations. “His graceful figures dance their stories across the page, silhouetted against a backdrop of exquisite, spectacular colour. Inked in black, they are utterly universal. They are each of us. All of us,” she said. “When I open one of Jan’s books, I belong to the oldest, most wonderful stories ever told. And within the mysterious filigree magic that he weaves, there is longing, menace, radiance, melancholy, joy and always, always, unspeakable beauty.” Pieńkowski in 2019, pictured at home in Barnes.