1) There were some incredible scenes in India as Chennai Super Kings required two off the final ball to win the IPL. Enter Lasith Malinga and a cunning yorker. Jos Buttler would probably have just smashed it for six, mind. Lancashire’s Liam Livingstone was the victim of a stunning catch from Middlesex’s George Scott in the deep in their One-Day Cup quarter-final. 2) Safety cars – it’s in the name. Unless the driver is not paying attention – then he might cause a high-speed crash. Speaking of crashes, Cal Crutchlow had a busy weekend but it had a positive ending. 3) As is legally binding for Manchester City whenever they win a trophy, Noel Gallagher was ushered into the changing room on Sunday to instigate an impromptu sing-a-long. Even Phil Foden knew the words. Sadly, very few players knew exactly what a stick of rock is. Liverpool had to console themselves with watching their players’ offspring tapping the ball into empty goals. Salah Jr got a huge roar despite not having to take on anyone and the goalkeeper being woefullly out of position for her strike. And Alisson’s youngster made a mockery of dad’s Golden Glove award. 4) Manchester City could yet add to their trophy haul when they play Watford in the FA Cup final on Saturday, seeking a domestic treble. Their fans will remember Yaya Touré scoring the winner against Stoke back in 2011 to kickstart a new era for the club. Watford might find encouragement in the way City lost to Wigan in the final two years later thanks to Ben Watson’s late header. Neil Young thwacking the ball past a young Peter Shilton in the 1969 final at Wembley will remind fans of a previous prosperous period in the club’s history. Watford, on the other hand, have only reached this stage once … and lost. 5) Those millennials, eh – needing to take their phones everywhere! Including their high-level judo bouts. 6) Not such a neutral official: Mike Dean let out all his emotion as Tranmere saw off Forest Green to progress to the League Two play-off final. 7) And Infinite Tucker. Obviously! Our favourites from below the line last week 1) A new way to put off your opponent. 2) A bit bracing out there: extreme curling. 3) We’ve got the numbers: 100 kids against three professionals. 4) European tour tomfoolery: Eddie Pepperell comprehensively pranks his mate Matt Wallace. Spotters’ badges: GrahamClayton, crumbbum, stevenjameshyde, whobroughtoranges Do subscribe if you fancy. Do subscribe if you fancy.