With Chelsea facing a transfer ban this summer, they may need to promote some of the young players they have loaned out over the last few seasons. The club have sent no fewer than 40 players on loan this season. The majority of them will probably never play first-team football at Stamford Bridge, but these 10 players will hope to stay at the club and fight for a place next season. Ola Aina turns 23 in October, so is running out of chances to impress the Chelsea manager. The Nigeria international has played at a high level this season, featuring regularly for a Torino side who are seventh in Serie A and still hope to play in the Europa League next season. The defender’s versatility is to his advantage. He has operated from both the left and right flank in Walter Mazzarri’s 3-5-2 formation this season, making 28 appearances in the league. He will also take heart from that fact that Chelsea are not inundated with top-class options at full-back. Chance of staying at Chelsea next season: 5/10 A regular at left-back for the England Under-21s, Dasilva has profited from a challenging spell in the Championship, where he has competed with fellow youngster Lloyd Kelly for a starting place at Bristol City. Dasilva has only just turned 21 but, given the difficult season Marcos Alonso has endured, he will have eye on the Spaniard’s spot in the team. Another loan move looks likely for Dasilva but, if he keeps developing, he will hope to break into the Chelsea squad before long. With three assists for Bristol City this season, he offers a real attacking threat from wide. Chance of staying next season: 2/10 A near ever-present for a team that has qualified for the Championship play-offs – under Chelsea legend Frank Lampard no less – Fikayo Tomori is one youngster Chelsea should not write off. Another regular for the England Under-21s, the centre-back has impressed this season and could come into the manager’s thinking as David Luiz’s contract runs down. Tomori started all but three of Derby’s league matches this season and will hope to start another three before the end of the campaign. The play-offs will offer another test of his mettle, but the defender has stood up to the task all season, making the most tackles of any centre-back in the Championship (96). Chance of staying next season: 4/10 Wigan flirted with relegation this season but James was instrumental in ensuring that Paul Cook’s side ultimately stayed in the Championship. The teenager is primarily a right-back but his shift into central midfield helped spark a run of results that kept Wigan up. The 19-year-old was not struggling at full-back, but he was so good that it made sense to get him more involved in games. Having started 44 games, scored three goals and picked up three assists, James cleaned up at Wigan’s end-of-season awards, winning the player of the year, players’ player of the year and goal of the season trophies. He should be playing in the Premier League next season – even if not at Chelsea. Chance of staying next season: 5/10 A Premier League regular for the last two seasons at Stoke and then Everton, Zouma could have a future at the Bridge. He is only 24, Gary Cahill is leaving and David Luiz’s situation is unclear. Zouma is strong in the air and makes a lot of interceptions but he may not be good enough in possession for Chelsea. Whether or not Maurizio Sarri is in charge next season, the onus is likely to be on playing out from the back so Zouma’s modest pass accuracy is a concern. Chance of staying next season: 6/10 Bakayoko’s loan spell at Milan was going well until he lost his place due to behavioural reasons. Milan are now very unlikely to make a move for the Frenchman, but he has at least proven that he has talent. The 24-year-old didn’t start a Serie A game until the last day of October but he secured a regular place due to some impressive all-action performances. Indeed, Bakayoko has made at least one tackle in all but one of his 23 starts this season and an interception in all but two. Chance of staying next season: 5/10 Mason Mount has not disappointed at Pride Park. The 20-year-old has played an important role in securing a sixth-place finish and a play-off semi-final against Leeds. He has not posted the sort of figures he managed at Vitesse last season, but eight goals and four assists is a decent return from midfield. His pass accuracy is low at 76.7% but Mount takes the sort of chances that can unlock opposition defences. Derby’s win rate this season has risen by 20% when he has been in the starting line-up. Chance of staying next season: 5/10 Christian Pulisic is the one guaranteed new face at Stamford Bridge next season after Chelsea signed him from Borussia Dortmund for £58m. Despite becoming Chelsea’s most expensive outfield signing, he has endured a frustrating campaign, perhaps even going backwards under Lucien Favre. The 20-year-old has made just 18 appearances in the Bundesliga this season, starting just seven of those game. Pulisic has scored three goals and set up three more, but he will hope to have a bigger impact at his new club next season. Chance of staying next season: 10/10 Having been named in the Championship team of the year, Abraham will almost certainly be playing top-flight football again next season. His struggles in the Premier League with Swansea will be a concern for Chelsea, but he is a box finisher and he was never given the service he needed. The 21-year-old striker has scored 25 goals for Aston Villa in the Championship this season – one every 126 minutes – and, with Olivier Giroud looking likely to leave, Abraham will probably stick around. Chance of staying next season: 6/10 After a dismal spell with Valencia at the start of this season, Batshuayi moved to Crystal Palace in January and has proven to some degree that he has what it takes to cut it in the Premier League. Whether that will be with Chelsea remains to be seen, but the Belgian scored his third goal in eight league starts for Palace at the weekend. The Belgium international will celebrate his 26th birthday in October so is surely reaching last-chance-saloon status at Chelsea. If the club can command a decent fee for the striker, they will probably cash in. However, should the coach – whoever that may be – decide that Abraham is not ready to step up, Batshuayi may be needed. Chance of staying next season: 5/10 • Visit WhoScored for more statistics and ratings• Follow WhoScored on Twitter and Facebook• Follow Martin Laurence on Twitter