As its name, and strikingly designed album covers using images from the Encylopédie indicate, the Paris-based Ensemble Diderot specialise in the music of the European Enlightenment. With a lineup of two violins, cello or viola da gamba and harpsichord, led by Johannes Pramsohler, the group is dedicated to exploring the baroque trio sonatas of the late 17th and 18th centuries. On their latest releases, the emphasis is very much on the earlier part of that historical range; the London Album brings together pieces composed in the capital before 1680, while its Paris counterpart shifts the cut-off point forward 20 years to the end of the century, and to the music written after the death of Lully in 1687. Both collections include works recorded for the first time. The London sequence kicks off with a rather prosaic single-movement Sonetta after the Italian Way by Robert King, who was one of the royal musicians at the English court from Charles II to Queen Anne, while later there’s a much more showy Trio Sonata by Gerhard Diessener, a German harpsichord-maker who taught in London in the 1670s and 80s, and two works by the harpsichordist Johann Keller, which, Ensemble Diderot claim, have never been put on an album before. The longest piece is a sonata by Giovanni Draghi, but the album is dominated by three trio sonatas by Henry Purcell, which from their opening bars open out a greater expressive range and formal ingenuity than anything else here. Yet Purcell apart, this English music does too often seem like a pale imitation of Italian models, and alongside them the works on the French disc immediately come across as more original and inventive – still absorbing Italian models, but adapting them more radically to fuse the manière francais with ardeur transalpine. The recording premieres from Paris are trio sonatas by Sébastien de Brossard, who assembled one of the most important music libraries of his time, and by the much better known André Campra; there’s also music here by Elisabeth Jacquet de la Guerre, Louis-Nicolas Clérambault, François Couperin and Jean-Féry Rebel, too. Clearly a great deal of research and planning has gone into the compilation of both these albums, but Ensemble Diderot’s ebullient approach wears that learning very lightly. Even music that is distinctly subfusc, such as the King sonetta, receives performances that squeeze every last morsel of rhythmic or melodic variety out of their formulaic phrases, while the authentically first-rate, such as the Purcell sonatas, Couperin’s Le Convalescente and Rebel’s Tombeau de Monsieur de Lully, really sparkle with imaginative life.