Donald Trump has backed Boris Johnson to be the next prime minister, in an interview with the Sun in which he also called Meghan, the Duchess of Sussex, “nasty”. The president, speaking to the British newspaper before he visits the UK on Monday, expressed support for the former foreign secretary in his bid to replace Theresa May, saying: “I think Boris would do a very good job. I think he would be excellent.” May is to step down on 7 June, just days after Trump’s official state visit, which will include attending commemorations of the 75th anniversary of D-day in Portsmouth. Trump referred to the American-born Duchess of Sussex as “nasty” over comments she made in 2016 threatening to move to Canada if Trump won the presidency. “I didn’t know that she was nasty,” he said when informed of her criticism. The former Meghan Markle married Prince Harry in 2018 and gave birth to their first child, Archie, in May. During the state visit, the president, his wife, Melania, and his four adult children are expected to meet Prince Harry as well as Prince William, the Duke of Cambridge, and his wife, Kate, the Duchess of Cambridge. Meghan is expected to stay home with Archie. Trump told the newspaper he did not know that he would not be meeting Markle but predicted she would make “a very good” American princess. On Johnson, Trump said: “I like him. I have always liked him. I don’t know that he is going to be chosen, but I think he is a very good guy, a very talented person. He has been very positive about me and our country.” Trump said other candidates had approached him in a bid to secure his endorsement: “Other people have asked me for an endorsement, too. I have been asked for endorsements. “I could help anybody if I endorse them. I mean, we’ve had endorsement where they have gone up for 40, 50 points at a shot.” Trump criticised May’s handling of Brexit negotiations with the European Union, saying she “didn’t give the European Union anything to lose”. Trump’s first visit to the UK as president was marred by similar critical comments he made to the Sun last year about May’s handling of Brexit.