A southern cop goes excruciatingly and hilariously off-script giving the eulogy at his mother’s funeral in the opening scene of actor-writer-director Jim Cummings’ offbeat indie comedy. Standing in front of the coffin in his police uniform, gulping back big showy tears, he speaks briefly about his mom’s kindness before rambling on about himself. Finally, he launches into an interpretive dance accompanying her favourite Bruce Springsteen song, Thunder Road – except the boombox isn’t working, so he gives audio commentary as he lets rip with the abandon of a four-year-old performing Let It Go from Frozen. The film, adapted from a short Cummings made in 2015, has won plenty of praise, and it hits the cringe-worthy highs of The Office in scenes like this. But I couldn’t buy into the affection for its self-involved hero. Cummings is officer Jim Arnaud, a man with a porn-star moustache that shows how hard he’s trying to be macho, and a deeply held belief that he is one of the good guys, though his swirling, inarticulate rage is pretty evident to everyone else. After his mother’s death, Arnaud’s world falls apart. At work, he snaps while arresting a harmless drunk. Next, his nightmare ex, Rosalind (Jocelyn DeBoer), serves him with divorce papers, suing for custody of their nine-year-old daughter Crystal (Kendal Farr). In a hilarious scene, Arnaud is called into Crystal’s school over concerns about her disruptive behaviour. She has been using profanities, which her teacher is too polite repeat: “There’s the one where someone pleases a gentleman with their mouth,” the poor guy explains delicately when pushed. Arnaud blames Crystal’s aggression on her mother, before losing his temper big-time. His problem, you see, is the disconnect between the man he wants to be and the man he is. Arnaud is ill-equipped for parenthood; he loves Crystal but can’t meet her emotional needs. Cummings presents us with a guy whose heart is in the right place – he just can’t control himself. But, like me, others may find their tolerance for a clueless white man’s anger issues has maxed out.