How do you get an octogenarian south Asian screen icon to swear in a rap video? According to hip-hop MC Zohran Mamdani, a little context can be helpful. When he came to prepare world-famous actor and TV cook Madhur Jaffrey for her role – lip-syncing along to the words of his expletive-laden tribute to his maternal grandma, Nani – he had a little explaining to do. Mamdani, who performs under the name Mr Cardamom, can remember Jaffrey asking him: “In the lyrics, who is this ‘mother fucker’ for?” he says. “Fuck this person, fuck that person; now whose ‘fuck’ is this?” The Jaffrey-starring video has had more than 71,000 views since it was uploaded to YouTube in April. The three-and-a-half-minute clip sees Jaffrey fan herself with dollars, throw punches in a boxing ring, and declare herself “the best darn nani that you ever done seen”. “It’s been a wild ride,” says Mamdani. “Once, I was pulling teeth to get an obscure south Asian blog to write about me; now the Financial Times is reposting the video on its social feeds.” Mamdani was born to Indian parents in Uganda and relocated to New York aged seven. Two years later, in 2001, he bought his first CD, The Blueprint by Jay-Z, and became “a huge hip-hop fan”, he says. “The music gave me a way to understand myself and the world around me.” Wildly different career paths lay ahead: his mother, the film-maker Mira Nair (Salaam Bombay!), offered him a route into the movies; while his father, Mahmood Mamdani, a prominent academic and political commentator, presented him with a potentially more scholarly trajectory. Instead, Mamdani chose music, recording the soundtrack for his mother’s 2016 film, Queen of Katwe, as Young Cardamom, with fellow MC Abdul Bar Hussein (HAB). Their songs about girls and street food were fun to listen to but they weren’t exactly pulling in the streams. A mutual friend introduced Mamdani to Jaffrey, after he admitted that the actor/cook, one of the south Asian diaspora’s most famous faces, would be “the dream” frontwoman for his next project. The song remains a tribute to his grandmother, while the video honours both Jaffrey and the south Asian culture of New York; it is shot in a Bangladeshi neighbourhood, a Pakistani restaurant, and a tutoring centre popular in the community. This, coupled with the prominence of artists such as Das Racist and MIA, means that Mamdani feels comfortable creating his personal take on New York’s homegrown lyrical artform. “I can use a couple of words in Hindi,” he says, showing the kind of polite cultural pride all nanis would admire. “I don’t have to adhere to another script.”