Artemisia Gentileschi rips through the barriers between art and life. This 17th-century artist is not so much an Old Mistress as our confessional contemporary. Influenced by Caravaggio, who she met when she was a child, she painted images that draw on her own struggles. Born in Rome in 1593 the daughter of an artist, she was raped at 19 by the man her father hired to teach her to paint. Her art refers to this experience and the resulting trial, at which she was tortured and humiliated, and from which her rapist walked free. In her Self Portrait as Saint Catherine of Alexandria, she shows herself as a torture survivor posing by the spiked wheel that was supposed to kill her. So it is imaginative and fitting of the National Gallery, which bought Gentileschi’s Self Portrait last year, to send this raw, truthful picture on a lightning-strike national tour not of quietly respectable museums or the stately homes where such treasures traditionally hang, but everyday places where real life happens. Its first venue was Glasgow Women’s Library, where Gentileschi popped up for a few days in March. Now she’s hanging in Pocklington Group Practice in east Yorkshire until 11 May. Cue media amazement. How safe is a national treasure in a GP’s surgery? Won’t it get cough mixture spilled on it? Don’t forget to mention it cost the National Gallery £3.6m! Yet our surprise that a great artist’s work might be shown somewhere as quotidian as a medical practice just shows how attenuated and impoverished our idea of art has become. We think the modern world cherishes art, but we’ve turned it into an irrelevant luxury. Six hundred years ago, ordinary people saw powerful art every week, for free, in their own neighbourhood. Churches all over Britain – and in the rest of Europe – were decorated with spectacular paintings of the Last Judgment and haunting sculptures of angels, saints and devils. While we mourn Notre Dame it’s worth remembering that every parish church was once a little Notre Dame. All over the world, visual images and objects were made for millennia to be used in rituals, or perform magic, or communicate with other worlds. No one called these things “art”. They were so much more important than that. Today they are shut up in museums, robbed of their social purpose, from Suffolk misericords to San rock paintings. The National Gallery is just returning a bit of art to the living world where it belongs. It’s about time, as its collection is full of artefacts wrenched from their original context and use. In its earliest galleries you’ll find a number of 15th-century Italian paintings with hexagonal or octagonal shapes. Why do these “paintings” look like trays hung on the wall? Because that’s what they are. They were made specially to deliver sweetmeats to women exhausted after giving birth. When you know this, it’s a connection with the lives of real people, and specifically women. Art also had an intense relationship with medicine before we imprisoned it in galleries and museums. Pocklington Group Practice is heir to this long history. In early 1500s Alsace, the German painter Matthias Grünewald painted a gripping altarpiece for a hospital run by monks. It includes both horror and hope. Christ on the cross is hideously disfigured by black pustules, and seems to be rotting before our eyes. Yet in another panel he is resurrected in a golden glow, free from sickness and decay. The patients who saw Grünewald‘s masterpiece probably had ergotism, which causes symptoms like those his dying Christ exhibits. His art descends into the hell of illness to bring hope of relief – in heaven if not on earth. Art in Hospitals, the charity the National Gallery is working with to bring its painting to Pocklington, seeks to revive that ancient therapy of art. It’s a great idea to add National Gallery treasures to the contemporary artists it works with, because before we separated something called “art” from life, every image had a social purpose. Gentileschi, like Grünewald, addresses pain. Her Self Portrait is the testimony of a woman who went through hell and survived. She looks back at you, feeling your sorrow, sharing hers. This is a great experiment that redeems art from its prison of rarefied irrelevance. • Jonathan Jones writes on art for the Guardian