Nottinghamshire needed 23 runs off 12 balls with just two wickets in hand if they were to top their Royal London One-Day Cup group and progress straight to a semi-final as kings in the north. On 5 Live Sports Extra, they were calling it a coin toss at the death, but for those of us who can’t quite shake Richie’s voice from our heads – “once the rate climbs above a run a ball…” – if felt like it was Northants’ match for the taking. Samit Patel ignored Richie and went six, four, four in the final over to seal the deal for the Outlaws and register his highest score in List A cricket, 136*. Patel is 34 now and he’s comfortable in his considerable volume of skin. He’s a key man if his side are to repeat their triumph of 2018. Worcestershire bagged second spot in the north group after three wins in a week, the last of which saw them chase down 351 against Derbyshire. In the end, they were comfortable, having got off to a flier, Riki Wessels making 130 off 62 balls with 10 fours and 11 sixes. That’s Wessels all over though, ending a lean trot with an extraordinary assault that reduced the required rate to just over Richie’s run a ball for the second half of the innings. If he meets his old buddies from Trent Bridge in the knockout stage, they’ll know that they need to get him early or anything could happen Lancashire, somewhat improbably, surged into the third qualifying spot with a run of five consecutive wins culminating in a squeeze on Derbyshire. In a match restricted to 38 overs, the visitors had to chase 240 – something they probably would have settled for at the start. But Lanky’s pair of young leg-spinners, Matt Parkinson and Rob Jones, went at well under a run a ball and Steven Croft used all that nous built up over so many years to return 2-20 off seven overs. If Stephen Parry and Liam Livingstone return to the XI, Lanky’s spin options will be as good as any in the country. Hampshire’s three wins made it seven from eight as they cruised to the semi-finals from the south group. Nerve matters in sport and nowhere is that more evident than when defending a big total against a hitter with nothing to lose who is having “one of those days”. At the Ageas Bowl, David Wiese was that hitter and Hampshire, having “won” the match once by reducing Sussex to 103-5 after 21 overs chasing 356, had to do it again when the visitors required 21 off three overs with Ben Brown and Wiese’s partnership having realised a scarcely credible 232 runs off 26 overs. But Mason Crane (remember him?) bagged Brown, Kyle Abbott snared Wiese and five wickets disappeared for 11 runs in 14 balls. Nerve matters. Middlesex’s six wins saw them secure second spot after a run fest at Canterbury. There were 727 runs smashed around the old St Lawrence Ground, the visitors scoring 33 more than the hosts. The stars were a pair of 21-year-old English openers, Middlesex’s Max Holden (166) and Kent’s Zak Crawley (120). Has English one-day batting ever been better stocked? Somerset, perennial neutrals’ favourites, squeezed out Gloucestershire on net run rate for the third qualifying spot from the south. The crucial win came at home, where they put away hapless Surrey with 26 balls in hand. The Overton twins shared seven wickets between them and Lewis Gregory’s blitz of sixes finished off the match in quick time. That Roelof van der Merwe and Craig Overton were not required to pad up in a five-wickets win showed the depth of Somerset’s batting resources, which might just prove enough to see them through to Lord’s. • This article appeared first on The 99.94 Cricket Blog• Follow Gary Naylor on Twitter