Broadcaster Richard Osman has scooped a seven-figure book deal after writing a crime novel in secret for the past 18 months. The Thursday Murder Club, Osman’s first novel, will be published in autumn 2020. Penguin Random House imprint Viking secured the rights to it and a sequel following a 10-way auction. The novel is set in a luxury retirement village in Kent where four residents meet up every week to tackle cold crime cases, and end up investigating a “live” murder mystery. Essex-born Osman, 48, best known for co-presenting the TV quiz show Pointless, told the Guardian that he had nurtured ambitions to write a crime novel for years and years. “I’ve always known how hard it is to write a crime novel and I have such respect for people who do it,” he said. “I never felt I was in a position where I could do it properly and give it the time it deserved until about 18 months ago. “I decided I would start it and once I got going I found that I couldn’t stop. But I decided I wasn’t going to tell anybody because I didn’t want to be that person who goes around saying, ‘Oh, yeah, I’m writing a book’, but it never happens. When I got to the end I thought, well, there at least I’ve found out that I can do it. But I had no idea what people would make of it.” The novel was inspired by a visit to a retirement community, which Osman said was “full of interesting people who’d led fascinating lives. They’d run things and owned things but now it seemed a bit like they were all living together at a university.” The first person to set eyes on the manuscript was Osman’s agent, Juliet Mushens. Within a month, 10 publishers were vying for the rights. “I’ve been involved in TV for many years and been a writer for comedy shows, but I had no idea how book publishing works,” he said. “Everyone seems to be excited about this 10-way auction so I’ve chosen to be excited too.” Osman began his career in TV behind the scenes. He emerged in front of the camera in 2009, appearing alongside Alexander Armstrong presenting a quiz show that he had co-created called Pointless. Bearing this in mind, Osman said he did not want to be seen as someone who just “dashed off a celebrity novel”. “I wanted to be serious about it,” he said. “I wanted to do something that would stand the test of time, that was nothing to do with the fact I was on TV.” The speed with which foreign rights have been sold offers some validation, with pre-publication deals already concluded in Germany, North America, France, the Netherlands and Italy – and more territories on the horizon. “Nobody knows who I am in these countries,” Osman explained. “They’re not buying the rights because I’m off the telly. They’re buying them because of the book.” He is already at work on the sequel, adding that he “can’t wait to let the characters loose again … well, those that survive the first book, anyway”. Osman also said that a TV adaptation was in the works: “I’m in talks, let’s say. As you might expect, I have fairly strong opinions on how that should go.”