The devil is a shape-shifter, not least when he takes the form of demonic foods. In response, the armies of the righteous have already waged war on sugar, and now red meat is in their sights. This time their cause seems doubly just. Red meat, we are told, is not only bad for our health, but the belching and farting ruminants that we farm are ruinous for the planet. Emboldened by the apparent success of the sugary drinks tax, the weapon of choice to slay this monster is a similar levy on meat. Oxford University’s professor of population health, Mike Rayner, has even done the maths, and concludes that we need to tax red meat by 20% and processed meat by at least 100% to offset their costs to human health. On the face of it, the meat tax looks like an appetising idea. But once you start putting some flesh on its bare bones it starts to look less savoury. I’ve become even more convinced about this after taking part as a juror in a Food Policy on Trial event hosted by the Food Ethics Council, of which I am a member. This intensive, exploratory half-day exercise heard from four experts, with questions from jurors and an audience made up mostly of food industry and policy experts. It didn’t take too much digging to discover that both the health and environmental problems associated with red meat are far more complicated than the headlines lead us to believe. Take health first. Earlier this year, both a major international study produced by the EAT-Lancet Commission on Food, Planet, Health and another based on five years of UK Biobank data seemed to conclude that the optimal level of consumption of red meat was zero. The problem is that neither study was able to distinguish between what kind of red meat was eaten, other than whether it was processed or not. We can be fairly sure that red meat consumption levels are too high for too many people, but we simply don’t know whether a moderate quantity of quality meat is good or bad for you. Pressed on this at the “trial”, nutritionist Jody Harris, from the Institute of Development Studies, agreed that the health case was only overwhelming against processed meat. Moral panic leads to the arbitrary demonisation of a particular food stuff, or breed of dog, or type of media or music But even this category is too wide for us to generalise. Is traditionally cured Parma ham as bad for you as industrially produced turkey rashers? The jury is still out. While it deliberates, we should remember that if we ate processed meat less often, any health risk would be minor anyway, perhaps comparable to breathing in some of the carcinogenic smoke at a vegan summer barbecue. The complications of the environmental issues are even more significant. Most industrially produced meat is raised on imported feed made from crops such as soya, heavily dependent on commercial fertilisers and irrigation, often grown on woodland and forest cleared for cultivation. In contrast, properly pasture-reared animals feed on grasslands unsuitable for arable farming, watered by the clouds. These animals don’t depend on fertilisers further down the food chain, they actually provide manure for crops. If we were to tax red meat, many people would switch to more poultry, which is almost always reared on feed, adding to our burden on the planet. Most significantly, there is now a strong case that pasture-fed ruminants are in the long run carbon neutral, or close to it. Key to this is the increased understanding that methane is a short-lived greenhouse gas and shouldn’t be treated in the same way as carbon dioxide, which, once released into the atmosphere, stays there indefinitely. Within 20 years, methane breaks down and its carbon returns to grasslands, which act as great carbon sinks. Enthusiasm for the meat tax risks making the age-old mistake which results in misguided policy initiatives: a genuine problem is identified, but then a simple and simplistic solution is proposed. So-called sin taxes are especially vulnerable to this. Moral panic leads to the arbitrary demonisation of a particular foodstuff, for instance, or breed of dog, or type of media or music. This leads to the rushed introduction of an ad hoc, piecemeal law such as the Dangerous Dogs Act, which fails to get to the heart of the matter. Policy is led by the issues du jour and fails to tackle the underlying, long-term problems. One of the most significant of these problems is that people on low incomes have the poorest diets. A meat tax would simply reduce their options even more, pushing them towards cheaper, often hyper-processed alternatives. The systemic failure of our food system is that we have become addicted to food that is cheap at the point of purchase only because its true cost in terms of greenhouse gas emissions and depletion of resources is not being paid by anyone. Until we fix this, good food will mostly remain out of the reach of the poorest people. If we really want to solve the environmental and health problems caused by eating too much of the wrong kinds of meat, we need to use fiscal sticks and carrots with more care than a blunt tax which would hit the poor hardest. Farmers need incentives to tread lightly on the land they work, while manufactures, retailers and consumers need disincentives to make, sell and eat the highly processed foods that we know are good for no one’s health. Both are possible if we take a more thoughtful and nuanced approach to policy. The temptation to go for a quick and easy fix must be resisted. Less meat must also mean better meat: for us, for the planet and for animal welfare. • Julian Baggini is a writer and philosopher