Britain may be in the mood for a nationalist prime minister who is prepared to see minorities lose out, according to an alarming poll on populism in Prospect magazine. The poll mines a worrying seam of anti-democratic, anti-civil rights instincts on the right, with Conservatism moving rapidly rightwards. By 61% to a meagre 18%, voters agree with the sentiment that “a prime minister should always put the British majority first even if it means minorities lose out”. That might embolden Boris Johnson to make more controversial “jokes” about Muslim women, suggests Prospect’s editor, Tom Clark. Johnson last summer suggested that Brexit might “get somewhere” if it were being run by Donald Trump, of whom he was “increasingly admiring”. But he may be feeling out-Trumped as he watches rowdy Nigel Farage rallies where audiences shout, “Lock her up!” about Theresa May. On foreign policy, zero-sum nationalism again echoes Trumpism: 58% agree that “a prime minister should always put Britain first even if that means damaging alliances”, with only 20% disagreeing. But that’s a more ambiguous question. How would you answer it when considering Tony Blair’s fateful error in putting the “special relationship” with George W Bush first, even though joining the Iraq war was certainly not in Britain’s national interest? More reassuringly, voters reject the crassest Trumpishness. When asked, “Could you imagine supporting a PM who was impolite, insensitive and taunted minority groups, but always spoke up for Britain?”, people said no by 48% to 29%. Nor would they tolerate a PM who would “bend the rules to get things done”, by 52% to 24%. The rule of law is not to be trampled by passing political passions. Here’s a sign of hope: this rightwing populist impulse is no sudden youthful upsurge – it’s the hot-blooded, rash and impulsive old, the over-65s who are trying to drag the country into a nationalist furore. Be reassured when you look at the difference between the old and the young on these questions: 77% of over-65s say majorities should always trump minorities, while only 41% of the wiser under-25s agree, with the same difference on a nationalist foreign policy. The generational split is likely to be permanent, as pollsters keep noting how the much higher education levels of younger cohorts show a close correlation between education and open-mindedness, while a lack of education among cohorts who left school young two generations ago correlates with rightwing populism. The dangerous lure of Farage/Johnson populism beckons the Tories closer to extinction, a party attracting more of the yesterdays and very few of the tomorrows. The Tories didn’t win a majority of any age group below 48 at the 2017 general election, and Tory support is ageing fast. But David Gauke, the justice secretary, showed how hard it is to explain that things are complicated on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme; that there are no easy Brexit answers and that before choosing a new leader, his party should pause to consider Britain’s role in a post–Brexit world. But serious politics sounds leaden in the face of rabble-rousing. This week I was in Middlesbrough, surveying Labour’s local election wreckage. The party now controls not one Tees Valley council, losing Middlesbrough, Redcar, Stockton, Hartlepool and Darlington. “We all got beaten,” said one of the surviving Labour councillors, grimacing at the pain of it. The regional mayor is Tory, and in Middlesbrough the new mayor is a multimillionaire hedge-funding property developer, standing as an independent. The council was won by independents, because, say distraught Labour campaigners, any party label was death for candidates. Brexit was important, but the anti-politics feeling was stronger, and anti-Corbynism took its toll among Labour voters, too. “One old chap came into the Labour office – our office! – to ask us how to stand as an independent. We had to explain politely we were Labour, and not that keen. He put out a leaflet listing his hobbies, but not much else.” He won because the label “independent” was all it took. Some independent candidates are tax-cutting Tories in disguise, who knew they’d never get elected with a true blue badge. Some are nimby campaigners against house-building. Some are well-known local agitators who held a demo against a mythical mosque that never was. Others are conspiracy theorists claiming that the council was corrupt, imagining brown envelopes and planning scams everywhere. All it took was opposition to politics, but now, to their own surprise, this patchwork is in control. Having promised to cut council tax yet improve everything, before long they’ll have to set a budget and face the political realities. The time will come when it dawns on them, and on voters, that organised politics with a costed manifesto of policies has value: protest voting only goes so far. Imagine the moment of truth if a Farage or a Johnson actually took charge of the country, and was responsible for the consequences of their words. Last night on ITV’s Peston show, Farage called himself a “jack in the box”, proclaiming his intent to take over at the next general election. Can he flesh out credible non-Brexit policies? There’s no sign as yet: he backs US-style private health insurance. Psephologists point to the Farage paradox, where the more successful he seems, the more soft Brexiters veer towards remain in reaction to him. As both main parties stagger under the impact of Brexit, with both failing miserably to cope with it, the old two-and-a-bit party system looks fragile. With or without electoral reform, real politics will reassert itself, as rag-tag oppositionists taking power in councils discover the seriousness of their political calling. Once forced to confront the tough choices, trade-offs and compromises of this essential and honourable profession, newcomers will have to learn the hard way: populism may get you into office – but then what? • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist