It is bad enough being responsible for slumping customer numbers and rising bills at British Gas, but Centrica’s boss, Iain Conn, now finds himself lumped in with senior banking executives in controversies over pay. Conn’s bedfellow in shareholder discontent is Lloyds Banking Group’s chief executive, António Horta-Osório. Both face their investors at annual general meetings this week, having ruffled feathers in recent months over their excessive pay packets. Conn’s remuneration has grown with the help of two bonuses, each worth £388,000, while Horta-Osório is feeling the heat over annual pension payments viewed by many shareholders as little more than a backdoor pay rise. It puts both companies at risk of joining the list of British boards which have suffered shareholder rebellions over the 2019 AGM season, including Barclays, engineering business John Wood and shipping services company Clarkson. London-based bank Standard Chartered also suffered a 36% vote against its own pay policy last week. The backlash may be smaller, given Lloyds and Centrica have support from influential shareholder advisory firms Glass Lewis and ISS, but it won’t go unnoticed. The pressure has been building thanks to the help of trade body the Investment Association, whose 250 members manage about £7.7tn in assets. The association has urged companies to close the gap between contributions made to directors’ pensions and those offered to staff, saying that otherwise it looks like higher payments are just a “mechanism for increasing total remuneration”. Horta-Osório has become a lightning rod for the anger over high pension pay. The Lloyds boss receives 33% of his salary, or £419,000, as a cash payment in lieu of pension. Apart from fellow executives, the rest of Lloyds staff are offered just 13%. The gulf between the staff pension and Horta-Osório’s persists despite his having cut his pensions payments from 46% of salary to 33% earlier this year. The bank also capped a portion of his pension which is linked to his final salary at his request, although the move only cost him £3,000 out of a total pay packet of £1.3m. MPs have ratcheted up the pressure. Frank Field, the independent MP who chairs the work and pensions select committee, and Rachel Reeves, the Labour chair of the business committee, have demanded that the bank justify the payments. It could be argued that a recent strong performance by Lloyds has given Horta-Osório grounds to argue that his pay is not excessive. However, the situation at Centrica does point to a disconnection between company performance and executive pay. Conn received a 44% rise for 2018, despite a year that involved two price increases, a profits warning, the announcement of thousands of job cuts and a customer loss rate at British Gas of 90,000 per month. He is quick to blame the drop-off in profits on the regulator introducing a price cap, which he says is choking competition and investment. But it will be tough to swallow for some. Conn’s total pay package last year was worth £2.4m, up from £1.7m a year earlier, having been bolstered by those two £388,000 bonuses. That sum marks a U-turn for Centrica’s remuneration committee, which last year agreed that top bosses shouldn’t pocket any bonuses after share price falls in 2017. That trend has continued, with shares recently hitting their lowest level since 1999. The pay bump isn’t a good look for the head of Centrica’s pay committee, Scott Wheway, who also faced fire at insurer Aviva, where he served in the same role in 2012. That year, around 54% of shareholders rejected Aviva’s remuneration report as executive pay surged and profits sunk.