Too big, some said of Michael O’Leary’s Gigginstown Stud racing operation. Too powerful, too all-pervasive, a threat to the spectacle and the competitiveness of the game. Well, over the course of the next five years, we will all come to discover what an O’Leary-less jumping game looks like and his detractors may well end up concluding that you need to be careful what you wish for. Few who follows the sport closely, in Ireland above all, will not have seen several races over the last couple of years which looked a little … odd. When four or five horses in the same colours are the only ones still competitive from the home turn, it is tempting to wonder when racing turned into a team event. This year’s Grand National, with seven Gigginstown runners including the hugely popular winner, Tiger Roll, was also a challenge for spectators and commentators alike. But these races also now stand as a sharp reminder of the hole that will be left behind by O’Leary’s step-by-step withdrawal from National Hunt racing. O’Leary has been ploughing untold millions into bloodstock every year, buying point-to-point winners in Ireland and young hurdlers in France, and millions more into training fees. He pays the bills for about a third of the horses trained by Gordon Elliott, Noel Meade and Henry de Bromhead, and a larger percentage of the winners saddled by all three. And while the money taps will be turned off slowly, the decision to start the process by adding no new recruits to the roster can be expected to have an immediate effect on the prices being paid for Irish point-to-pointers and young Graded winners in France. You need only two potential buyers to make a market, so they say, but increasingly over the last few years, O’Leary has always been one of them. For a quarter of a century, the winter code has been thriving on both sides of the Irish Sea. The loss of one of the biggest owners in the game – and, by extension, one of the biggest in jumping history – is arguably the first truly significant setback for National Hunt since its bandwagon started to roll in the mid-80s. There are no real precedents to offer a hint of how it might play out, either over jumps or on the Flat, where the biggest owners have breeding operations to underpin the racing side of the business by supplying both bloodstock and cash. O’Leary said on Tuesday that his “four or five” year plan to withdraw from ownership “will give our trainers ample time to replace our horses without disruption.” Those whose jobs depend on his horses will hope so but whether even five years is enough for Irish racing to find the owners to replace his hundreds of horses remains to be seen. Some, no doubt, will be tempted into ownership when O’Leary’s domination might previously have been a deterrent. A drop in the price of young jumping prospects should be further encouragement. Yet the economies of scale that O’Leary enjoys as a result of his vast wealth and investment mean that it is not as simple as finding 30 new owners of 10 horses, or 60 with five, to replace one with 300. He famously fell out with Willie Mullins in a dispute over training fees, and has been able, in effect, to set his own price for playing the game, running Gigginstown with at least one eye on the bottom line. Owners with less money to spend do not have the same advantages. New owners alone will not fill the gap. Irish racing will also hope that existing owners, and those who are already major players in particular, will add to their investment too. But with their biggest rival off the scene and Ireland’s generous prize money therefore already easier to win, will owners like JP McManus, Rich Ricci or Graham Wylie see either the need or the incentive? McManus is the only current owner whose investment in National Hunt racing stands comparison to O’Leary’s. Both had very similar numbers of runners in Ireland last season: 922 for O’Leary and 994 for McManus. Barry Connell was next on the list with 113 (and just seven winners), while Ricci had 92. It is very hard to see where nearly 1,000 runners will come from to replace those that will eventually be lost. Ultimately, it is likely that a bloodstock operation on the Gigginstown scale is effectively irreplaceable. At the same time, though, the depth of National Hunt’s roots in Ireland will mean that it stands a better chance of weathering the storm than might be the case elsewhere. Irish jumping will hope to absorb the blow of O’Leary’s departure, adapt and then move on with a mixture of new and existing owners filling at least some of the gap that Gigginstown leaves behind. The extent to which they have done will not become apparent for several seasons yet. The Musidora Stakes at York, the feature event on the first day of the Dante meeting, has attracted a double-figure field for the first time since 2001 and looks like one of the most open renewals of recent seasons too, with no standout Oaks contender setting off at odds-on, as has been the case in three of the last four runnings. A majority of the runners are lightly raced and open to significant improvement on their form to date, most obviously Frankellina, whose trainer, William Haggas, took the Musidora last year with Give And Take, and Godolphin’s Dubai Blue. At the prices, though, it could pay to take a chance on Ralph Beckett’s Sand Share (3.35) at around 5-1. Her close third behind Fleeting in the May Hill at Doncaster last September is backed up by the clock and her pedigree suggests improvement for today’s step up in trip. York 1.50 Fujaira Prince 2.25 Reputation 3.00 Yafta (nap) 3.35 Sand Share (nb) 4.05 The Night Watch 4.35 Bomb Proof 5.05 Past Master Yarmouth 2.00 Lincoln Red 2.35 Archer’s Dream 3.10 Birch Grove 3.45 Rail Dancer 4.15 Majestic Moon 4.45 Cape Cyclone 5.15 Diva Star Newton Abbot 2.10 Casa Tall 2.45 Triple Chief 3.20 Jot’em Down 3.55 Igor 4.25 Hold Me Tight 4.55 Southfield Vic 5.30 Perfect Percy Bath 5.25 Dalness Express 5.55 Powerful Dream 6.25 Major Blue 6.55 Pacificadora 7.25 Champs De Reves 7.55 Top Rock Talula 8.25 Lippy Lady Perth 6.05 Skiddaw Valleys 6.35 Little Stevie 7.05 Lady Samback 7.35 The Boola Bee 8.05 Shanroe Al C 8.35 Mr Mercurial 9.05 Angel’s Envy