West Bromwich Albion discovered the wild and violent mood-swings of the play-offs after two goals in three minutes gave Aston Villa a 2-1 victory in the first leg of their semi-final. West Brom had frustrated Villa for 75 minutes, protecting Dwight Gayle’s early goal and making Villa, the form team in the Championship, look toothless. But a brilliant strike from Conor Hourihane and a Tammy Abraham penalty gave Dean Smith’s team the advantage to take into Tuesday’s second leg at the Hawthorns. This game is a few rungs down in the ranking of West Midlands rivalries, but you would not think that listening to the noise inside the stadium, Villa a club that finally looks to have direction under boyhood fan Smith, three years after relegation from the top flight. Villa were on top in the early stages, but West Brom went inches from taking the lead in the 11th minute. Jed Steer nearly donated a goal by flapping at and missing a cross into the box, but redeemed himself seconds later by sensationally tipping a Jay Rodriguez shot that was heading for the top corner, on to the bar. But five minutes later, West Brom were ahead. Glenn Whelan, who was described this week by Smith as undergoing a “renaissance” this season, let a Jack Grealish pass slip under his studs which put Gayle through on goal, and he walloped a left-footed shot into the bottom corner. The goal seemed to knock Villa sideways: from that point their play was disjointed and uncertain despite having plenty of the ball, and they appeared to have little clue about how to break through an admittedly packed defence. A crossfield pass by Axel Tuanzebe aiming for Anwar El Ghazi on the left, but sailed over his head and out of play summed things up neatly. The second half initially followed a similar pattern to the first, with West Brom continuing to defend stoutly, packed so tight that Villa simply could not unpick them, the task looking a little like trying to untangle a drawer full of charging cables. They were also intent on slowing the game down at every opportunity, and it was a surprise that it took until 62 minutes had elapsed for any of their players to be booked for time wasting, Gayle shown a yellow card for flamboyantly dithering over a throw. Gayle pushed his luck a few minutes later when a couple of Hourihane’s fingers accidentally brushed his cheek, the forward committing to the bit by staying on the turf for nearly a minute, holding his face as if struck in the chin with a plank of wood. Villa’s substitutions, Hourihane on for Whelan (who suddenly looked every day of his 35 years) and Andre Green replacing Albert Adomah, initially looked like they made little impact, until they did. Grealish, who had spent 75 minutes playing like he was trying to win the game on his own, collected the ball on the right of the box, tried to make space for a shot but instead spotted Hourihane in a ludicrous amount of space just outside the area. He thrashed a shot through the massed ranks, into the corner and Villa Park exploded. That turned out to be a prelude to the decibel level a couple of minutes later, when Grealish again made tracks towards goal, and Kieran Gibbs chopped him down. Not even the West Brom players protested the decision, and Abraham nervelessly stroked the penalty home. The home crowd, by this time one loud and pulsing mass of joy, got the perfect final act when Gayle was booked for a second time, this time for a late challenge on goalkeeper Steer. He will be suspended for the return, giving West Brom caretaker Jimmy Shan a quandary up front, with Hal Robson-Kanu already suspended. But this is the play-offs: anything can happen yet.