Whatever side of the Brexit fence you sit on, we can all agree that the last few months have been some of the most depressing and unproductive in our recent political history. The Brexit referendum was supposed to be a unique opportunity to restore faith in our democracy – but instead we’ve almost destroyed it. As a country we’ve collectively lost sight of the magnificent opportunities that Brexit could bring. I have opposed the prime minister’s withdrawal agreement on the basis that it isn’t even close to being Brexit. You only have to look at the frustration in the country, the dire local election results, the paralysis and stagnation in parliament and the rise of Nigel Farage’s Brexit party to anticipate what will happen to the Conservative party’s fortunes if Theresa May continues to pursue this course. May’s high-risk strategy of freezing her cabinet ministers out of the negotiations with the EU meant that she took full ownership of the deal that was agreed. It was her deal that has been defeated in parliament three times, once by the biggest majority in our democratic history. When a prime minister’s flagship policy is defeated once, let alone three times, it’s time to step aside. Each rejection of her withdrawal agreement by parliament has been delivered by a broad coalition of MPs from across the House of Commons. It is such a bad deal that there isn’t just one group or set of interests that is stopping it from becoming law. Labour, Liberal, SNP, DUP, Green and Conservative MPs have all persistently stood up for what they perceive to be in the best interests of their constituents and the country as a whole. And yet the prime minister continues to blame parliament for the deficiencies of her withdrawal agreement, her premiership and her government’s negotiating strategy. Successful leaders bring broad coalitions together, heal divisions, find areas of common ground and have an uncanny way of being able to turn adversity and defeat into new and exciting opportunities. They also know when their leadership has become an obstacle to progress. Ripping up one election promise after another and desperately trying to cobble together a last-minute stitch-up with one of the most dangerous and toxic Labour leaders I’ve ever known, is not the mark of a strong leader. And using the office of prime minister to blame MPs for doing their jobs and their constitutional duty is not the statesmanlike behaviour one expects to see from the nation’s leader. It is now time for May to go and for the country to move on. The country will thank her for her service, as I will, but we will breathe a huge sigh of relief as new life is injected into the Brexit negotiations with the EU as well as our domestic policy agenda. Parliament has already outlined what it wants, so the idea that having a new leader won’t change anything is fanciful nonsense. The current “parliamentary maths” makes Brexit perfectly possible, as long as it is accompanied by a change in No 10. In 2017, almost four fifths of MPs voted to trigger article 50 so that the UK would leave the EU on 29 March this year. Having repeatedly assured the country that we would leave on that day, May has unilaterally extended the leaving date twice. A majority of MPs asked May to remove the backstop from her deal and rejected the idea of staying in the EU customs union, knowing that it would scupper any chance of us negotiating trade deals with vital parts of the world economy. Instead, the prime minister hasn’t asked for the backstop to be removed, had no intention of preparing the country to walk away from the negotiations if we couldn’t achieve what is clearly in our interests – and is now apparently entertaining the idea of signing up to Corbyn’s customs union. The new leaving date is 31 October. A new prime minister would be able to use the time and space created by the latest article 50 extension to seek a genuine free trade agreement with the EU. At the same time, we can prepare the country properly for a no-deal exit, under which we will continue to trade with our closest trading partners under World Trade Organisation rules. And if the EU continued to adopt a hardline position, putting us in the intolerable position of either staying tied to the EU or imperilling the very existence of the United Kingdom and sacrificing the futures of the people of Northern Ireland, a new prime minister would walk away from the negotiations. They would be fully empowered to conduct the treaty negotiations as they and their cabinet ministers saw fit – and parliament would be asked whether or not it wanted to bring domestic legislation into line with our international treaty obligations, as negotiated by a new government. In the biggest act of democracy in our nation’s history, 17.4 million people voted to leave the EU. The opportunities are still just around the corner and there’s still time to grasp them and transform ourselves into a country that can govern its own destiny. We need a leader who is serious about delivering Brexit, preparing the country for change – and who will work towards enacting the referendum result rather than constantly undermining the wishes of the electorate. In 1990, Margaret Thatcher stood down from the leadership of the Conservative party after she failed to get sufficient votes in the first leadership ballot. Later, I said to her that I thought she could still have won if she had stayed in the contest and fought the second ballot. She told me that if she had done so, it would have left Conservative MPs split and done huge damage to the party. She believed that the national interest was best served by her standing down and allowing the party to choose a new leader who could make a fresh start. She was right – and our present prime minister should reach the same conclusion. • John Whittingdale is the Conservative MP for Maldon