Shortlisted for the Rathbones Folio prize, Alice Jolly’s remarkable third novel is the tale of a serving woman in 19th-century rural Gloucestershire, written in rolling free verse, and set during a time of tumultuous political upheaval. Mary’s story is a “found document” in the best literary tradition, discovered behind a panel in the last house in which she served. Indeed, by ventriloquising an overlooked, working-class female voice, the novel recalls Richardson’s Pamela, with its audacious “writing to the moment” and utterly convincing idiolect. We first meet Mary as an old woman, caring for her ailing master, Blyth Cottrell, at Mount Vernon, where she’s given the task of writing down his life story. In an act of rebellion, Mary decides to tell her own story instead, and we return to her abusive orphaned childhood, and then to her time in service at Stocton Hill Farm. There she’s taken on by Blyth’s father, the benign Harland, who later teaches her to read and write, and encounters Blyth’s brother, the firebrand Ned. It’s Ned’s involvement in the swelling Chartist movement that sets off a chain of events leading to the book’s gripping climactic tragedy, giving Mary a heavy burden of secret knowledge alluded to from the start. Jolly brings the upheaval of the times – the Swing riots of the 1830s, with their rick burning and machine breaking – vividly to life, placing her characters at the centre of historical events that quickly overwhelm them. What distinguishes Mary Ann Sate, Imbecile from more conventional historical novels is Jolly’s daring experiment in form, and her extraordinary handling of language. Mary’s untutored and unpunctuated outpouring keenly documents her hopes and fears and her unrequited love for millworker Lucetta. She also writes exquisitely about the turning year: “The butter touch of the sun” in “zummer”, or the “Leaves russet scarlet flame” after harvest, or the “white / Moon glimmer” on a basket of eggs. Equally well evoked are gnarled grotesques: “A string thin whisker and bristle man / With a glout face and nooching stride”; as well as the mills and dyehouses surrounding Stroud, “The fall of the fulling stocks … The heart beat that does keep / The life to flow through all these valleys”. An afterword informs us that Mary died in the work-house in 1887, an “imbecile”, though she’s clearly not. She succeeded in her ambition to tell “the stories history never writes”, fulfilling the desire that “some person bear witness to our lives / Know us in all our deepest parts”. At 640 pages, the novel might have faltered, but its driving plot, engagement with politics and unforgettable, robustly feminist heroine justify its length. It’s a rigorously researched, lyrical tour de force. • Mary Ann Sate, Imbecile is published by Unbound (£9.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.