Former Giro d’Italia winner Tom Dumoulin abandoned the race shortly after the start of the fifth stage, amid foul weather conditions on Wednesday. The Dutch rider, winner in 2017 and one of the favourites for the three-week race, injured his left knee in a massive pileup about six kilometres from the line in a 235km ride from Orbetello on Tuesday. “Tom Dumoulin’s injuries have proved too painful and he is forced to abandon the Giro d’Italia in the early kilometres of stage five,” Team Sunweb said on Twitter. The team had said earlier that he had been cleared to race by medical staff and would “give it his best shot”. Earlier, Mikel Landa apologised for calling Simon Yates “a retard” after a crash at the end of stage four. The Movistar rider was asked about one of the incidents and responded: “That fucking Yates, who is a retard and rides like crazy. He threw me into a roundabout.” Landa completed the stage on his teammate Lluís Mas’s bike after his was damaged but was 44 seconds down on the stage winner Richard Carapaz. Yates, who also fell in the crash, finished only 18 seconds down and said the incident had started when another rider hit him. He later accepted Landa’s apology for his comments, saying: “I understand what it’s like to say something in the heat of the moment.” Meanwhile, four European cyclists, including two retired riders, have been provisionally suspended for potential doping violations following information from the Austrian law enforcement authorities, the International Cycling Union (UCI) said on Wednesday. Slovenia’s Kristijan Koren of Team Bahrain Merida and Croatian Kristijan Durasek of UAE Team Emirates as well as former riders Alessandro Petacchi and Borut Bozic have been notified of potential anti-doping rules violations as part of the Operation Aderlass investigation. Koren is competing at the Giro d’Italia but was not allowed to start Wednesday’s stage. Pettachi, 45, retired in 2015, while 38-year-old Slovenian Bozic ended his cycling career last year and is now assistant sports director at Bahrain Merida. The four are under investigation for employing prohibited doping methods between 2012 and 2017. UAE Team Emirates have suspended 31-year-old Durasek, and said in a statement: “The team hopes that Durasek can prove he was not involved in the affair. Should it be proven otherwise, he will be terminated immediately.” Team Bahrain Merida have also provisionally suspended 32-year-old Koren and Bozic. “The team strictly advocates zero-tolerance doping policy and has therefore provisionally suspended both members concerned,” they said. • Stage five report to follow here later …