The second largest shareholder in Metro Bank has cut its stake in the lender by nearly a third, in the latest sign that investors are jumping ship in the wake of an accounting blunder. Fidelity slashed its stake from 7.6% to 5.4% on Friday, according to a market filing. Problems are mounting at Metro ahead of its annual general meeting on 21 May, where executives will come under pressure over an accounting misclassification that has lopped 75% off its stock price and blemished its reputation as an upcoming force in high street lending with 1.7 million customers. The bank has repeatedly tested shareholder patience since January, announcing plans to raise another £350m just months after ruling out further cash calls, and revealing a 50% slump in first-quarter profits, alongside the exit of some of its biggest corporate customers. Against this backdrop, the bank’s share price has tumbled from £22 at the start of the year to all-time lows of about £5.41. Investor appetite also appears to be building for a boardroom shake-up. It comes a year after the bank’s American chairman and founder, Vernon Hill, dodged a shareholder rebellion over multimillion-pound payments to his wife Shirley’s architecture firm, InterArch. Metro’s board quietly conceded in its annual report that it would open InterArch’s contract up to tender, in a move that seems to have appeased shareholders and advisory firms who had cried foul. But investor concerns have returned in the lead-up to the AGM. The Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority, which monitors stability in the British financial system, have launched investigations after Metro confirmed hundreds of millions of pounds of commercial property loans and loans to commercial buy-to-let operators were misrepresented as being lower risk. The bank was further embarrassed after it emerged the error was caught by the PRA despite the bank originally suggesting it discovered the issue on its own. Shareholders have been ditching the stock, with Fidelity the biggest move so far, and many are directly betting against the lender’s success. Metro is currently the most shorted UK stock, with at least 11.8% of its shares on loan to short sellers, according to data listed by the FCA. Its chief executive, Craig Donaldson, who has led the bank since its launch in 2010, has said he offered to resign after the mistake came to light in January, but he decided to stay after gaining full support of the bank’s board and instead gave up a potential £800,000 bonus. Directors including Hill are understood to have spoken privately to shareholders after the accounting blunder. But the bank’s bosses may still face opposition at the AGM. The shareholder advisory firm Glass Lewis has recommended a vote against Hill’s re-election, while fellow proxy firm ISS says investors should withhold support for four directors it holds responsible for the blunder. They include Hill and Donaldson, as well as Gene Lockhart and Stuart Bernau, the chairs of Metro’s risk and audit committees respectively. Abstentions are also recommended by ISS around the reappointment of Metro’s decade-long auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers, while ISS believes a £288,000 bonus for the finance chief, David Arden, is “not considered appropriate, given the recent shareholder experience” and has recommended voting against the bank’s pay report. Metro is also the subject of reports that it could struggle to raise the £350m it says it needs to fuel future growth. However, the bank has stressed that, with the fundraising fully underwritten, it will gather the cash regardless of shareholder appetite. 