I grew up just outside Narberth, a small town in Pembrokeshire. It is mostly famous for a food festival, being close to Oakwood (Wales’s only theme park!) and Narberth Castle, which features in The Mabinogion. Princess Rhiannon, having been wrongly accused of killing her own child, is forced to sit outside the castle and condemned to tell her story to everyone who passes by and then to carry them into the castle on her back. The baby is found, though, and Rhiannon is forgiven. She names the baby Pryderi, which means “Worry”. I’ll say. When I think about my childhood, before the internet, the division between the real and the unknown feels hazy. I was a dreamy, lonely child, and every summer day seemed full of slightly traumatic experiences such as adopting stray kittens that then died, or discovering escaped bulls, or being chased on my bike by vicious sheepdogs. We had a big book of Welsh fairytales providing a world of folklore in which women came from lakes, cities were drowned, and children were taken by fairies. It all seemed fairly plausible in that landscape. And what a landscape, particularly the beaches. I love being in the open water, but not in an athletic way - I just like to splash. I spent days hiding in the sand dunes of Broad Haven South, or swimming at Amroth, eating ice-cream and catching shrimps in rock-pools. I based the landscape of The Water Cure on a future version of Barafundle Bay, an otherworldly beach. Last time I visited I swam into a huge barrel jellyfish. They don’t sting and I was wearing a wetsuit, but it’s like swimming into a ghost. Another time, beautiful but poisonous things washed up all along the shore from a big storm: sea slugs, portugese man o’war. There is an eeriness to the beauty of the scenery here. One of my strongest childhood memories is of a hand washing ashore on the local beach. I read about it in the paper and refused to go there for a year. My parents and sister would merrily go on a walk and I would sit in the back of the car, hunched down. My school was in the Preseli Hills; speaking English would get you a detention, and I can still recite entire Welsh poems from memory. Because I had few friends I ate furtively in the school library, which was also the community library, and where I developed a taste for lurid romance novels and horror. On snow days when school was shut everyone would just drive up to the hills anyway and go sledging. You’d see teachers cheering on pupils careering down the snow in a kayak. Then on weekends I worked at one of Narberth’s two rival supermarkets. I liked being on Bakery and enacting a small rebellion by occasionally giving customers an extra slice of bacon in their butty. The internet opened things up for me. It helped me make new friends, recommended me books, brought me into the real world. As I got older we started to go to free parties in isolated corners of the county, sleeping in cars and waking up at sunrise overlooking glorious beaches or rolling hills. At the time this seemed like a poor substitute for the glittering life I knew awaited me in London. But I grew up with more freedom than I realised at the time. I go back and am hit by the beauty and weirdness of everything, by the timelessness, the mundane and incredible existing side by side. • The Water Cure by Sophie Mackintosh is published by Penguin. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&p of £1.99.