Sam Wollaston reports (Haircut equality is finally here, G2, 8 May) that his local salon is raising the price of a man’s haircut to the same level as a woman’s “for moral reasons. It’s about equality, it’s the right thing to do.” My husband and I go to the same hairdresser. We both have short hairstyles, which probably require about the same amount of cutting, and our appointments take the same amount of time. Yet I am charged almost double the price my husband pays. If “hair hasn’t got gender”, as Sam’s stylist says, then perhaps it would be more moral to achieve equality by dropping the price of women’s haircuts to the same level as men’s.Susan TomesEdinburgh • It is interesting to me that men and women pay different prices to have their hair cut. I am 75 and have always cut my own hair. How much money have I saved?Janette SmithBirmingham • I have loved listening to the mercurial imagination that is Danny Baker for decades now (Baby Archie’s first race row is a taste of things to come, Opinion, 10 May). He simply has no form when it comes to racism. I’m inclined, therefore, to believe the man when he protests to a catastrophic error of judgment.Richard CohenLondon • Danny Baker had his taste buds removed in 2011. That explains everything.Phil RhodenKidderminster, Worcestershire • We played my husband’s favourite, “Don’t Worry, Be Happy” by Bobby McFerrin, as his coffin slid into the flames (Letters, 8 May). The only time I can genuinely claim to have laughed and cried at the same time.Cary BazalgetteLondon • I once asked an old lady if she did her pelvic floor exercises (Letters, 8 May) and she said: “Oh no. If I get on the floor I can’t get up.”Dr James WillisAlton, Hampshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition.