Why do people inflict insanely hot chillies on themselves? Or, to be more precise, why do men inflict insanely hot chillies on themselves? As the entertaining It Burns podcast shows, there is almost nothing that cannot be subjected to ridiculous, almost lethal, levels of competition in order to feed the male ego. Host Mark Fennell explores everything from the race to breed the world’s hottest pepper to the almost unbearable suffering that “chilli heads” inflict on themselves. For a less analytical, more unequivocal dive into the same culture, try Scott Roberts’ Firecast. Think of it as a palette cleanser… Phil Harrison 13 Alibis If Richard Rosario had 13 witnesses to say he was hundreds of miles away when a teenager was murdered in New York, why is he in prison for the crime? Dateline NBC producer Dan Slepian has spent six years looking into the case and is now telling the story in a glossy and detailed true-crime podcast. He heads into the tough prison to interview Rosario as well as speaking to the victim’s family. Each episode is under 20 minutes, so the story moves fast, twisting as it unfolds. Hannah Verdier Deep Down & Desi: For Fast’s Sake PodcastShould you be on Instagram during Ramadan? Is using toothpaste OK? Does being kind sometimes mean being fake? And how do you feel about people eating around you? BBC Asian Network’s Yasser, Zayna and Shehzaad tackle all of these questions and more, in an intriguing show for both followers of Islam and the uninformed. Breaking down stereotypes, myths, confusions and cultural differences, it’s an excellent window into the millennial Muslim experience. Hannah J Davies This was a deeply chilling episode of the Guardian’s daily news podcast. Anushka Asthana tells the story of a plot to kill a Labour MP and a police officer, which was only disrupted after an informant within the neo-Nazi group National Action blew the whistle. The two men interviewed for the podcast – Robbie Mullen and Matthew Collins – are incredibly honest and insightful about their own time within far-right groups and why they turned informers. Mullen was sitting in a pub in Warrington when he heard about the murder plot from the then 22-year-old Jack Renshaw of the neo-Nazi group National Action. Mullen had become disillusioned and passed on details of the plan to Collins at the anti-racism charity Hope Not Hate. Collins himself grew up in South London and became an active member of the National Front, the BNP and Combat 18 before turning informant from within the far-right for three years. Katherine Godfrey Chosen by David Waters, freelance producerThis funny and inspiring documentary is a portrait of the relationship between 11-year-old Arthur and his artist dad Babak. Together they explore the world of ‘self-care’ in an attempt to bring some cheer to Babak’s outlook. But in the short time listeners spend with both characters it is clear that the joy is already there, in the company of each other. Producers Katie Callin and Barney Rowntree (for Reduced Listening) brilliantly capture the fun Babak and Arthur have together and transmit it to listeners. Each scene radiates warmth, too. When the father and son go on a fossil hunting trip, Arthur says to his father: “Well done for saying ‘paleontological’, that’s a hard word.” Babak returns: “Thanks for patronising me.” Arthur: “I’ve forgotten what patronising means.” Babak “Do you know what? Don’t worry about it.” By the end it’s clear that Babak and Arthur are performing a self-help lesson of their own, demonstrating the tight bond and mutual respect that can be formed in relationships built on tenderness, humour and honesty.