In March of 2014 the Los Angeles Dodgers played the Arizona Diamondbacks in a Major League Baseball match at the Sydney Cricket Ground. To promote the event, the SCG Trust asked regular tenants of their greater sports precinct – Sydney Swans, NSW Waratahs, Sydney FC, Sydney Roosters – to provide a high-profile player for a photograph with Dodgers pitcher Clayton Kershaw and Diamondbacks first baseman Paul Goldschmidt. It would be dubbed “the best of the best”. The Swans sent their champion Adam Goodes. The Roosters put up dual international Sonny Bill Williams. Sydney FC trotted out their famous Italian superstar, Alessandro del Piero. And the Waratahs … were not represented. The Trust had asked for Israel Folau. But he had something else on. Desperate, the Tahs put forth captain Dave Dennis. They offered photogenic Wallaby Adam Ashley-Cooper, hooker Tatafu Polota-Nau, a young gun called Michael Hooper. But the SCG Trust demanded to have Folau. It was him or no one. And they ended up with no one – and ran with that. And rugby copped a major league kick in the bottom. According to his management, Folau had a previous engagement with a sponsor. At the time Folau was an “ambassador” for several brands, notably Trust rival ANZ Stadium. If there was a significant game at ANZ Stadium they’d give Folau a call and he’d drive across Sydney to pose for photos with corporates. He was a sponsor’s dream, so intensely loyal he would risk the wrath of the Trust. According to those who know him, Folau was – and remains – very aware of the value of his “brand” and his image. He knows what he’s worth. He knows how important branding is. Along with ANZ Stadium – Folau’s contract ran out in August of 2018 given there was no Bledisloe Cup match nor Waratahs games to promote – Folau has been an “ambassador” for, among others, Asics, Foxtel, BMW, the Global Rugby Tens tournament, the Australian Football League (AFL), and ironically, The Bingham Cup, the “world cup” of gay rugby. Today, however, following a “high level breach” of the professional rugby players’ code of conduct for a much-publicised declaration that homosexuals, atheists and a cabal of “sinners” are bound for hell unless they “repent”, corporate sponsors are hopping off the Wallabies star. Rugby Australia know that sponsors align themselves with brands because positivity rubs off. They also know the reverse is true And it’s all Rugby Australia can do to hang onto them. Land Rover has taken away Folau’s car. Asics has declared their partnership “untenable”. Network 10 said it “fully supports” RA’s position. Qantas said that Folau’s comments were “really disappointing”, then sat back to see what RA would do. Rugby Australia responded swiftly, declaring that unless there were “compelling mitigating factors” they intended to cancel Folau’s contract. And if Folau knows about branding, RA is expert. They know that sponsors align themselves with brands because positivity rubs off. They also know the reverse is true. “The core benefit of a sponsorship, an ambassador arrangement or even an influencer partnership is association, and just as a brand is connected to the on-field wins and the highs, they can be adversely impacted when there is controversy or poor behaviour,” managing director of Mediahub Andrew Livingston told AdNews. “When this happens there is a risk that a brand’s association with an individual becomes too intertwined and they can be tarnished by the same brush from the general public. In this case, it is incredibly important for a brand to take a strong position against the individual, especially when the comments from Israel Folau are so harmful and disrespectful.” Foxtel chief marketing officer Andy Lark told the Australian Financial Review that brands like Qantas want to associate themselves with high-integrity brands. “Australian rugby is now in the same situation with a player,” said Lark. “If you don’t subscribe to our brand values you don’t get to put on this jersey. That’s not just true for a rugby player, that’s true for any senior executive, or any employee.” After Folau’s first Instagram post, Qantas threatened to withdraw sponsorship. After the second one Qantas declared it was pleased with RA’s swift condemnation of Folau’s comments and would await the outcome of their review. On Thursday, Qantas chief executive Alan Joyce told the AFR: “We don’t sponsor something to get involved in controversy. That’s not part of the deal. We expect our partners to take the appropriate action. It’s their issue, they have to deal with it.” Reading into that, can Folau still run around in green-and-gold livery adorned by Qantas’s brand? Can Qantas – and Land Rover, Asics and all the rest of the corporates who’ve been so strong in praising RA’s condemnation of Folau’s comments – possibly sign on again if the man’s representing their brand? Folau will learn of his sentence after a panel of John West QC, Kate Eastman SC and John Boultee hear further submissions from RA and Folau. If his contract is terminated there is avenue for appeal. If he is allowed to play, Rugby Australia will be between a rock and a hard – and potentially lonely and poor – place.