Police have named the suspect in a shooting at the University of North Carolina in which two people died and several others were wounded as 22-year-old Trystan Andrew Terrell. He was in custody with charges pending after Tuesday’s shooting, said Charlotte-Mecklenburg police. The suspect, who some local media reported was a student at the school, is accused of carrying out a rampage armed with a pistol on the last day of classes for the academic year before exams next week. Police spokeswoman Sandy D’Elosua said the individual who was arrested was believed to have acted alone. Three of the injured remain in a critical condition, with a fourth person suffering less serious injuries. Charlotte’s mayor, Vi Lyles, said on Twitter: “We are in shock to learn of an active shooter situation on the campus of UNC Charlotte. My thoughts are with the families of those who lost their lives, those injured, the entire UNCC community and the courageous first responders who sprang into action to help others.” Local WBTV in Charlotte reported that the gunfire erupted at about 5.45pm near the university’s Kennedy Hall administrative building. Three of the wounded victims sustained critical injuries. “Run, Hide, Fight. Secure yourself immediately,” the university said on Twitter shortly before 6pm. The school said on its website the campus was on lockdown and that students and staff should “remain in a safe location”. Video footage posted to social media showed students evacuating campus buildings with their hands raised as police officers ran past them toward the scene of the shooting. Susan Harden, a professor of education on campus since 2011 who also serves on the Mecklenburg county board of commissioners, expressed disbelief at the gun violence. “This is a day at the end of the semester, when students are doing performances, presentations ... this is just the worst thing,” said Harden said at the police staging area. “Our campus is so safe. So safe. I’ve never felt unsafe on our campus. I’m heartbroken.” The university has more than 26,500 students and 3,000 faculty and staff. The campus was to host a concert at the school’s football stadium on Tuesday evening.