It is far from clear that testosterone is responsible for the athletic success of Caster Semenya and Dutee Chand (Caster Semenya loses testosterone legal case but may launch new appeal, 2 May). They are elite female athletes whose high level of testosterone is genetic and due to failure of the tissues to respond to testosterone secreted by the testes. Therefore treatment to reduce testosterone is unlikely to affect their condition, although the side-effects of the therapy may adversely affect performance. It is known from the Atlanta Games that athletes with differences in sexual development (DSD) maintain Olympic levels of performance even after removal of their testes. Unbiased evidence confirming this is held by the IAAF, which has confidential records from previous gender verification tests. The IAAF has a responsibility to reveal the anonymous data which could help in Semenya’s appeal against the verdict from the court of arbitration for sport. The high frequency of DSD (more than one in 420) among elite female athletes compared with the general population (below one in 20,000) indicates that DSD is associated with enhanced athletic performance. Many other genetic variants in those without DSD also contribute to enhanced athletic performance. DSD athletes should therefore not be discriminated against because of their genetics.Prof Malcolm Ferguson-SmithCambridge • I wholeheartedly agree with Madeleine Pape (I lost to Caster Semenya, but I can’t support this ruling, Opinion, 2 May). The decision not to allow Caster Semenya to compete naturally and to require her to take medication to do so is incredibly disheartening. It comes at a time when we are trying desperately to encourage today’s youth to celebrate their natural physique and talents without enhancements. Even more so, it appears at odds with the Olympic charter that “every individual must have the possibility of practising sport, without discrimination of any kind and in the Olympic spirit, which requires mutual understanding with a spirit of friendship, solidarity and fair play.” This verdict runs the risk of alienating those who do not conform because of their natural genotype. Where is the fairness in that?Jane SingerLondon • Some children are born with a natural aptitude for numeracy, or for art, or for music. This aptitude must nonethless be honed through hard work and application. Scientists have not yet identified any singular genes which may influence this, but it is not implausible to assume that they may in future. In line with the recent judgment from the sporting world, w ill we then insist that such children are medicated to counteract their genetic makeup, in order to ensure that fairness exists in the highly competitive environment of the academic and artistic worlds?Sarah MulhollandGoldsithney, Cornwall • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition