The ferry contracts signed to ensure critical imports could reach the UK in the event of a no-deal Brexit have been cancelled, costing taxpayers a further £50m. Questioned in parliament, transport ministers confirmed similar contracts could be signed again later this year should a Brexit deal not be agreed well before the new 31 October departure date. Contracts worth £89m with Brittany Ferries and DFDS to secure ferry space for vital goods across the Channel have been cancelled with a termination payout of £43.8m to the firms, along with costs taking the final bill over £50m. According to National Audit Office estimates in February, the cost of compensation to ferry operators for termination would be up to £56.6m but the Department for Transport said the final figure was expected to be about 10% lower. The latest payout joins an accumulating bill for the contracts awarded by the transport secretary, Chris Grayling, including £33m compensation to Eurotunnel for the botched process. Almost £1m was paid to consultants for a £14m contract with Seaborne Freight, which was scrapped after it emerged the company had no ferries. With significant congestion forecast on the main freight route through Dover and Calais, the government commissioned extra ferry services from ports including Plymouth, Poole and Portsmouth. But with the date of Brexit pushed back from 29 March to 31 October, the contracts have been cancelled, possibly indicating the government is no longer anticipating a no-deal Brexit. In the House of Lords, the transport minister, Baroness Vere, admittedthe ferry saga could yet play out again ahead of October. She said: “No-deal is still the legal default so what is going to happen next is pretty much what happened last time. “Discussions will happen between the departments [of health, environment and business] and we will look at the amount of class one goods that need to come in, and the DfT will be tasked with making sure that goes ahead.” She defended the contracts, which she said were only a small fraction of the £4bn no-deal planning: “The benefit was that the taxpayer had an insurance policy ... The government was able to ensure the continued movement of absolutely critical class one goods into the country.” The fallout from the no-deal ferry debacle, which led to more calls than usual for Grayling’s resignation, may yet rumble on. Last week it emerged P&O Ferries was suing the government over the £33m settlement with Eurotunnel. P&O said the compensation left its ferry service facing an unfair disadvantage. The shadow transport secretary, Andy McDonald, said the ferry contracts “would for ever more be a case study in ministerial incompetence”. A government spokesperson said the contracts were a vital part of contingency measures for Brexit: “Following the extension, the government is reviewing all preparedness plans. The government’s freight capacity contracts for the summer period are no longer needed and have therefore been terminated. “The government has taken this decision now as it represents the best value for money for taxpayers.” However, the Liberal Democrat spokesperson for transport, Jenny Randerson, said: “Chris Grayling’s Department for Transport has become little more than a farce now. “Is Chris Grayling really worth so much to Theresa May that she’s happy to foot an £83m bill racked up in just five months? “If there’s one thing that would unite us all in this Brexit chaos, it would be Mr Grayling being shown the door by the prime minister.”