Mueller and Trump – they surely constitute one of the great double acts in criminal history, like Sherlock Holmes and Moriarty or Javert and Jean Valjean in Les Misérables, and the pairing documented in this massive but obsessively detailed report is all the more magnetic because the two of them never actually meet. Perhaps they don’t need to: like that other celebrated couple, Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde, their connection is symbiotic or even conjoined. An article from the Washington Post, reprinted along with the report, sums up their parallel lives. Almost exactly the same age, both born in New York, they are like twins who individualise themselves by cultivating and exaggerating their differences. One becomes a war hero, the other a draft dodger; one is a dutiful public servant, the other a grossly self-serving profiteer; one is a lawyer who reveres the truth, the other a deluded mythomaniac. At school, Mueller chastised his friends for mocking other boys who weren’t present to defend themselves; Trump, by contrast, has made personal insults a substitute for political argument. Mueller grew up to be such a stringently monochrome man that he wears only white shirts and considers blue to be a damnably frivolous shade, except for ties; Trump is a Technicolor creature, with an orange complexion and a gilded comb-over. Mueller takes refuge in the impersonality of an official role; in the speeches he made when running the FBI, he banned the first person pronoun; Trump the narcissist habitually speaks in the third person, erecting himself as his own love object. When Trump heard that Mueller had been appointed to investigate his campaign’s collusion with the Russians and his later efforts to obstruct justice, he shrilled: “I’m fucked!” Alas, he wasn’t, or so far has not been. Consummation might have been electric if he and Mueller had ever managed to get together. But after first volunteering with his usual bravado to sit for an interview with Mueller, Trump finally heeded warnings about perjury and agreed only to answer written questions. When he did so, however, he suffered a temporary bout of amnesia. Despite having bragged that he possessed “one of the world’s great memories”, in his cursory responses to Mueller’s requests he managed to find more than 30 different ways of saying that he didn’t remember/recollect/recall/have knowledge of what happened on occasions when other witnesses testified that he bullied aides to have the special counsel sacked. As a sideline, the Russian saboteurs organised Confederate rallies in southern states Mueller’s report has painstakingly reassembled facts and arranged them to expose an elaborate but precarious work of fiction. More than a liar, Trump here looks like a fabulist, intent, as his enablers put it, on “creating a narrative” or a “script” that would rationalise what his lawyer, Don McGahn, calls “crazy shit”, like the firing of James Comey and the subsequent flustered cover-up. The report finds a more sophisticated effort of aesthetic obfuscation on the Russian side, where military units of the Kremlin’s intelligence directorate engineered a phantasmal invasion of the US. They stole the identities of Americans, gave them new names and addresses, then goaded these nonexistent beings to act as online provocateurs, who rounded up flash mobs to support Trump and paid Facebook in bitcoin for ads that typically declared “Hillary is a Satan”. In all this, they were helped by Julian Assange, here revealed as another addle-headed conspiracy theorist. Assange considered Hillary to be “a sadistic sociopath” and chose to back Trump because his “dumb moves” would limit his “freedom to start wars”. A stray missive retrieved by Mueller alerted me to the novel that the Russian hackers used as a source for their election interference. In June 2016, Guccifer 2.0, one of their “online personae”, knowingly alluded to “the Illuminati and their conspiracies!!!!!” This refers to the Renaissance sect revived by Dan Brown in Angels & Demons, his prelude to The Da Vinci Code; in Brown’s thriller, translated into German as Illuminati, the mischief-makers plan to use antimatter to blow up the Vatican during a conclave to choose a new pope. Familiar, no? Even the alias of Guccifer, who masterminded this plot, sounds like the kind of quizzically allegorical name of a Dan Brown villain: Gucci + Lucifer = consumerist branding with a dash of demonology. The difference is that the original Illuminati were agents of enlightenment who defied the mystagoguery of religion; their contemporary imitators traffic, instead, in social chaos and intellectual confusion and are leading us into a neo-medieval mudpit. As a sideline, the Russian saboteurs organised Confederate rallies in southern states. Evidently, their aim was to reignite the American civil war and given the lasting mistrust and hostility they disseminated they were only too successful. Although we may long for crimes to be punished, here the end is anticlimactic: Mueller declines to pronounce Trump guilty but pointedly “does not exonerate him”. A president cannot be indicted while he remains in office; nevertheless, Mueller seems prepared to wait and he adds a reminder that Trump will lose his immunity to prosecution when he leaves the White House. After the report come a series of supplements that offer alternative conclusions. First is a transcript of Michael Cohen’s strenuously self-ennobling address before he was sentenced, when he claimed that his conviction for tax evasion and for paying off Trump’s mistresses had made him a better person. A more unregenerate performance follows from another fixer, Roger Stone, including a threat to take out his fury on the pet dog of a former ally who refused to back up his lies. Then Trump’s obsequious new attorney general pre-empts the report by twisting it into a vindication of his boss. We have a choice of reckonings: do you fancy redemption, retribution or slimy political spin? Of course, the ultimate outcome is not yet known. As Trump so often says, when luring us to tune in for the next episode of the black farce that he calls an administration, “we’ll see what happens”. • The Mueller Report by the Washington Post is published by Simon & Schuster (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99