It felt something like love. The Geordie fans crooned throughout this stroll of an end-of- season win in honour of their manager. “Rafa Benítez, we want you to stay” was on repeat. From the dugout Benítez gave an understated wave. Not enough to read into, but symbolic of his attachment to Newcastle, something strong enough for him to express his hope they can find a way “to move forward, maybe together”. At the end it felt significant that the owner, Mike Ashley, was in attendance in the directors’ box and made his way down to the dressing room to offer his best wishes to the manager and his players. “He said congratulations, talking with me and the team, nothing special,” Benítez said. The main talking will take place next week, mindful that the manager’s contract expires at the end of June, and guarantees of ambition are required to mend damaged trust. Ashley could not fail to have noticed how cohesive and positive the team were. That old chestnut about where they are, and whether they are making the very best of themselves, remains at the heart of it all. It was one of those days where the football was there to be played and enjoyed without stress. Fulham were largely accepting as they bade a feeble farewell to the top flight for the time being, while Newcastle’s players provided their own convincing tribute to the outstanding work delivered by Benítez. Finishing the campaign in sunny midtable, it was worth remembering Newcastle began with a run of eight defeats and two draws from their first 10 Premier League games (worse form even than Fulham’s). Benítez pulled it all together expertly. Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels In a perfect world, would he want to stay at St James’ Park? “We have a meeting coming soon, hopefully as soon as possible, and then we will see where we are,” Benítez said. “Someone will ask me the question, do I want to stay? It’s very easy. I can see the potential of this massive club and hopefully we can do things in a way that will be good for everyone to move forward, maybe together. At the moment, it’s just keep talking and see what happens next week.” In the ninth minute the Newcastle contingent were given a moment to savour. From a corner swung in by Matt Ritchie, Jonjo Shelvey scored with an outrageous volley. The combination of high velocity and swerve was joyful, and he cantered the length of the pitch for a clenched fist uppercut of a bow in front of travelling fans who were going loopy. If those on the pre-match booze cruise down the Thames must have wondered if they had seen the goal straight that was more than understandable. Newcastle helped themselves to a more comfortable lead just two minutes later, with thanks to the problem that has dogged Fulham’s season – frail defending. Christian Atsu cut inside and drove in a shot which Sergio Rico spilled into dangerous territory. Ayoze Pérez was quicker to the ball than any Fulham marker for his sixth goal in the past five games. Their third in the second half was oh so easy. Another corner, another tidy delivery from Ritchie, and this time Fabian Schär nodded in unmarked, before Salomón Rondón had the last word. All in all it highlighted the job Scott Parker faces to rebuild Fulham in the Championship next season. Fulham offered little. “Come on!” screeched a plaintive voice in the Johnny Haynes Stand. “Where’s the urgency?!” As rhetorical questions go, though, the honest answer was that urgency began to go missing back in August, not long after the optimism of promotion began to unravel. Parker recognises how much work there is to do and emphasises the club will fight to keep their most valuable assets. “The owners are very committed and will do everything in their power to keep the best players,” he said. “It has given us a clear idea of what needs to be done at the football club. This club needs a culture, an identity. That’s what we’re going to do. It’s a big year for us and I am really looking forward to it.” There was, though, a sliver of light, a symbol of how football relies on that indefatigable sense of hope for better times. How optimistically they applauded a shot from 16-year-old substitute Harvey Elliott.