Something big is coming. In 2024, a new £5bn theme park will open in the UK. Stretching across two sq km (500 acres) of north-west Kent and creating 30,000 jobs, it will become the glittering focal point of all British entertainment as we know it. And the theme of this theme park? ITV. Wait – that can’t be right, can it? ITV, the television channel? ITV, the Foster’s lager of television? It’s making a theme park of ITV? Really? Apparently so. Which leaves just one question: how is it going to fill it? Here are some ideas: Midsomer Murders: the VR ExperienceDon a VR helmet and find yourself dressed head-to-toe in Laura Ashley, surrounded by chintz and the scent of impending death. You will be killed, but how? Run over by a Range Rover? Stabbed through the heart with a cricket stump? Electrocuted on an exercise bike? Drowned in soup? Being murdered has never been so much fun. Random Celebrity Travelogue GeneratorVisitors enter a room and spin two wheels: one showing locations, the other ITV stars. When the wheels stop, a digital avatar of that star will guide you around that location. So what will it be? Joanna Lumley’s Crete? James Nesbitt’s Zimbabwe? Caroline Quentin’s Sicily? Martin Clunes’s Japan? Martin Clunes’s Jutland? Martin Clunes’s Suffolk? NB: Owing to financial restrictions, all visitors will experience Martin Clunes’s Suffolk. The Tipping Point Tipping PointWelcome to an attraction based on a TV show based on an attraction. Coming soon: a new TV show based on the ITV theme park attraction, which will then be followed by an attraction based on the TV show, based on the attraction based on the TV show based on the attraction. And then a TV show of that! And then an attraction based on THAT! It’s Tipping Pointception! You’ll never leave! We will all die here! No, really, we will all die here. ITV2 WorldTucked in a corner far away from the main park, you will find the dubious delights of ITV2 World. Come here to experience ancient rides based on Jurassic Park, Back to the Future and Harry Potter, rendered nearly unusable by the 30-second announcements, every 15 minutes, of week-old celebrity gossip. The Krypton FactorHave you ever dreamed of using a flight simulator? Have you ever wanted to test your spatial awareness with a 3D puzzle designed by a professor of mathematics, or speed through a demanding military-inspired assault course? Of course you have, which is why The Krypton Factor is, realistically, the only programme in ITV’s history that even remotely suits a theme park. No episodes of The Krypton Factor have been made since 2010.