I met Judith in the 70s when I started writing about her father Alfred Kerr. I published a 720 page biography of him in 2016 and consulted Judith and her brother Michael. I read lots of her letters to her parents and wrote about their years in Paris and London. I am devastated. She and Michael created the Alfred Kerr foundation in Berlin in memory of their father where I am the president. We award an annual prize for a young actor/actress and the award was last Sunday. I spoke to her on the phone last week as she was too ill to come, and Michael’s widow Lady Kerr came instead. I have lots of photos and spoke on her father and his film scripts last Sunday but I am devastated. Deborah Vietor-Englander, Germany My daughters both enjoyed being read the same picture books over and over. It was Judith Kerr’s wit and Mogg’s own vulnerabilities which never made that experience dull. We took our eldest to see the Tiger Who Came to Tea at the Wimbledon Theatre, a decade or more ago. Judith Kerr, who was in the audience, received a standing ovation from parents and children and that sentiment of her books being loved by both adults and children was extremely touching. Paul Benton, London I was lucky enough to meet Judith Kerr once, and I’m ashamed to say I babbled on about my first picture book, which had just come out. She was so kind, witty and generous. I came home feeling I had met a true legend. I loved The Tiger Who Came to Tea as a child, and bought a copy in my 20s, long before I had children or knew I wanted to write children’s books. It remains my favourite picture book. Judith was sharp, humble, quick-witted and never self-pitying. I find her life in her 90s so inspiring - working and walking every day, having a Martini at lunch, dressing up immaculately and going to parties. I hope I’ll do the same. Teresa Heapy, Oxford I’m the designer and creator of animated children’s shows such as Bob the Builder and Raa Raa the noisy lion. I never met Judith Kerr, but friends who did often refer to her as the nicest person in children’s books. She was one of the author/illustrators who inspired me as a child, as a student at art school, and then throughout my career in animation and publishing. A profoundly influential lady. So sad to hear of her passing. The Tiger Who Came to Tea – I struggle to think of a more beloved and generation-spanning picture book. Curtis Jobling, Cheshire The Tiger Who Came to Tea is probably one of the first books that we have read to our son Louis ever since he was a baby. He appreciated the pictures and listened attentively until the very end. He is now two and can pretty much recite it by heart. He loves it! The story has also been my favourite to read and it never gets repetitive or boring. It is timeless, sweet and magical. Kasia, London Like many others, my childhood was filled with memories of reading Kerr’s wonderful titles. I was raised on Mog the cat to the point that it fuelled my own desire to write. Upon having a son, Mog became an integral part of his library and subsequent night time stories. After being published myself, I attended a HarperCollins party and was completely starstruck at being in her presence. Her work is boundless and beautiful, as was she. Christopher Byford, Gloucestershire I am an academic and read the Tiger Who Came to Tea to my daughter every evening for about three months. Each time I came downstairs, I would tell my wife about the curious interpretations of it that had occurred to me and, at her suggestion, wrote them all down. The eventual result was an academic article in the Children’s Literature Quarterly: A Wolf in Tiger’s Clothing: Danger, Desire and Pleasure in Judith Kerr’s The Tiger Who Came to Tea, that makes a Freudian interpretation of the story in relation to fairytale and to Little Red Riding-hood in particular. Apparently, Judith was made aware of the article and was amused at the idea, but had little time for these sort of interpretations, For her, sometimes a tiger is just a tiger! Still, it was huge fun to write and is by far my most read article. Tim Beasley-Murray, London I was introduced to Judith Kerr’s work at a very early age, The Tiger Who Came to Tea and Mog were family favourites in our house. Whilst studying history GCSE, I watched a documentary about her upbringing and fleeing to Paris and eventually England as a young girl. I also really enjoyed reading her autobiography during my A-levels. Eventually I had the opportunity to hear her talk at the Holocaust Educational Trust ambasador conference last year. Despite being hunched over for most of it, her presence was glowing and warm - much like her books. She was very humble despite the horror of just escaping the Nazis and her parents having kept suicide pills in England. Seeing her speak was one of the best literary moments of my life. She was and is an amazing woman and will be sorely missed. Issie Tovey, Bristol Judith Kerr made a lasting impression on me at Berlin’s international literature festival in 2016. She spoke so warmly and honestly to a sold-out, 1000-strong audience of school children at the Berliner Festspiele about her experience as a refugee; the kindness of all those who helped her and her family (with characteristic modesty) how incredibly lucky she feels; and how we might best support refugees building their lives in Germany today. One child asked her whether she would write any more books, and her answer, spoken with a glint in her eye and a wide smile, has stayed with me ever since: “Of course I will, I’m only 93 you know!” Lucy Curzon, Berlin Her Mog books were a huge and formative part of my childhood, and it was amazing rediscovering them with my own daughter, Sophie. The Tiger Who Came to Tea has been her favourite book for years – the fact that the story was about a little girl called Sophie probably helped! We even went to see the stage adaptation when it came to Dublin, and it sparked such a love for the theatre and acting in my daughter. I loved reading more about Judith’s own interesting life as I got older and always admired her. She lived an incredibly long and busy life and I will always be grateful for the love of words and literature she helped create in me all those years ago. Michelle Lyons-Doyle, Greystones, Co. Wicklow, Ireland When I was 11 I read when Hitler stole Pink Rabbit, it was the first book I had ever read so far. Her portrayal helped me understand children’s pain and anxiety growing up in a violent situation - in her case fleeing the Nazis, and in mine, Belfast in the 1970s and early 80s. When I became a mother to two boys, we loved reading Mog’s Christmas, where Mog was thoroughly put out by lots of family descending on her territory at Christmas and escaping on to the roof. It reminded us of dad and granny who were grinches at Christmas, and always retreated into the back room to get away from the throng. Anne Thompson, Belfast I feel like I lost a friend. I came to the UK 20 years ago. In my country, I had never had the opportunity of reading books as a child. Here, learning English, I found it very beautiful to read her books, and since I had cats as a child, I read the Mogg stories specifically. Years later I read about her life. She made me love this country even though she was not born here. She showed me that the UK is a generous country that adopted a person that had suffered the horrors of the war and, she, as and individual, taught me how to transform suffering into love and creativity. She will always live on in her stories. Mary, London