The Bank of England governor Mark Carney must rank as one of Britain’s most popular policymakers. Since he took the post in 2013, the Canadian has often appeared to be the only adult in public life who can stay calm in a crisis. His recent observation that companies and financial markets must recognise the risks of climate change has made him a darling of the environmental movement. It is strange then that he should risk his reputation as a solid guardian of monetary policy – and with only nine months to go before he steps down from the role – with a warning that interest rates will soon rise and at a faster pace than previously expected, without a solid base for his prediction. Carney, it should be remembered, acquired the label “unreliable boyfriend” following a run of similarly mixed messages. It was the MP Pat McFadden who said in 2014 that the Bank’s economic forecasts ebbed and flowed to leave businesses and consumers confused. “We’ve had a lot of different signals,” he said. “I mean, it strikes me that the Bank’s behaving a bit like a sort of unreliable boyfriend.” The label irritated Carney, but he has shaken it off thanks to a steady performance in recent years. The concern is that after recovering his reputation in the wake of the Brexit vote, Carney and the monetary policy committee he chairs are about to throw it away and confuse the nation all over again. Admittedly, the forecasts have not changed that much. Instead of a single quarter-point rise in the next two years, there might be two. The reason for increasing the cost of borrowing from the current 0.75% to 1.25% is the prospect of inflation rising above 2% in 2021 and the need for higher interest rates to cool things down. The only reason economic activity has picked up in the US, eurozone and China is they dropped plans to raise rates But where is inflation coming from at the moment? Not from the core inflation basket that strips out the volatile prices of energy and food. The latest figures show that the upward pressure all comes from higher petrol prices. The downward pressure comes from big cuts in the cost of new cars and air fares. The Bank’s latest quarterly review of the economy says that looking further ahead, a combination of a reviving global economy and the UK’s ever-increasing workforce – much of it the result of immigration from outside the EU and austerity cuts forcing benefit claimants to seek work – will increase demand and keep up the pressure on prices. But the Bank said something similar in August last year when it increased rates to 0.75%, only to see inflation tumble from 2.3% to 1.8% in January, leading Carney to initiate his first U-turn in the Bank’s February review – when growth forecasts were reined in. Suddenly the world was a dark place and a possible recession in China and the US loomed large. Three months later and everything is looking stronger again and so a faster pace of interest rate rises is back on the agenda. However, the only reason that economic activity has picked up in the US, the eurozone and China is because their respective central banks have promised to tear up plans for interest rate rises. Carney wants us to believe that Britain can buck this trend despite its own domestic problems, which many economists believe will linger long after Brexit is resolved. The Federal Reserve has suffered a huge jolt to its reputation for flip-flopping on policy over the course of a few months. It would be a shame if the UK’s central bank followed suit. So it turned out Philip Hammond wasn’t a penny pincher after all. The chancellor confirmed last week that 1p and 2p coins (and the criminals’ favourite, the £50 note) are no longer under threat and will be around for years to come. It was the right call. And not just for sentimental reasons linked to nostalgia and an opaque sense of British identity. The Treasury had originally argued that with contactless payments exploding in popularity, it didn’t make economic sense to spend millions producing coins and notes that were used infrequently. It has been claimed that about 60% of copper coins are typically used in just one transaction before being stashed in a jar or discarded. But pitted against the official statistics and dry economic pronouncements were a host of more emotive arguments that were hard to dispute. Charities would lose out because those spare pennies are often dropped into collection boxes; shops wouldn’t be able to charge prices that end in 99p; and shoppers would bear the brunt because retailers would simply round up prices to the nearest pound. To be honest, though, what may well have decisivelyBut what may have swung the decision in favour of keeping coppers was a report issued in March this year which warned that millions of UK adults would struggle to cope in a cashless society. While many urbanites are used to paying with a wave of their card or smartphone, the Access to Cash Review said a “significant number” of people – about 2.2 million – were using cash for all their day-to-day transactions. Natalie Ceeney, who chaired the review, was right when she suggested that by dumping our lowest-value coins the government would have given the impression that it didn’t care about cash. If coppers no longer make economic sense, at what point do 5p and 10p coins become unviable? Spotify’s 100 million paying subscribers – a landmark that it reached last week – are testament to the role the 13-year-old streaming company has played in reviving the fortunes of the music industry in the digital era. In the UK, record labels that were once hooked on the CD as the bedrock of profits generated more than half their income from music-streaming services for the first time in 2018. And last year, too, the streaming revolution drove global music revenues at their fastest rate in more than two decades. Yet Spotify is also a victim of its own success. The world’s three biggest record companies, Universal, Sony and Warner Music, control the rights to the vast majority of tens of millions of songs on Spotify. More than half of the revenues generated by the 217 million Spotify users globally (there are 117 million listeners on its ad-supported tier) go in royalties to record labels, artists and songwriters. Each time licensing deals with the major labels have come up for renewal, Spotify has been squeezed for more fees. The company has a market value of $25bn, but it made a €142m loss in the first quarter this year and is not expected to break even until 2021. Its founder, Daniel Ek, is attempting to gain some leverage by reducing its complete dependence on music and branching out into podcasting. In recent months Spotify has spent €358m on three companies – Parcast, Gimlet and Anchor – as part of a $500m acquisition budget this year. Ek estimates that in the future non-music content will account for 20% of all Spotify listening and he wants to own, not just license, content. Competition is set to intensify, with announcements by Google and Amazon of the launch of free versions of their music services, although Spotify is twice the size of its next biggest rival, Apple Music. But pressure is certainly mounting on Spotify’s position as the world’s most popular music streaming service.