Aubrey Beardsley is one of Britain’s greatest artists, but museums have never quite known what to do with his dangerously depraved images. So it is delicious news that his perverse and often obscene art is to get the Tate Britain blockbuster treatment next year. The fact that Beardsley worked in ink on paper, rather than paint on canvas, means his pictures are easy to hide in study rooms. Even in Queer British Art, the 2017 show at Tate Britain, Beardsley’s presence was surprisingly subdued. But the announcement that Tate will put 200 of his naughty little masterpieces on display next March, in a show that will tour to the Musée d’Orsay in Paris, suggests we may finally be ready for one of the classiest purveyors of filth. Beardsley produced a startling quantity of sensational art in a brief life. Born in Brighton in 1872, he died of tuberculosis in 1898, aged 25. Four years before his death, he already looked like a moribund figure to his fellow artistic radical Walter Sickert, who portrayed him walking weakly with a stick. Yet Beardsley presented himself the same year as a sensualist beast, nestled in a capacious bed whose covers swallow up his tiny figure. He’s lost in dirty reveries. “By the twin gods, not all the monsters are in Africa,” is inscribed in French in a corner. What is little Aubrey dreaming about? His illustrations to a privately printed edition of Aristophanes’ play Lysistrata – in which the women of ancient Athens go on a sex strike against war – give us a pretty good idea. They reveal his imagination at its most ripely decadent. In The Toilet of Lampito, a woman wearing nothing but fine stockings bends over while Eros applies a powder puff to her bottom. As the love god does this, he plays with himself. The Examination of the Herald portrays a wizened male magistrate scrutinising an Athenian youth’s giant erect member. And in Lysistrata Haranguing the Athenian Women, the naked audience seem more interested in fondling each other than listening to Lysistrata’s speech. What makes these designs so effective is the alienated yet lubricious precision of Beardsley’s drawing. He makes black lines on white paper sexier than a coloured image and more filthy than a photograph because of the exact way he delineates fantasy. The images in Lysistrata hint at every sexual possibility and orientation. This was Victorian England, where desire itself was a bit queer. Beardsley’s mysterious and mobile hedonism made him the star illustrator of The Yellow Book, the magazine of the aesthetic movement that was published from 1894-97. His most vibrant visual manifesto for aestheticism is the illustrated first edition of Salomé, by the movement’s leader and martyr Oscar Wilde. In fact, Beardsley’s powerful black-and-white visualisations of Wilde’s verse play about the beheading of John the Baptist are among his most mainstream images. Salomé had been banned from the British stage so the published text needed to be respectable enough to find readers. He goes for atmosphere instead of explicitness. In one of the most dreamlike pictures, Salomé floats in space above a black lily pond, contemplating the severed head of the Baptist whose death she demanded. She is witchlike; the head seems to stream with snakes as it drips blood into the water. This is a symbolist masterpiece that shows how close Beardsley was in genius to such contemporaries as Toulouse-Lautrec and Munch. Beardsley is an artist who can still alarm. His art makes a mockery of fixed categories of sex and gender. Tate Britain is bold to give him the retrospective he deserves in a 2020 programme across the Tate’s four UK galleries that stresses diversity. Andy Warhol’s identity as a gay man comes to the fore in a Tate Modern show that promises to reveal yet new dimensions to his eye for modern life; Steve McQueen and Theaster Gates get major exhibitions; and Zanele Muholi’s potent photographs of the South African LGBT community will also be shown at Tate Modern. The most outrageous artist in this radical mix is the corrupting Victorian who has slid into Tate Britain’s boudoir. No one knows for sure what Beardsley’s “real” sexuality was; he’s so queer he can’t even be classified. Maybe he was celibate. One thing is clear: this satyric talent is overdue for full recognition. What a wicked artist. Pass the powder puff, please, and put the catalogue in a brown paper bag.