The Firm opens in high mood as four middle-aged men, formerly in a criminal gang, meet up at a London pub. They are celebrating the imminent release of a fifth member, Shaun, from prison that day. Like Godot, Shaun never appears and the waiting gives rise to unresolved memories and tensions. A pecking order emerges as alcohol is drunk, and the bonhomie ruptures when a young interloper and upstart, Fraser (Makir Ahmed), enters the mix. Just like Roddy Doyle and Irvine Welsh’s sparring men, the way in which this ensemble communicates their love – and hate – is through quickfire banter. Roy Williams’s script flips into different kinds of street vernacular. They talk about old times and prison life as well as exes and girlfriends in locker-room tones. Ray Fearon – the “hot misogynist” lawyer in Fleabag – plays the gang leader, Gus, who is something of a hot misogynist here too: a rich, swaggering, if charmless, alpha male. There is also van driver Trent (George Eggay), ex-con Leslie (Jay Simpson), who is the only white man among them, and supermarket worker Selwyn (Clarence Smith). They are a motley bunch and they feel real, casting jokey volleys at each other before the memories become spiked with rage and resentment. The dialogue is fast and lively, the repartee zingy, but it does not create a larger synergy or momentum between the characters. The crucial, underlying emotional connections seem absent. The plot is laden with secrets, from an abandoned child to a betrayal involving another absent character. These stories unfurl on stage without being fully psychologically unpacked. In its themes about male friendship, criminality and gang culture, The Firm is desperately topical, and there is some strong direction by Denis Lawson. The pub setting, complete with jukebox and beer pumps, never looks static as the men josh and prowl around it. The cast give energetic performances too so it is a great shame that, dramatically, it does not quite come together. At Hampstead theatre, London, until 8 June.