Alisson 9/10 Fine saves from Lionel Messi, twice, Philippe Coutinho, Jordi Alba and Luis Suárez denied Barcelona the precious away goal. A commanding performance. Trent Alexander-Arnold 9 Created the second goal through sheer force of will and the crucial fourth with incredible speed of thought. First to everything. Joël Matip 9 Coolness personified. Dominant in the air, unruffled by the antics around him and read the danger superbly. Virgil van Dijk 9 His organisational skills were to the fore as he marshalled the traps for Messi and dominated Suárez. Andy Robertson 7 Relished the occasion, as in the Camp Nou. Riled Messi and continued to threaten even after suffering the injury that forced his half-time substitution. Jordan Henderson 9 Led by example despite being hindered by a knee injury. Started like a train and made the opening goal with a surging run. Fabinho 9 In an awkward spot after a harsh early booking and with Messi running at him but was undeterred. A midfield force. James Milner 8 Snapped into tackles and disrupted Barcelona’s rhythm whenever possible. Distribution not always accurate but kept looking for a killer ball. Xherdan Shaqiri 7 Handed his first start since January in place of the concussed Salah and his rustiness showed at times. Superb cross for the third, however. Divock Origi 9 The unlikely hero once again. Gave Liverpool hope with his early goal, shattered Barcelona with his late goal and carried the fight at every opportunity. Sadio Mané 9 Unnerved the Barcelona defence once again with his pace and intelligent movement. Sergi Roberto never knew what to do with him. Substitutes Georginio Wijnaldum (for Robertson 46) – 9Joe Gomez (for Origi 85) – 6Daniel Sturridge (for Shaqiri 90) – 5 Marc-André ter Stegen 4/10 Calm with the ball at his feet but powerless to prevent Liverpool transforming the semi-final. Could have done better with the second goal. Sergi Roberto 3 Surprisingly kept his place at right-back after a torrid time against Mané in the first leg. Struggled all over again. Gerard Pique 4 Positional play important again but lacked the authority he showed in Barcelona and toiled against Liverpool’s crosses. Clement Lenglet 3 Weak in the challenge for the opening goal, as was Pique, and rattled by the intensity of the home display. Jordi Alba 3 The polar opposite of his first leg performance. His dreadful mistake led to the first goal and made poor decisions throughout. Arturo Vidal 3 Looked tired in mind and body. Failed to impose himself on the game and frequently overrun by the home midfielders. Sergio Busquets 6 Tried to inject much-needed composure into his team’s display and passed crisply but too often let down by those around him. Ivan Rakitic 4 Took the game to Liverpool in the first half and at the heart of Barça’s brightest moves before fading badly after the interval. Philippe Coutinho 3 An anonymous return to Anfield. Repeated his first-leg performance by producing a few tidy touches and then vanishing. Lionel Messi 4 No magic this time. Had a second-half sulk as the dream of another final collapsed around him. Beaten long before the final whistle. Luis Suárez 3 Berated by the Kop for his theatrics and not given a sniff of an opportunity by the Liverpool defence. A nightmare return. Substitutes Nélson Semedo (for Coutinho 60) – 4Arthur (for Vidal 75) – 4Malcolm (for Rakitic 80) – 4