Charlotte Keatley has an acute ear for the way mothers talk to daughters – and how daughters respond. Straddling four generations, yet structured as if time doesn’t exist, My Mother Said I Never Should is brilliant in its observational detail. It captures every subtextual nuance in the conversations of those mothers who can’t stop parenting and the children who can’t stop answering back. But what her 1987 play also shows is how we are all products of historical circumstance. It isn’t temperament that embitters a woman who sacrificed everything to survive the war; nor is it a personality quirk that confounds a woman who was brought up to be a housewife when economics compel her to get a job. Their experiences made them that way. As she dances between the original age of austerity and the era of the pill, Keatley shows how everyone is shaped by the social attitudes and expectations they grow up with. Rather than condemning the values of the past, the play is a gesture of empathy, which recognises that the damage one generation does to the next is rarely intentional and nearly always a product of the times. What’s great about Katie Posner’s studio production is that it neither judges nor indulges the women. The director plays against any tendency towards nostalgia or whimsy, favouring a brisk, fluid and unsentimental approach that is no less humane for it. On Elizabeth Wright’s set, which melts into the past in the same dreamy way as the play itself, Maggie O’Brien, Asha Kingsley, Emily Pithon and Georgina Ambrey are a superb ensemble, switching between the abandon of childhood and the burden of adulthood with transformative ease. Meanwhile, Theatre by the Lake’s summer repertory season gets under way on the main stage with a classic romp about a group of men. The story goes that when screenwriter William Rose took his idea for The Ladykillers to the head of Ealing Studios, it was met with some mystification. How could a plot in which all but one of the main characters come to a sticky end be classed as a comedy? It is only by understanding the particular brand of jet-black humour brought to Alexander Mackendrick’s 1955 movie that the joke pays off. You wonder, though, if the memo got through to the team behind the good-natured but largely mirthless production in Keswick. Clumsily staged, the sequence of second-half deaths, in which each member of a gang of robbers gets his comeuppance, has nothing of the precision or surprise needed to raise a laugh. It makes you think the studio boss had a point. This, despite the tried-and-tested adaptation by Graham Linehan. Something must have gone awry with the comic rhythms of Chris Honer’s production, when so many of this talented writer’s jokes fall flat. Even in front of a benevolent audience, running gags such as the interjections of an exotic caged bird and the standing on the scarf of Dominic Gately’s chief baddie Professor Marcus repeatedly miss the mark. Somehow the production fails to establish the absurdity of a band of crooks masquerading as classical musicians and successfully hoodwinking Rachel Laurence’s sweet-and-innocent landlady. Nor does it create a full sense of how high the stakes are, undermining the comic urgency of the gang’s predicament. Eric Potts, an actor with formidable panto experience, stands out as the dim-witted One-Round, getting laughs his fuzzily defined partners in crime rarely match. They have their moments, but this modestly entertaining show is a shadow of the deathly comedy it could be. At Theatre by the Lake, Keswick, in rep until 30 October.