Bayern Munich beat RB Leipzig 3-0 on Saturday thanks to two goals from Robert Lewandowski to win their 19th German Cup and complete a domestic league and Cup double. The Bundesliga’s top scorer headed the champions into the lead in the 29th minute, wrong-footing the Leipzig goalkeeper Peter Gulacsi, and Kingsley Coman’s superb first touch and shot in the 78th made it 2-0. Lewandowski sealed the win with a fine run and superb finish in the 85th minute to clinch Bayern’s 12th double. Their coach, Niko Kovac, who lifted the Cup with Eintracht Frankfurt last year and led them to the 2017 final, became the first man to win the double with Bayern both as player and coach. Bayern also had to thank their goalkeeper Manuel Neuer, who on his return from injury made two superb point-blank saves to protect their one-goal lead. “It was the toughest opponent we could have had and we saw that in the opening 30 minutes,” said Kovac, whose future at the club looks more secure after winning two titles in the past week. “Manuel Neuer kept us in the game with two superb saves but overall the victory was deserved,” he said. “We had tough times back in October and November so compliments to the team. To be here with two titles makes me very proud.“ Leipzig had the better start and the first big chance, with Yussuf Poulsen’s header palmed on to the crossbar by Neuer before Lewandowski put them ahead. Coman came close to a second but his effort on an empty goal was headed away at the last moment by Ibrahima Konaté. In a highly entertaining game, Neuer again came to the rescue by stopping Emil Forsberg in a one-on-one situation. Bayern hit back through Coman to open a two-goal lead before the Poland striker Lewandowski struck again to kill off any lingering Leipzig hopes. “I am very satisfied with the way we played well and won clearly,” Lewandowski said. “We had the game under control and the second half we pushed a bit more and won the Cup. “We gave everything for the double. At the end we can say that this season was very good for us,” Lewandowski said. The Bayern winger Franck Ribéry, who is leaving Munich along with Arjen Robben, came on as a late substitute to make a record eighth German Cup final appearance in his final game for the club.