I wouldn’t be the chef I am today if this book didn’t exist. I saw a copy for the first time in 1998, in the staff room at the Seafood Restaurant in Padstow. I’d started working with Rick in March that year and picked it up from the staff room table one quiet lunchtime and never put it back. I borrowed it for life. Sorry, Rick! What makes me pick this book up even now is the way the recipes are written. I can hear Rick’s voice in his writing, and you can tell that he’d been cooking these dishes with passion for years. They make me want to cook everything, apart perhaps for the anchovy ice cream (what was that all about?). Many were on the menu when I cooked there; some still appear to this day. Every single recipe, piece of advice and snippet of knowledge comes from a chef who had been in at the deep end running an extremely busy kitchen and restaurant. It’s genuine, something that can’t be said for many cookery books, especially these days. When he wrote English Seafood Cookery there was very little of the technology we take for granted, no cut and paste, no Google. It’s written from experience, and Rick’s originality and take on favourite recipes he’d collected from his travels are all in here. My favourite recipes are the fish soup and the classic and original sauces. The advice on species mentions foraging for coastal wild foods way before its time. The book is full of superb Illustrations by Katinka Kew with no photography – rare nowadays. You find yourself using your imagination a lot more when you cook from this book, a much-needed skill in an age when the “right way” to do everything is put in front of us.Nathan Outlaw is chef‑owner of the two Michelin star Restaurant Nathan Outlaw, Port Isaac, Cornwall Serves 4mussels 20 white wine a splashNoilly Prat 2 fl oz (60ml) fish stock 4 fl oz (120ml) saffron a large pinch bass 4 fillets, 3 oz (85g) each unsalted butter 2 oz (60g) salt and white pepperFor the fish stock onion 1 large carrot 1 large celery 1 stick, including the topfish bones (including heads) 3 lb (1.4kg)water 3 pints (1.7 litres) Clean and peel the stock vegetables, then chop them into pieces roughly a ¼-inch (6mm) cube. The stock takes only 15 minutes to cook, so the vegetables must be cut small to extract the maximum flavour in so short a cooking time. Place the vegetables in a large saucepan (at least 6 pints or 3 litres) and put the fish trimmings on top. Pour on the water and bring slowly to the boil. As soon as the stock comes to the boil, turn the heat right down and leave at a slow simmer for 15 minutes. Take the pan off the heat and leave the stock to go cold before straining. Making stock this way keeps the liquor clear and clean-tasting. Open the mussels by putting them in a saucepan with the wine and cooking them over a high heat with the lid on. Remove from the heat as soon as they are open; strain them, reserving the liquor, and remove the shells and beards. Place the mussel cooking liquor in a sauteuse with the Noilly Prat, the fish stock and the saffron. Reduce the liquid by two-thirds by rapid boiling. Turn on the grill, brush the fillets of bass with melted butter, seasonwith salt and white pepper, and cook them. Finish off the sauce by whisking the butter, cut into 3 or 4 pieces, into the reduced liquid. Put the mussels in the sauce to warm through and serve each fillet with 5 mussels and a quarter of the sauce. I was once advised by a fisherman in Padstow on the cooking of salmon. “Take a piece of fat, put it in the pan, heat it up and chuck in the salmon,” he said. He suggested the same method for the cooking of young rabbit and, indeed, almost any other piece of fish, meat or fowl he hooked, netted, shot or trapped. The cooking of salmon in lard seemed a bit barbaric, considering the price. But to many fishermen in Padstow, salmon is no more a luxury than the odd crawfish or lobster they take home for tea. If one can ignore the price, salmon cooked in lard is pretty similar to herrings cooked in bacon fat – which is the most satisfactory way of dealing with herrings, and I should think an eminently satisfactory way of serving up salmon, too. Serves 4herrings four, 8 oz (240g) each Salt and freshly ground black pepperoatmeal 8 oz (240g) lard 3 oz (90g) streaky bacon 4 rasherslemon wedges Flatten out and bone the herrings. Season and press them with oatmeal until well covered. Place the lard in a frying pan and fry the streaky bacon until crisp. Remove and keep warm. Fry the herrings in the fat, flesh side first, then skin side until golden brown. Serve with the bacon and lemon wedges. In 1984, we won the Sunday Times/Taste of Britain Award for best English restaurant. This increased our turnover by about 50% overnight. This was by no means all fun; we found ourselves quite unprepared for the extra business and upset quite a few people with slow service. It took us six months to sort the problems out. This is the salad I devised for the RAC Club lunch to celebrate the award. It’s rather nice – very simple, but none the worse for that. Serves 4langoustines 24 chicory 2 oz (60g) endive 2 oz (60g) walnut dressing (see below) 3 fl oz (90 ml) tomatoes 6 oz (180g), peeled, deseeded and choppedfresh tarragon 1 tsp, chopped fresh parsley 1 tsp, choppedSalt and freshly ground black pepper Completely peel all but four of the langoustines. Carefully peel the last four, keeping the peeled tail attached to the head. Wash and dry the chicory and endive. Slice the chicory lengthways into ½ inch (1.25cm) strips. Put two-thirds of the walnut dressing in a mixing bowl and turn the endive and chicory over in it, ensuring that all the leaves are coated. Arrange the salad neatly on four plates, leaving the centre of the plate empty. Mix the tomatoes, tarragon, parsley and the rest of the dressing together in the mixing bowl. Season well with salt and ground black pepper. Spoon out into the centre of each plate. Place five peeled langoustines and a single half-peeled langoustine equidistantly around on the salad. Walnut dressingBest used with bitter salads like chicory, endive and scarole. walnut oil 2½ fl oz (75ml) groundnut oil 5 fl oz (150ml) red wine vinegar 1½ fl oz (45ml) salt ¾ tspColman’s English mustard powder ¾ tspblack pepper 6 turns of a peppermill Mix the mustard with a little water, then mix everything with a whisk. A recipe using salt cod, with lots of garlic: a strong assertive fish soup. Remember that the cod needs to be soaked for 36 hours before using (less if it is home-salted). Serves 4garlic 4 cloves olive oil 2 fl oz (60ml) onion 8 oz (230g), chopped leek 1, roughly choppedorange peel 1 strip tomato 1 oz (30g), slicedfish stock 1 pint (600ml) parsley stalks 2 bay leaf 1 thyme 1 sprig salt cod 12 oz (340g), soaked for 24-36 hoursaïoli 4 fl oz (120ml)french bread 1 piece, about 8 inches (25cm) long For the aïoligarlic 8 cloves egg yolks 2 lemon juice of a quarter salt a pinchvirgin olive oil 12 fl oz (360ml) First make aïoli: if using a mortar and pestle, reduce the garlic to a puree with the pestle, add the egg yolks, lemon juice and salt, and beat in the oil in a steady drizzle. If making the aïoli in a food processor, put the garlic, egg yolks and lemon juice in the food processor. Turn it on and blend for about 10 seconds, then add the oil slowly to build up a thick mayonnaise. For the soup, chop up three of the garlic cloves and cook them gently in a saucepan with the olive oil, onions and leek. Add the orange peel and tomato, the stock and the herbs. Bring to the boil and simmer for 10 minutes, then add the fish and poach for 5-10 minutes, depending on the thickness of the fillet. Remove the fish and keep warm in a soup tureen or deep serving dish. Strain the cooking liquor through a sieve into a second saucepan, pressing the vegetables against the mesh of the sieve to extract as much flavour as possible. Pour a cupful or so of the hot stock on to the aïoli in a mixing bowl and whisk the two together. Now add this to the remainder of the strained fish stock. Return it to the heat and warm the sauce to the temperature of an egg custard (hot enough to be uncomfortable to your little finger), stirring with a wooden spoon. This will thicken the soup. Pour it over the fish and serve with the french bread cut into four slices, lightly toasted and rubbed with the remaining slightly crushed garlic clove. For a more substantial meal serve with some boiled potatoes. The amount of spice in these fishcakes gives them a subtle flavour and an interesting colour, and doesn’t overpower. Serves 4cider court bouillon (see below) 1 pint (600ml)mackerel, herring or white fish 1½ lb (720g) floury potatoes 1 lb (450g), peeled and slicedeggs 2 butter 1 oz (30g) chopped parsley 1 oz (30g) ground turmeric ½ tsp coriander seeds ½ tsp cardamoms 2 Flour, for coating handsmilk 2 fl oz (60ml) breadcrumbs 2 oz (60g)oil, for shallow frying For the court bouillondry cider 10 fl oz (300ml) water 40 fl oz (1.2 litres) white wine vinegar 3 fl oz (120ml) bay leaves 2 peppercorns 12 onion 1, peeled and roughly choppedcarrots 2, peeled and roughly choppedcelery 2 sticks, roughly choppedsalt 2 tsp Bring all the court bouillon ingredients to the boil and simmer for 30 minutes. To complete the infusion of flavours, leave to cool before using. Next, bring the court bouillon to the boil again, add the fish and poach gently until just cooked. Remove the fish and cook the potatoes in the bouillon till they are falling apart. Drain and mash the potato. Take the fillets off the fish, removing the skin. Beat one of the eggs into the potato with the butter and parsley. Grind the turmeric, coriander and cardamom together in a grinder. Add the spices and the fish to the potato mixture and season. Divide the mixture into eight and mould into flat cakes using floured hands. If the cakes are a bit soft, chill them for 30 minutes. Beat the remaining egg and add the milk. Coat the cakes in the egg mixture, then the breadcrumbs. Heat the oil in a frying pan and fry the fishcakes for 3 minutes on each side or until golden brown. Drain on kitchen paper. Serve the fishcakes with a green salad dressed with walnut dressing and sprinkled with chopped coriander. A fillet of salmon stuffed with tarragon butter and wrapped in puff pastry, served with a champagne sauce with fresh fines herbes. This is one of the most successful dishes we ever dreamt up and though time-consuming, it is not difficult to make, and, I think, is successful because it is quite simply flavoured. Note that champagne is not essential; you can substitute muscadet, vouvray or a sauvignon, but not, in this case, any cheap dry white wine – it is too special a dish. You will find it tricky to wrap the fillet with pastry this thin. A cold work surface, a cool room and speed are important. You could make up one big fillet and portion it out when cooked, but I find individual portions give a perfect balance between fish and pastry, and also allow for precise cooking, which is most important with a fish that can be dry if overcooked. Serves 4salmon fillet 1¼ lb (600g), skinnedpuff pastry 1 lb (450g)egg 1, beaten (for egg wash) For the tarragon butterunsalted butter 6 oz (180g) fresh tarragon 1 tbsp salt ½ tsp lemon juice of a quarter black pepper 4 turns of the peppermillFor the champagne saucefish stock ½ pint (300ml) champagne 4 fl oz (120ml) mushrooms ½ oz (15g) onions ½ oz (15g), chopped double cream 6 fl oz (180ml)fines herbes (parsley, tarragon, chives and chervil) 1 tbsp, chopped Order of work Make the tarragon butterSkin the salmonWrap the salmonMake the sauceCook the salmonFinish the sauce Make the tarragon butter by softening the butter slightly and mixing in the tarragon, salt, pepper and lemon juice. Remove the skin from the salmon. Unless the fillet is a tail piece, you will find a row of small bones down the centre of the fillet. These should be removed with a pair of tweezers or by gripping the bone between your thumb and the point of a small knife and pulling them out. Cut the fillet into four equal portions, then cut a pocket in the side of each, trying to make this as deep as possible without cutting through to the other side of the fillet. Divide the tarragon butter into four and put a piece in each of the pockets. Roll out the puff pastry extremely thinly, no more than ⅛ inch (4mm) thick. Cut a piece of pastry about 6 inches (15cm) square depending on the size of the fillet. Lightly brush the surface with water, place the fillet along one edge of the pastry ensuring that there is spare pastry on either side. Roll the fillet right over, lifting the pastry up and over too, until the near edge touches the pastry on the other side. Press down a little to seal and cut away any surplus. Brush the fillets with egg wash and chill for at least half an hour. Turn your oven on. To make the sauce, put the fish stock, champagne, mushrooms and onions in a small saucepan and reduce by half. Add 4 fl oz (120ml) of the cream and reduce it until it coats the back of a spoon. Pass through a sieve, then keep warm. While you are reducing the sauce, whisk the remaining cream in a bowl until it is beginning to thicken. Bake the salmon for 12 minutes. Slice each portion into 4 or 5 pieces slightly diagonally, so that when you place them on four warm plates each slice lies against the next. Move the slices apart a little so that you can see the salmon inside the pastry; it should be moist and slightly pink. Finish the champagne sauce by adding the chopped herbs and whisking the whipped cream into the sauce just before serving. The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US. English Seafood Cookery by Rick Stein (Penguin Books, £8.99). To order a copy for £7.91 go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.