I need help with an issue that could potentially leave my home and many others lethally unsafe. South East Water is fitting a water meter to my home and others. It has a right to do that – I live in a water-stressed part of the country. However, it’s stated that the installation may break electrical earthing if the water main is used as the primary earth in a customer’s home. This method was the primary way of earthing until 1966 at which point a regulation change prohibited it. This was not retrospective. Earthing is the responsibility of the home owner. However, a utility, or any other tradesman, must surely not leave a property that was safely and legally earthed prior to their work, in a dangerous state. JH, Maidenhead, Berkshire Regardless of when and whether you have a meter you should get your wiring checked, for many of the old metal water service pipes beneath the streets have been replaced with plastic which would mean your home may no longer be adequately earthed. There may be other hazards associated with the age of the circuits. Although it remains legal to use water pipe earthing installed before 1967, it would have to have been modified if you’d had any electrical work done on the house since then, so it sounds as though you are overdue a safety overhaul. South East Water tells me it has delayed installing the meter to give you time to sort out your electrical arrangements and that its customer services team can help liaise with electricians and suppliers. “Before 1966 it was common practice to use metal water pipes as electrical earths. This was never authorised by the water industry. After this date it was considered unsafe and no longer permitted,” it explains. “We are aware this could be an issue for some customers, whose homes have not been rewired or checked, and we want to ensure the safety of customers and employees when installing water meters.” The Water Companies Act 1991 allows suppliers to insist on water meters in areas that have been declared water-stressed, but while South East Water has legal powers to enforce installations, it says it prefers “amicable” cooperation. If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions