Author of the hostile environment. Wrongly deported UK citizens to Jamaica. Several of whom were then murdered. Wrongly deported foreign nationals who had not failed English exams. Prevented EU citizens from voting in the EU elections. Sent Go Home vans around minority neighbourhoods. Told that ridiculous lie about the immigrant’s cat. What was that she was saying about “burning injustices”? Good riddance. jwl In her statement May is trying to boast about a useless, divisive and incompetent premiership which has devastated lives. Boasting of her achievements, claiming to have been a compassionate prime minister of a compassionate government. Bollocks. And those tears at the end ... she had none for Windrush. hacklesup Shame it took her nearly three years to take Nicholas Winton’s words [“compromise is not a dirty word”] to heart. How different things might have been if she’d remembered them when she came into office. Calling people “saboteurs” is the opposite of compromise. Baloopa This would have been an excellent speech had it been delivered right after her huge bungle in calling the snap election was revealed as a disaster. Nearly two years later, it was self serving and utterly devoid of real insight, which is everything we’ve come to expect from Mrs May. Caligula Already the hypocrites are lining up to say she was a terrific woman and did her best for the country. This vile PM, as she came to the end of a speech that was probably written long ago, let her voice break. She was crying for herself not the country. Her ambition was personal not for the improvement of the citizens lives. Now she’ll be replaced by another vile PM. ID5933171 This sounded more like a resignation speech on behalf of the Tory Party! Compromise means a slap in the face for Boris Johnson and the ERG. Clearly saying that if the Tories do not compromise over Brexit then they will be lost forever. If Boris Johnson gets to be PM then the whole of the world will turn against the UK. Graham Taylor History will look back on the pre-Brexit era of Cameron, Osborne, May et al as a time of stability, not austerity. Mrs May failed with her Brexit negotiations because she appointed small minded people to her cabinet, she overrated their ability and she innocently expected loyalty from them. Not one of them is worthy of replacing her.maortrachta2 Is anyone keeping score of the deaths and suicides of benefit claimants under her Government, the deaths of deportees under her Government, the wrongful denial of rights to remain, work and study in the UK under her Government, the deaths in custody under her Government, the abuse of care home residents under her Government and anything else that most right minded people would class as burning injustice? Don’t let her failure to deliver Brexit overshadow her many other failures. RichardCC A new PM is never going to solve anything for the country. The Tories are not negotiators and any leader’s hands are still tied by the factions in their own party. The problem is we have the wrong party leading the country on Brexit and the only way to resolve this is a general election and a Labour party win. Their recent plan has been well received in Europe by Barnier and Tusk and they both described it as promising and negotiable. Their GE campaign then should be a Brexit deal and a people’s vote on the deal negotiated or the option to remain. I think that’s the way it will go. forageforfood