Chris Wilder has been named the manager of the year at the League Managers Association awards after winning promotion with Sheffield United. The 51-year-old becomes only the fifth coach from outside the top flight to win the main award, and the first since Eddie Howe won in 2015 for leading Bournemouth to the Premier League. Wilder topped a shortlist including Pep Guardiola, Jürgen Klopp, Mauricio Pochettino, Wolves manager Nuno Espírito Santo and Norwich City’s Daniel Farke, after votes from the public were combined with those of a panel of football experts. He was also named the Championship’s manager of the year. “To be voted for by your peers to get this award is just unbelievable and caps off an incredible season for me and everybody at Sheffield United,” Wilder said on stage after collecting the award from Sir Alex Ferguson. “I would like to think we have struck a blow for recruitment, training ground, teaching and all the other stuff which goes on behind the scenes – there is no chequebook culture.” Having previously managed Alfreton, Halifax Town, Oxford United and Northampton, Sheffield-born Wilder took over at Bramall Lane in 2016. United had been mired in League One for five seasons, but he has led his boyhood club to the top flight in just three. “It just shows you this can happen, it is dreams, inspiration for everybody. There is a pathway through for all of us and hopefully it has shown the way for everybody else. If we can stay in the Premier League, that would be fantastic. It is an exciting and unbelievable experience we are going into.” Guardiola took the main award last season but had to settle for the Premier League prize this time, after his Manchester City team won 14 games in a row to pip Liverpool to the title. He gave a brief message by video, paying tribute to the efforts of his players and backroom staff. “I want to share it with my players because they are the artists of everything, to my staff because we fought a lot [against] all the managers in the Premier League, especially Jürgen Klopp, an incredible contender to face till the end,” the Manchester City manager said. Luton’s Mick Harford was named League One manager of the year, despite only taking charge of the Hatters on an interim basis when Nathan Jones left in January. Harford guided Luton to the title and promotion – before handing over to the new permanent manager, Graeme Jones. Danny Cowley won the League Two award after his Lincoln side strolled to the fourth-tier title, while Arsenal’s Joe Montemurro took the Women’s Super League prize. Tottenham manager Karen Hills won the Women’s Championship award.