Anish Kapoor, represented Britain in 1990 It was the summer before Margaret Thatcher resigned, a very different Britain. The Berlin Wall had just come down, and there was a sense of proper optimism. I was an Indian citizen and it didn’t matter. It wasn’t an issue. What mattered was that I lived in the UK, was part of the UK art community. Would that still be true? Our psychic state as a country has changed so much. The art world was unbelievably different, too, not so market-driven as it is now. This was before the so-called YBAs; they were just leaving art school. Exposure on this scale, in my mid-30s, was extraordinary. As an artist, you have a certain kind of language you are trying to get into the world. At Venice, I had the experience, for the first time, of people reflecting back to me the work – telling me, if you like, what I was doing. At the pavilion we gave out – can you believe it? – the first-ever bag with my name on it. It was the first time I’d seen such a thing, perhaps the first time it had been done. Now, of course, it is absolutely ubiquitous. If one were doing it again, would one deal with the current moment? I’m not interested in making direct commentary on quotidian questions, political or otherwise. But it’s a great time to be controversial, perhaps the best time ever, because in politics and elsewhere there are so many entrenched positions. You could stick your finger up at all that and say: “I’m not playing the game.” Rachel Whiteread, 1997 It was just after Labour had been elected. There was a bit of optimism, briefly. In my life, there were all sorts of things going on: I was in the middle of a political storm in Vienna as I was trying to complete the Holocaust memorial there, which was a huge deal. The biennale opened in June and I had been to look at the pavilion in February. It was the first time I’d been to Venice and I cried – it was so beautiful. Then I went to the Giardini, the gardens where most of the national pavilions are, and thought: “What a bizarre place this is, with the British pavilion, that imperial building, up on a hill at the end of the avenue.” It was high-stress and what I made reflected my mental state. One work, called Untitled: 10 Tables, was a brutal piece cast from interlocking tables. I also made a library sculpture, directly connected to the Holocaust memorial, which has cast bookshelves as its exterior. I was just trying to get the memorial into the world somehow. We were installing for three weeks, carrying vacuum cleaners on our heads through St Mark’s Square and things like that – fabulous. When it opened, I was completely unprepared for the circus, but I got to meet the abstract painter Agnes Martin, which was a joy. And Marina Abramović did an extraordinary performance, Balkan Baroque, where she sat among a huge pile of bones, washing them and singing folk songs – a response to the war in the Balkans. It was amazing to be able to be involved with the biennale at such a young age. It holds some of my fondest memories. Mark Wallinger, 2001 The time we spent installing the show was one of my favourite parts. There was a feeling of camaraderie, with all the other artists in their funny little pavilions. We used to share pizza on the porch. Plus, the British pavilion is the only one around there that has toilets – it was a magnet. The buildings in the Giardini are vestiges of the world order at the end of the 19th century – and it was typical of Britain at the time to have put its pavilion at the top of the only hill in Venice. The show was partly about all of that, playing with different kinds of identities and the hoops we go through to feel part of something, the illusions of faith and identity. The first thing you encountered was my work Facade, a huge trompe l’oeil photograph, printed on fabric, of the pavilion, which we erected in front of the building. So to enter, you had to pass through the illusory doorway. We had one day to install it, in an amazing storm. It was epic, like putting a spinnaker up in a tempest. Outside, I flew my Oxymoron flag: the red and blue of the union jack represented in its complementary colours, which make it become the green and orange of the Irish tricolour. The show addressed the particularities of the time, but I didn’t want to make it didactic. I hope it was playful, but serious. I like to think the works I showed would still be pertinent. Mike Nelson, 2011 I spent three months living in Venice with my family making my show, working with assistants, who were also my friends, and a team of Italian builders. It was a fantastic time, a real privilege, living in the city – one of the happiest times of my life. We took the roof off the Italianate, turn-of-the-century British pavilion and rebuilt the interior as an Ottoman caravanserai, inserting the traces of an earlier work I had made for the Istanbul Biennial in 2003. So it was one biennale within another, the Ottoman empire within the British empire, with all the potential implications for the politics of that time – the Arab spring was under way. I was very happy with the work, unusually for me. The opening week was kind of horrific, indigestible, let’s say. I’d made work at the Venice Biennale before, but I hadn’t ever been in the centre of things. It was a bit of a turning point. I realised that the way I had been working, my desire to confound a certain type of consumption both in the art world and the world at large, was being read as spectacle, as an “experience”. It was being co-opted by immersive theatre, even by pop-up restaurants. It became difficult for people to read it as sculpture. Since then, my work has become more minimal, more sculptural. If I were doing it again, I’d still approach it in the same way – it’s just the ugly boil of the times has risen higher now. Problems don’t just arrive from nowhere. Jeremy Deller, 2013 I was happy to be the artist representing Britain. There was a lot I wanted to get off my chest about the UK – aspects of the country I liked and didn’t like. I was interested in making new mythologies. I had giant animals, giant humans, destruction, in the show. As you entered there was a mural of a giant harrier hawk swooping down to take a Range Rover in its claws. There was another mural of William Morris as a colossus throwing Roman Abramovich’s yacht into the Venice lagoon. The show was called English Magic. It was important to use that contentious word “English”. Looking back, it feels as if some of the exhibition’s elements have really come home to roost. For me, Englishness and the crisis in our identity was a major cause of Brexit. In the exhibition, I showed drawings made by prisoners who had been in the army, serving in the Iraq wars. Their subjects were people who had been involved in getting us into the second war, including Tony Blair. I’ve been filming the rightwing protests in Parliament Square recently, and a lot of those people are worried about homeless veterans. They also have this deep patriotic respect for authority, the army, the royal family, alongside a sense that these systems have let them down – yet the blame is redirected to Europe. In 2019, you could make a much more visceral version of what I did in 2013. It was relatively polite. It looked like a functioning art exhibition. Phyllida Barlow, 2017 Being invited to represent Britain was an enormous thrill, but that was quickly replaced by a sense of foreboding. I’m not particularly patriotic. My love of London is one thing, but what does it mean to me to be English? And then am I English – or British? These feelings were hugely amplified by the result of the Brexit referendum in 2016. Politically, everything seemed to be like a Chinese box, one mistake revealing another revealing another. What would it mean to represent a country that was in such an exposed, vulnerable place? The actual biennale was extraordinary, though. It’s easy to dwell on its theme-park qualities, but the fact that it brings together so many people and nations, with every nook and cranny of the city filled with art, is extraordinary. It’s a hope-filled experience, showing that there is a way nations can come together. Would it be different two years on? Yes and no. I’ve found the Brexit process excruciating – and I was finding it excruciating back then, as though something had been sabotaged. The idea of being European seemed so important to me. Suddenly Brexit seemed to be shrinking things down to this safe little haven called the UK. I think what has changed is that more and more has been exposed, both about the reality of what it means to leave, and how problematic the EU is. But leaving it doesn’t seem to solve any of that. Things have destabilised from an already destabilised position. • This year’s British Council-commissioned exhibition is by Cathy Wilkes, at the British Pavilion from 11 May to 24 November.