Channel surfing was a bleak prospect back in 2006. With every click of the TV remote came another bombshell from a world on the brink. Nuclear standoffs. Poisoned spies. Hannah Montana. If only there were a sitcom to sweeten these dark and dystopian times, we thought. A frothy half-hour hug, with jokes that your dad might have read off a lolly stick in Weston-super-Mare circa 1979. A show with the irony-free exuberance of a Butlin’s Redcoat performing The Birdie Song. Not Going Out was that show, and with Colour Me Mindful books yet to be invented, we fell on it like needy burnouts. By series two, the setup was firmly in place and so simple even a goldfish would get it: each week, feckless man-child Lee (Lee Mack) would sniff around his imperious flatmate Lucy (Sally Bretton) and watch his worst-laid romantic plans go up in smoke. Granted, Not Going Out was only marginally more sophisticated than Noel Edmonds’s gunge tank. However, like My Family before it, Mack and Andrew Collins’s script was irresistible comfort food, suspending the horrors of the world and keeping audiences hooked with the odd couple’s catfight chemistry – and the occasional zinger. But then they went and ruined it. After a string of stolen kisses and drunken grapples, series seven committed the cardinal sin, guaranteed to sink any sitcom (see also: Frasier’s ill-advised coupling of Niles and Daphne), and let Mack take the object of his unrequited desire down the aisle. In a heartbeat, the addictive sense of will-they-won’t-they dissipated. They had – and it turned out we didn’t give a damn. The show grew broader and cornier. Bobby Ball was increasingly deployed as Lee’s hapless dad, Frank, his nagging chirp about as welcome as a mosquito in the ear at three in the morning. Meanwhile, the two leads, whose chemistry once fizzed, morphed into the sad, sniping, child-saddled losers that many viewers had become in the decade since the show began. With the character-driven intrigue deflated, focus shifted to the jokes – and you immediately wished it hadn’t. Late-period Not Going Out is the greatest conundrum on British television, baffling the brightest minds in cultural commentary. It is widely acknowledged that Mack is the quickest-witted, most drop-to-your-knees brilliant pundit ever to sit behind a panel show desk. Watch a showreel of his best moments on Would I Lie to You? and there’s a case that he’s the most instinctive comedian of his generation. However, based on the groaners from Not Going Out’s recent runs, it’s as if he’s lost all of his passion for writing and has been forced to co-write these scripts at gunpoint. Still, in an age when the TV audience has never been so diffused, viewing figures for Not Going Out have still been known to nudge five million. This year’s 10th series will probably top that. But faced with that overwhelming statistical evidence of a show going from strength to strength, all I can say is: someone must be holding the graph upside-down. Not Going Out? More like a house arrest.