The bodies bulking their way out of the confines of the painting are either too big for the work, or we are too close. Buttocks, breasts, big feet. Something pendulous, like a testicle, a black smear of pubic hair, maybe an eye. It is hard to tell. Lee Krasner’s 1956 Prophesy was painted the year her relationship to Jackson Pollock was breaking down, and she said that it disturbed her. Pollock encouraged her to keep going. She left the painting on her easel when she took a trip to France, alone. While she was away Pollock wrapped the car he was driving around a tree, killing both himself and one of his two female passengers. Does it always have to be about Pollock? That he overshadowed Krasner, both in life and death, is inescapable. When Krasner met Pollock in 1941, she was already developing a significant career as a painter. Piet Mondrian praised her rhythm – and they went dancing together. As a drawing student of Hans Hofmann, he had said her work was “so good you would not know it was done by a woman”. The times were against Krasner and other female artists. Born into an orthodox Ukrainian Jewish family in Brooklyn in 1908, Krasner died in 1984. The Barbican’s retrospective takes us from her earliest, highly accomplished student works to the very end, in an exhibition as elegantly designed and hung as it is fascinating, filled with surprises and troubles. Stripped back to its essentials in a design by David Chipperfield Architects, the gallery looks the very model of brutalist, modernist chic – this is just right for Krasner’s art which, like Pollock’s, could be as elegant and decorative (for too long a dirty word, and one hardcore fans of abstract expressionism would likely hate) as it was wrought from the ego and the unconscious. Krasner began conventionally enough, with self-portraits whose masses of hair and clotted paint already had in them the kind of organised turmoil and tonalities that would reappear in her mature work. Her naked life drawings (much better, it must be said, than Pollock’s Michelangelo-inspired early drawings), had a kind of smoothed beefiness. One female nude floats rather than sits on her diminutive chair. Later, Krasner began classes at Hofmann’s 9th Street school, where she encountered his very physical teaching style – correcting students’ work by drawing over it, or tearing up drawings and reassembling them in new configurations. Krasner went on to adopt this wilfully destructive approach for herself (and perhaps later taught it to Pollock). Her charcoal drawings from her time with Hofmann break into and overlay the figure in a much looser, dynamic manner. Limbs bulge, heads shrink, and the body becomes a caricature of human anatomy, with scaffolds and arcs vectoring over the compositions. The charcoal slides and splinters, smudges and swerves about the paper. It jabs and passes, Krasner getting the friction and skid to work for her, as if letting go for the first time. Decades later, in the mid-1970s, she rediscovered many of these drawings and cut them up, rearranging parts and mounting them on canvas, as if there was still work to do based on her experiences in Hofmann’s class. Through the later 1940s, while Pollock was becoming the poster-boy rebel with a cause, in the barn of the property they bought in Springs, Long Island, Krasner toiled at relatively small, dense compositions of her own, with almost gridded hieroglyphs, a language of triangles, alphabets de-tuned into squiggles, loosely drawn rhomboids, circles and squares. Sometimes the shapes would break up and fizz, turn into glimmering banks of light and dark. She made a gorgeous table using an old wooden wheel, inlaid with broken glass, mosaic materials left over from an abandoned project, keys, coins and other detritus. Meanwhile, the paintings were skeins of fractured colour. The fracturing went on. There are years when nothing seems to happen, then jump-cuts from one way of working to another. You can guess at personal difficulties, Pollock’s fame and increasing alcoholism, his disappearances, his own switches in style and creative blocks. In 1954 and 1955 things picked up again for Krasner, with a group of partly collaged works in which she started to cut into her canvases and realign elements, in part influenced by Matisse’s recent cut-outs, the shearings and slicings more decisive and extreme. Shapes got bigger, composition and its breakdown more apparent. She picked up where Prophesy left off. Pollock is in there, but also Picasso’s 1907 Les Demoiselles d’Avignon, her own earlier life drawing, Willem de Kooning, André Masson and Joan Miró’s constellations. Eyes and mouths litter bodily contours, all shuffled and slipped around in these implosive canvases. I read these pink and black and grey paintings as picking up on Pollock’s unfinished business and taking his figurations somewhere else. While the upstairs galleries at the Barbican move through Krasner’s earlier career as a kind of chapter-by-chapter retelling, the downstairs spaces concentrate on the 1960s and beyond in a more fluid way. Following his death, Krasner moved into Pollock’s barn and started painting at night. Huge canvases, portentous titles, wild scrabblings, flexings and flurries, spatterings and spirallings and draggings of an almost dry brush over the canvas, mostly in umbers and browns and a more liquid, dirtied white upped the ante of her art. For me, this was abstract expressionism when its time was done, though for Krasner the gesture wasn’t spent. These stampedes and blizzards have a percussive, Stravinsky-like rhythm. It all gets more delicate around 1964, soon after a lumbering painting called Another Storm, in which Krasner used a lot of alizarin crimson (a pigment that has very little density, but infects whatever is around it. It is like painting with ice cream). Flowers and faces reappear – Icarus has a face on its right side, which looks both like Pollock himself and like his 1953 painting Portrait and a Dream. With its magentas and orange and white, Combat from 1965 looks less like a battle than a garden in flower. My favourite later work, Kufic, 1965, is all rhythm, and completed in burnt sienna over a very thinned-out ground in the same colour. Here and there are accents of blue under-drawing, just enough to lift everything into flight and make it breathe. There’s not much to it, but a boisterous, lovely calligraphy, a ghost of the anger that came before. I could look at Kufic all day. Jump to 1971, and Krasner’s work again takes a leap into stark frontal shapes, flatly painted, in Palingenesis – as if she had returned to Matisse’s cut-outs, and her earlier deconstructions of her own work – but everything is rendered in largely flat, thinly painted colour, backlit by the white ground behind. Geometry is making a return, but it gets lost again in her later reworkings of her rediscovered drawings. These are the last things in the show, but signal less an ending than a return to something lost and refound. So hard-assed and critical of her own works was Krasner that whole years of adventures, forays and experiments were destroyed along the way. It was tough enough to be a woman artist amid the first generation of abstract expressionists, especially one suspicious of a signature style. Despite his success, Pollock didn’t settle either, but died before he could get out of his impasse. Krasner kept going, still finding her way. Lee Krasner: Living Colour is at the Barbican Art Gallery, London, from 30 May to 1 September. The accompanying book is published by Thames & Hudson and Barbican, price £35.