It’s a golden time for great climaxes. Is that policeman a Good Policeman or a Bad Policeman? Will the Dragon Lady beat the Frosty Lads? Do Iron Face and Norwegian Jesus finally triumph over Big Daddy Purple? True, The Fiver may only consume these ultra-popular cultural phenomena from a distance – overheard snippets of conversation from more With It co-workers, confusing context-free gifs on Social Media Disgrace Twitter, and so forth – so we may be a little hazy on the details, but people seem to like them. And this weekend into this crowded, competitive arena of dramatic finales steps the Premier League. It’s a little tricky to know what to expect. On the one hand, this week’s pick-and-mix of Great Football Endings – from Vincent Kompany drawing back his right foot 30 yards from goal on Monday, via the #scenes at Anfield and the Amsterdam Arena, to Eden Hazard sending Kevin Trapp the wrong way from the penalty spot on Thursday night – suggests anything is possible this Sunday. On the other, surely the Football Gods have slaked their raging thirst for memorable moments. To be fair it’s set up quite nicely. And all the sums are pretty straightforward. Liverpool have to win at Anfield against Wolves, no ifs, no buts. If they do then Manchester City have to beat Brighton down at the Amex. Technically – technically – if City lose 5-0 then Liverpool can win the title with a draw, but the chances of this season’s AgüeRRROOOO moment coming when Lewis DUUUUUUNK heads home Brighton’s fifth are so infinitesimally small it’s basically a waste of a sentence. Elsewhere, Tottenham are 99% certain of fourth unless Bizarre Goal Difference Swing – often talked about at this time of year, never seems to show up – makes an unlikely appearance, Bayern should wrap up yet another Bundesliga, and the Football League play-offs crank into full gear. But all the focus will be on Anfield and the Amex. Does football have the energy left for one more chaotic funfest? “The club is looking to recruit a talented harpist to potentially perform as part of a team for match-days next season. If you are interested in being considered, please contact our customer engagement team” – Gillingham look to get their maverick off-season recruitment done early. 20 April: “No one can stop me from playing football, I just decided to take an important time off for myself and it is very important to carefully weigh the options. It’s not the end or retirement from the game. I believe I can still play on for another two or three years” – Yaya Touré. Today: “Yaya has decided to end his career as a champion” – Touré’s Mr 15% confirms the player’s retirement from football. Here’s the latest Football Weekly Extra podcast. And if you can get to Hackney in the next hour or two [or own a DeLorean if you’re reading this later – Fiver Ed], there’s only Football Weekly Live. The new Diego Maradona documentary looks very tasty. “Re: yesterday’s Quote of the Day. As a lifelong Barnsley fan, can I point out that if Dani Parejo could hold a conversation with his dad while airborne following a tackle from a Reds player, then he probably wasn’t booted that hard” – John Meara. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Rollover. A life-size statue of Lily Parr, the trailblazing, chain-smoking, goalscoring winger of the 1920s and 30s, will be erected outside Manchester’s National Football Museum in June, becoming the first prominent UK public sculpture of a female footballer. Arsenal and Chelsea are understandably miffed with Uefa after being told they will receive only 6,000 tickets each for the Big Vase final in the 68,700-capacity Baku Olympic Stadium, while Liverpool and Spurs have been given 16,613 tickets each for the Big Cup final from the Wanda Metropolitano’s 67,804. “It’s outrageous, but unfortunately it’s par for the course,” sighed the FSF’s Kevin Miles. Meanwhile, Arsenal have expressed concern that they have not yet received “acceptable guarantees” from Uefa that Henrikh Mkhitaryan will be safe to travel to Baku. Manchester United will look to inject some youthful vigour into their side against Cardiff on Sunday, with 19-year-old Tahith Chong, 18-year-old Angel Gomes, and 17-year-old Mason Greenwood all in line to feature. French Football Federation suits have handed Neymar a three-match ban after he mildly attempted to lay the smack down on a fan following PSG’s French Cup final loss to Rennes last month. Fulham have appointed former burger salesman Scott Parker as their new head coach. Former Fulham manager Claudio Ranieri will do one from his Roma job come the summer. “When these three games are over, my work here will be over,” he tooted. Brighton defender Bruno will call time on his career after Sunday’s game with Manchester City. Mansfield Town are confident of booking their place in the League Two play-off final after being pegged back for a 1-1 first-leg draw at Newport. “It’s big decisions that [the referee] got wrong,” sniffed boss David Flitcroft. “It’s a travesty because you prepare and work really hard for these games. Now we’ll just get ourselves ready. We’ll prepare for one hell of a game on Sunday.” Relegated League One side Walsall have appointed former Bristol Rovers boss Darrell Clarke as manager. And in news that strays into The Fiver’s egg-chasing, lager-through-a-sock-drinking cousin The Breakdown’s territory, the 2021 Big Rugby Cup final will take place at Spurs’ shiny new stadium. You might think there are seven dead rubbers in the Premier League this weekend. And you’d be right! But we’ve still found 10 things to look out for on the final day. Arsenal face a defining moment at the end of their long road to Baku, writes Amy Lawrence. Arsenal’s Leah Williamson gets her chat on with Suzanne Wrack. Which Chelsea loanees should be brought back for next season, wonders Martin Laurence. Jamie Jackson gets the inside story at Salford City before the National League play-off final against Fylde. Maaaaatch previews! Getchur maaaatch previews here! Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!