There will be plenty of British military veterans relieved by word that the new defence secretary, Penny Mordaunt, plans to introduce an amnesty on so-called historical prosecutions for actions committed more than 10 years ago – which should cover offences committed during the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. At first glance it looks like a welcome response to the pain described by many ex-service personnel, as they face multiple investigations into past events, often triggering a recurrence of post-traumatic stress disorder as they are forced to relive horrific experiences from long ago. Others will be pleased by what Mordaunt’s move means for the soldiers of the future. In this view, the armed forces can’t possibly do their job if, in the heat of battle, they are half-thinking of a future day in court. The argument is simple: that it’s wrong to ask those in uniform to risk everything for their country, only to throw the book at them for it afterwards. The politics of the move are clear enough, with Mordaunt, herself a naval reservist, keen to entrench her reputation as the forces’ champion. It should fend off pressure from, among others, her potential rival for that title on the Tory benches, Johnny Mercer, who had threatened to withhold his support for the government on all non-Brexit business until ministers acted. And yet despite all that, Mordaunt’s decision looks wrong-headed. It’s unlikely to solve the problem it purports to tackle – and it creates another that might be even more serious. First, despite the headline proposal, there are crucial exceptions to this amnesty. Northern Ireland is not included, even though Mercer has been especially exercised by what he calls the “abhorrent process” of “elderly veterans being dragged back” to the province to answer for actions taken decades ago. It’s clear, as a matter of political reality, why the government has to exclude Northern Ireland: if it didn’t, it could lead to the murder of UK citizens going unpunished. But it’s much harder to make a principled case for that exception, the implication of which is obvious: that the lives of Iraqi or Afghan civilians are not quite as sacred. Cases relating to those countries could still go ahead if there were “exceptional circumstances”, for example, the late emergence of compelling evidence. You can imagine the kind of thing: say, video footage from a helmet-cam showing a British soldier shooting an unarmed civilian in the back of the head. But given how rare prosecutions over military conduct in Iraq and Afghanistan have been, it was always the case that compelling evidence of that kind would be required to bring charges, with or without a 10-year statute of limitations. So, in practice, this might not be as much of a change as it appears. Under the Human Rights Act and its protections of the right to life, the government will still have a legal duty to investigate possible crimes. There’s a similar hole in Mordaunt’s suggestion that the UK will opt out of the European convention on human rights before the start of “significant military operations”. That might cover the first phase of war, but not apply to a subsequent occupation. Yet it’s in that second phase that prosecutable crimes are most likely to occur. In the Iraq case, the prime example was the murder of Baha Mousa, the 26-year-old hotel receptionist beaten to death in Basra by British soldiers in 2003. Human rights experts don’t believe the convention would allow for any derogation, or opt-out, to be extended to a military occupation. And there can be no opting out of the ECHR’s prohibition on torture, no matter when it occurs. In other words, in many of the situations where prosecution might arise, Mordaunt’s amnesty won’t apply. If this move were merely ineffectual, it could perhaps be shrugged off. But it could have a strong symbolic effect. “This may be sending a message about impunity,” human rights lawyer Adam Wagner, who has acted for hundreds of British soldiers, tells me. “And you don’t want that culture of impunity on the battlefield. You want soldiers to know that if they do something wrong, they will be held to account for it.” We know from the horrors of the last century how dangerous it is if those armed with lethal force believe they are above the law. Wagner says that we do, in fact, want our soldiers to have half an eye on the courtroom, to be trained in the Geneva conventions, to remember the ban on hooding or torture of prisoners and the like. And this, he insists, is not just the view of liberal, human-rights types: military commanders themselves don’t want to make the kind of soldier who would shoot an unthreatening civilian in the head believe he or she enjoys immunity from the law. The answer, then, to the painful, repeated investigations of veterans is not to impose a patchy, Swiss cheese amnesty full of holes. Instead, there simply needs to be a better, more robust investigative process from the start, one that would see the military police and the court martial system combine to produce an inquiry whose results can be trusted and which does not need to be redone multiple times. That way, we might get to the truth and spare those soldiers who are innocent the undoubted trauma of constant reinvestigation – but without compromising the principle of the rule of law, the very principle that, after all, we are asking our armed forces to defend. • Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnist