A giant talking robot of Donald Trump sitting on a gold toilet is being shipped from Sichuan in China to London for protests to mark the president’s controversial state visit to the UK. The 4.9-metre (16ft) “Dumping Trump” robot was inspired by the Trump blimp which was the focal point of the protests against last year’s visit by the president. It depicts Trump with his trousers down, tweeting on the toilet, while his long red tie dangles into the bowl. It also emits farting noises and recordings of some of Trump’s provocative sound bites including: “no collusion”, “a witch-hunt”, “you are fake news” and “I’m a very stable genius.” It was commissioned by Don Lessem, a Philadelphia-based dinosaur expert and anti-Trump campaigner, who paid $25,000 (£19,375) of his own money to get it made. He had previously commissioned several dinosaur automatons for theme parks from a factory in Sichuan. He said he had to reassure the factory owner that he [Lessem] would not be imprisoned for commissioning this new robot. Lessem told the Guardian there was some uncertainty about whether the robot would arrive in the UK in time for the three-day state visit starting on 3 June. He put the chances of it arriving on time at “50-50”. The organisers of the anti-Trump protests in London have promised a number of “creative elements to the protests”. Options under consideration include a bigger version of the Trump baby blimp in the form of a Trump hot air balloon. Lessem said he had contacted the organisers of the protests to let them know Dumping Trump was on its way. Asad Rehman, the executive director of War on Want and a member of the Stop Trump Coalition, said: “It’s news to us, but there are many different people doing many different things to protest the visit.” Lessem joked to the US news site the Daily Kos that he would not name the ship carrying the robot “for fear Trump will bomb it”. He added: “My goal is to create this year’s attention-getting and bile-producing sequel to the Trump baby balloon, and one that could be more easily deployed at rallies all over the world. I think we need a focus to our rage, and as many and large reminders as possible of what a disgusting disgrace this oaf is to humanity.”