Expectations on the Black Caps at World Cups have, since the turn of the century at least, been the same – to reach the semi-finals. In part this is because that has, largely, been their lot. New Zealand have reached the final four seven times – in 1975, 79, 92, 99, 07, 11 and 15. Their last effort, in the tournament they co-hosted with Australia in 2015, is easily the most memorable. Grant Elliott etched his name in New Zealand cricket folklore after hitting the South African great Dale Steyn’s penultimate ball into the Eden Park stands, sending the 40,000 crowd wild and the Black Caps into their maiden final. Unfortunately for New Zealand, they bombed the following week on the Melbourne Cricket Ground grand stage. As the captain Brendon McCullum’s stumps were shattered by Mitchell Starc’s third-ball screamer so, too, were hopes of a heroic upset. New Zealand, fifth favourites for this tournament, are consistently cast as the World Cup dark horses. Given their record that sells them short, somewhat. The format and conditions should suit them and with Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Afghanistan in the first 10 days, the chance is there to build early momentum. ICC world ranking 4 (as of 6 May)Captain Kane Williamson, leftCoach Gary SteadWorld Cup best Runners-up 2015 Fixtures (10.30am unless stated)1 June v Sri Lanka, Cardiff5 June v Bangladesh, The Oval (1.30pm)8 June v Afghanistan, Taunton (1.30pm)13 June v India, Trent Bridge19 June v South Africa, Edgbaston22 June v West Indies, Old Trafford (1.30pm)26 June v Pakistan, Edgbaston29 June v Australia, Lord’s (1.30pm)3 July v England, The Riverside New Zealand are a confidence team, so a strong start will aid their prospects of progression given specific 50-over preparation has been limited due to New Zealand contributing nine players from their World Cup squad to the recently-completed Indian Premier League. Playing in home comforts New Zealand did trounce Bangladesh 3-0 in their most recent One Day International series. Prior to that, they lost 4-1 to India in January to enhance their reputation as some-time flat-track bullies. Four members of New Zealand’s World Cup squad took part in a three-match series against a near full-strength Australian XI earlier this month but two warm-up matches against India, at the Oval, and the West Indies, in Bristol, carry extra importance to form cohesion. Selection-wise the coach, Gary Stead, surprised by including the back-up wicketkeeper batsman Tom Blundell, who scored a Test century on debut but is yet to don the ODI fern. The attacking leg spinner Ish Sodhi also edged out Canterbury’s Todd Astle for the second tweaking spot behind the left-arm off-spin all-rounder Mitchell Santner. While Sodhi will only feature on turning wickets, Blundell has been thrust into the spotlight after a fractured finger to the first-choice keeper Tom Latham. New Zealand are hopeful Latham will be fit for their opening match but Blundell will play in the warm-ups at the very least. Overall New Zealand arrive with an experienced, balanced squad and a couple of key question marks. In the captain, Kane Williamson, and Ross Taylor, warming up for his fourth World Cup with Middlesex, New Zealand possess two world-class batsmen, both capable of rebuilding or pacing the innings depending on the shaky top-order platform. On the bowling front what Trent Boult and Tim Southee lack in pace they will hope to compensate for with swing. Lockie Ferguson brings the express element, with Matt Henry completing the quartet. There are, however, major concerns about their combined ability to contain power hitting in the death overs. Ultimately, the World Cup could be won and lost on this battleground. Flat tracks and short boundaries are expected to provide mega totals. The Black Caps harness batsmen and all-rounders in the form of Martin Guptill, Colin Munro, Colin de Grandhomme, Taylor and Jimmy Neesham who are more than capable of clearing the fence. Like everyone, they will come hard at the top but are also flexible in their ability to switch tactics if conditions or early wickets dictate. In the field New Zealand will be inventive and scrap to save every run. They are not opposed to grinding their way to victories, and have learnt to hold composure when chasing daunting totals. The talismanic Williamson is the obvious choice but given he performs more often than not, New Zealand’s fate rests more with Guptill. Guptill’s ODI record in England is seriously impressive – 652 runs at 46.5 with a strike-rate of 97.31, including an unbeaten 189 from 155 balls. His importance at the top cannot be understated. Henry Nicholls or the out-of-sorts Munro, two contrasting batsmen, will join Guptill in opening up. Either way responsibility rests on Guptill, the senior man and one of the best white-ball strikers in the world. Look no further than his unbeaten 237, the highest World Cup score in history, featuring 24 fours and 11 sixes in the quarter-final victory over the West Indies in Wellington, to appreciate the damage he can cause. Anything less than the semi-final status quo will be considered a disappointment. On their day the Black Caps are capable of shocking anyone but against the top echelon, India and the home favourites England, they need to extract every ounce of talent and even then bank some luck. Whether their bowling attack offers sufficient threats is questionable. Santner is more of a containing spinner than wicket-taker. Seamers Southee, Boult and Henry are unlikely to strike fear in premier batsman either. In favourable conditions, which provide more than a hint of swing, New Zealand can go toe-to-toe with the best. Reach the semis, and from there anything is possible. Liam Napier is a freelance cricket writer who writes for NZME