You hear so much about fabled Champions League nights under the lights at Anfield, but during the dark times you’re never sure whether you’ll get to live through them. I was born in the summer of 1995, so Liverpool’s most recent European glory days under Rafa Benítez are but a distant childhood memory. Istanbul in 2005 is a blur that I’m still not sure definitely happened. Tuesday night happened in front of my eyes and it still hasn’t sunk in. It may take me until the final to realise the scale of what this Liverpool side achieved when faced with the task of sticking four past Barcelona. Under Jürgen Klopp, we have seen some of Liverpool’s greatest European triumphs. Dortmund. Villarreal. Manchester City. Roma. Liverpool feel like a club who have rediscovered the soul lost through years of infighting and political stand-offs. Credit must go to so many behind the scenes, but especially to the manager. Klopp has made Liverpool football club about the fans, the footballers and very much about the football. The way it should be. The gung-ho, heavy metal style we were promised when he arrived from Dortmund has fed into the complete control that Liverpool have exercised over countless games throughout this season, and arguably since the turn of last year. They were able to sweep Barcelona up in a whirlwind before applying the brakes and seeing out the game. It’s a blueprint they’re used to. The footballers are lads who came to the club with a story to tell and chapters to be written. Many had a point to prove and they are doing that every time they take to the pitch, surprising those who thought they didn’t have it in them to go again. Andy Robertson has gone from tweets about desperately needing a job to intensely marking Lionel Messi, and his influence has been felt as much off the field. His efforts in supporting food banks and other causes in the community show the human side of a lad that we as fans can relate to and be proud of. That goes for so many players in this side. We would have been proud regardless of the result against Barça, but a place in the final is the payoff they deserve for their efforts over the season. While we supporters have been on an emotional rollercoaster, celebrating Liverpool wins long into the night only to be pegged back by a formidable Manchester City side within hours or days, the players have remained professional. We can be especially proud of our manager. He has reconnected the club with the supporters. He’s made us feel like we’re at the heart of everything again. Celebrations after late equalisers against West Brom have been replaced by the scenes in front of the Kop on Tuesday. Players, staff and supporters as one. It is almost cliche to talk about the atmosphere on nights like these where the crowd raises itself, and the level of our lads, leaving the travelling players and supporters in its wake. You’ve seen it in the past but can Anfield still conjure that feeling – particularly with the way football is heading? The answer on Tuesday was a resounding yes. It was an “I was there” moment. The Saint-Etienne ‘77 for our generation. Gini Wijnaldum doing a double David Fairclough from the bench. Divock Origi topping and tailing the scoresheet. The Belgian’s first gave Anfield the early injection of hope that the doubters (myself included) needed. Wijnaldum’s first cranked up the noise another notch. The third caused pandemonium in the stands. Though it left Liverpool needing another goal to secure safe passage, it was celebrated with screams and songs of defiance. The fourth goal is a work of art and the picture of the Kop painted a thousand words. Adults sprawled over seats, laid down in the rows, or balanced on shoulders and chairs. The final whistle brought sheer relief, and tears for many around me. It was the first time in a long time I’d shed tears of joy at a football match. It was a joy to be alive. It is a joy to be alive. A joy to be a part of this club. A joy to be able to watch these players. They’re giving us memories to last a lifetime. The stories we’ll tell our kids and grandkids. I can’t wait to make more memories in Madrid. To give these lads the party they deserve. And, hopefully, to see this stunning season out with some silverware. Josh Sexton is editor of The Anfield Wrap