The former Wigan coach Shaun Wane is interested in succeeding David Furner at Leeds Rhinos after the eight-time Super League champions parted company with the Australian on Monday, the Guardian understands. Furner was sacked by Leeds just six months into his role with the club, following a dismal start to the season which has seen the Rhinos win only four of their first 14 league games. They lie 10th, two points clear of bottom-placed London Broncos, and are now on the hunt for a third permanent coach in less than a year. Wane, who left Wigan at the end of last season after guiding them to another Super League title, is understood to be keen on speaking to Leeds if the opportunity arises. Wane won every available domestic trophy in the game during a glittering seven-year stint in charge of his hometown club, before leaving at the end of last year to take up an opportunity with the Scottish Rugby Union. He is still in that role, but made no secret of his desire to return to rugby league at some point in the future when he left Wigan last October. A former Leeds player during a three-year stint in the 1990s, Wane would believe he could make a significant difference at a club which appears to be in a period of transition after sustained success. The Rhinos and Wigan have shared the last four Super League titles between them, but both are struggling at the wrong end of the competition this season. “This was a very difficult decision and not one we have taken lightly,” said the Leeds director of rugby, Kevin Sinfield in announcing that Furner was leaving the club. “David was an outstanding candidate to be our coach and was my first choice for the job. Unfortunately, we have not started the season as we had all hoped and action was needed to move in a fresh direction with this group of players this season.” The former Hull and Wakefield coach, Richard Agar – who acted as Furner’s assistant in the weeks prior to his dismissal – will take interim charge for Saturday’s Challenge Cup tie against Bradford Bulls. Leeds have insisted they are in no rush to appoint a permanent successor to Furner but the ex-Cronulla coach, Shane Flanagan, is another who has already been linked to the role. None the less, Wane’s interest in succeeding Furner would likely make him one of the frontrunners.