This review contains spoilers for the final episode of Line of Duty series five By episode three of the latest series of Line of Duty (BBC One) – its fifth, written as always by creator Jed Mercurio – the feeling was dawning that this one was … whisper it … not quite up to snuff. The two most compelling features of the fantastically popular and admired show have always been: a stunning central performance by a guest actor (Thandie Newton last time, Keeley Hawes in a career-defining turn over the two before that); and tension so great that the general viewing sensation is most akin to being gripped by the throat and shaken, as a dog does a rat, until it decides to let go. The former was still there. Stephen Graham put in a marvellous performance as the tunnel-visioned undercover officer, driven by his own demons and in conflict with his devotion to his young family. But the latter was not; or at least, not to anything like the same degree. At times, it seemed to be skirting the edges of parody, with its endless acronyms, ambiguous looks through glass partitions, gouts of exposition to get everyone caught up with the proliferating plot and repeated bait-and-switches. The finale clawed things back a little, mainly by concluding the greatest bait-and-switch of them all; whether Superintendent Ted Hastings (for the uninitiated, think of him as TV’s equivalent of the ravens in the Tower – if he falls, England falls) is ‘H’, the head of the corrupt network of police officers in cahoots with organised crime that AC-12 have been investigating since Line of Duty began. The truth – or ‘truth’, we should say, as there will always be those convinced that we are only at the latest turn of the rabbit hole and there is further yet to fall – was arrived at by a brace of classic LoD interrogation scenes. This time they were between Ted and DCS Patricia Carmichael (played with icy politesse by Anna Maxwell Martin). She stacked up the evidence against him. This included: his killing of the man last season who could have confirmed or denied Derek Hilton’s identity as ‘H’, his illegal Fahrenheit order to Steve to shoot John Corbett, who was possibly going to unmask him, and the bundle of used notes found in his hotel room and traced to the same source as the bribes given by the organised crime syndicate to other officers. At first it looks as though his legal counsel, Gill Biggeloe (Polly Walker), who has inserted herself into the situation – as she is wont to do – has saved him. But then it emerges that Ted’s DNA has been found on Corbett’s corpse. It is not looking good for our hero, especially as Carmichael has also linked him to Corbett’s mother, who was murdered in the Troubles for being an informant for Ted during his days with the RUC. The cavalry, Kate and Steve, arrive – as cavalry is wont to do – in the nick of time and save Ted from time in the nick. The last 10 minutes which, given the fragmented state of national viewing habits these multi-platform days I shall not detail further here, provide the answers we have been panting for and a twist (and twist of the knife) as deeply satisfying as any in AC-12’s history. Nevertheless, it is impossible to shake the sense that it has overall been a lacklustre experience. A placeholder episode can be forgivable (though even that would be a big hurdle in something only six instalments long) but this has felt like a placeholder season. Episodes have too often trodden water for the bulk of their hour and given us a flurry of excitement in the last five minutes; a cheap trick to get viewers tuning in next time, where once you couldn’t have torn yourself away at any point. There has been almost none of the mingling of detectives’ professional and private lives and entangled storylines that have given previous seasons their heart, which has left the audience uninvolved and actors Martin Compston and Vicky McClure woefully underused. Previous Line of Duty stories have depended on tiny moments – deciding to help a girlfriend out of a legal grey area, agreeing to avenge an abused child, panicking when faced with a ghost from your past, failing to stand up to a boss – whose ramifications build into something terrible. They have always asked questions about morality, conscience and the constant vigilance needed to guard against the decay of both and the casting of others’ malevolent seed on that marshy, receptive mental ground. The latest has lost some of that delicate psychical work (and some of the plotting was verging on the contemptuous), but at least the ravens are still in the Tower. For now. For now.