Famed golf instructor Hank Haney apologized on Wednesday for disparaging remarks he made about LPGA tour players on his daily SiriusXM radio show. Haney, who rose to fame as Tiger Woods’ swing coach, made a series of tone-deaf jokes when asked by co-host Steve Johnson about the US Women’s Open that starts on Thursday at the Country Club of Charleston. “I’m gonna predict a Korean [will win],” Haney said. “That’s a pretty safe bet,” Johnson replied. “That’s gonna be my prediction. I couldn’t name you, like, six players on the LPGA Tour,” Haney said, before adding: “Well, I’d go with Lee. If I didn’t have to name a first name, I’d get a bunch of them right. I don’t know. ... Lexi Thompson. ... Michelle Wie’s hurt. I don’t know that many.” Wie, the 2014 US Women’s Open champion who is out of this week’s tournament due to a wrist injury, was among many golf insiders to criticize Haney’s attempt at humor on social media. As a Korean American female golfer, these comments that @HankHaney made disappoint and anger me on so many different levels. Racism and sexism are no laughing matter Hank....shame on you. I don’t ever do this, but this must be called out. https://t.co/P18JByTosN Too many of these girls, Korean or not, have worked countless hours and sacrificed so much to play in the US Open this week. There are so many amazing players in the field. Let’s celebrate them....Not mock them. @HankHaney https://t.co/YB25Bl9zoC Haney, 63, apologized for his comments later Wednesday on Twitter. “This morning I made some comments about women’s golf and its players that were insensitive and that I regret,” Haney wrote. “In an effort to make a point about the overwhelming success of Korean players on the tour I offended people and I am sorry. I have the highest respect for the women who have worked so hard to reach the pinnacle of their sport and I never meant to take away from their abilities and accomplishments. “I’ve worked in this game with men and women players from many different cultures and I look forward to continuing to do so.”