With reference to George Monbiot’s piece (Bullying and intimidation dominate the UK countryside, 1 May), the problem is land ownership per se. Historically, land which was gifted by nature has been forcefully appropriated into private ownership by a ruling minority who subsequently deny access to the majority. Land ownership is the key capital asset to the generation and distribution of money wealth, which has led to the polarisation of society into owners and workers, rich and poor. This maldistribution of wealth can only be addressed by returning land to the principle of the commons. Freehold could then become a form of leasehold with the rent generated being distributed in the form of a citizens’ dividend in return for their loss of access. Wildlife could also be compensated by restoring natural habitat and denying guns and shooters.John StoneThames Ditton, Surrey • I am sure I do not have to remind George Monbiot that the situation in Scotland, as far as public access to land is concerned, is much different from (and better than) in England. Under the Land Reform Act Scotland 2003, everyone has access rights as long as they are exercised responsibly. Landowners may only refuse public access if exemptions are granted, for a clearly defined range of reasons – health and safety, legitimate industrial or transport operations, or legally agreed privacy. There are, of course, challenges to these rights, and not infrequent court cases. The full rights and responsibilities of land users and land owners can be seen in the comprehensive Scottish Outdoor Access Code – visit www.outdooraccess-scotland.com.Rose HarvieDumbarton • George Monbiot is right that the treatment of our land is a vital issue for our time, and though I believe it’s unfair to generalise that “Britain’s countryside is dominated by bullies”, it is important that those who own land are held to account both now and after we leave the EU. That’s why Ramblers are campaigning for the new agriculture bill (which will replace the EU’s common agricultural policy after Brexit) to improve people’s access to the countryside. As George states, landowners currently receive subsidies by the hectare. Any new agriculture bill must make clear that landowners should only receive payments from the public purse if they fulfil their existing range of legal duties regarding the protection of public rights of way – which include keeping routes clear of obstruction and maintaining stiles and gates. Crucially, this is not an issue of urban versus rural, but of cherishing nature and everyone’s right to access it.Tompion PlattDirector of advocacy and engagement, The Ramblers • Stowe- and Oxford-educated George Monbiot accuses me of being “an Etonian landowner”, as if that disqualifies me from public debate. But really, as George and I are now both in our mid-50s, do we need still to reference our educations? More seriously, he accuses me of bullying Chris Packham. But is it really bullying to ask the BBC to enforce its own editorial guidelines on impartiality? Packham is well compensated by licence fee payers, so this is not entirely “free speech”. And, for the record, I do not condone the actions of the idiot who hung two dead birds on the gates of Packham’s country estate.Jamie BlackettDumfries, Dumfries and Galloway • RSPB vice-president Chris Packham is presumably unaware that his own organisation has killed 784 crows on their reserves to protect the nests of vulnerable species, or he might not have been in such a hurry to persuade Natural England to suspend the legal mechanism that permits them, and other conservationists, to do so. Since predation is now considered the main factor driving the decline of species such as the curlew, with 70% of nests failing across Europe, perhaps George Monbiot might like to reflect on who is bullying whom, as this vital conservation work is suspended right in the middle of the nesting season.Andrew GilruthDirector of communications, Game and Wildlife Conservation Trust • I read George Monbiot’s article on the rural ruling classes with my springer spaniel, Stella, by my side. She indicated, I believe, that she and the majority of the breed would not wish to be judged by the sad minority held captive by the said rural ruling classes.Gerry EmmansEdinburgh • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition