I am a great admirer of Greta Thunberg and a committed participant in Extinction Rebellion (XR), but I have doubts about her call for adults to join a worldwide strike for the climate in September (Young people are fighting for our future. But we need help, 24 May). UK law protects participants in industrial action against dismissal by their employers only if they are members of unions complying with strict procedures and taking the action as part of a trade dispute with employers. Climate strikers will not be protected, which is likely to deter (quite reasonably) many otherwise supportive workers and skew the demographic profile of participants in favour of those in secure, flexible employment and the self-employed. This risks encouraging the impression that action on climate change is both less widely supported than it really is, and in any case only a liberal, middle-class concern rather than a non-party-political global emergency. Such impressions play into the hands of climate sceptics and the powerful interests behind them. XR’s international rebellion in April was sustained by participants who came when they were able, using annual leave and turning out in the biggest numbers during the weekends and bank holidays. We were discouraged from risking arrest unless we could afford the consequences; most participants could not and so contributed in other ways. By contrast, calling a general climate strike creates a dilemma for many workers between showing their support for climate action and risking jobs that they can ill afford to lose. The youth strikers are principled and courageous, but their strikes are not likely to cost them their livelihoods. The urgency of the need for action on climate change and ecosystem collapse calls for desperate measures. But I fear that calling a general strike in September will weaken the cause, not strengthen it.Tom SinclairOxford • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here