The Northampton director of rugby, Chris Boyd, is full of those Kiwi metaphors that can make the game seem frustratingly simple considering how well his countrymen play it. Explaining how he has put Northampton on an upward curve in his first season in charge, and done so with no little style, he says: “You have a set of cattle, the opposition have got a set of cattle and you try to work out where your advantage might be.” His point is that his cattle are not as big or powerful as, say Saracens or Saturday’s opponents Exeter, but you sense that is how Boyd would prefer it. He is one of the most engaging directors of rugby around and talks of how he often debates with Dan Biggar the merits of eschewing possession in favour of defence – as Wales tend to do – but concluding that, “I really battle with the idea of being happier with the other team having the ball than yourselves. It just doesn’t sit comfortably with me.” Moreover, he lets his players make mistakes without fear of reprisal and nowhere has it paid off more than in the emergence of Rory Hutchinson. The 23-year-old centre began the season injured and in the final year of his contract. He returned to fitness fighting for his future but after an irresistible run of form since February – taking Northampton to the brink of the play-offs – he has been called up to Scotland’s World Cup training squad. Upon taking the job Boyd saw talent in abundance in him but someone equally error prone so it is to the New Zealander’s great credit that he has allowed Hutchinson to develop in the heat of battle, just as it is hard to imagine the previous management being so forgiving. “Chris says we play a high-risk game and we will have those moments when we have the odd interception but those are the risks we take and 80% of the time it works for us,” says Hutchinson. “Chris described it to me like a set of scales with your attack and defence where you need to even them out. He said that mistakes are going to happen if you have the ball a lot so it is just a case of limiting those mistakes and making the right decisions.” If a licence to play has been key to Hutchinson’s breakthrough, both coach and player believe there is a bit more to it that. Boyd sees a trend emerging where crash-ball centres are no longer the only solution to breaking down destructive defences. Hutchinson is only 5ft 9ins and only 90kg but can pick defences apart rather than trampling over them. “If you were not winning the battle up front and line speed was prohibiting getting the ball to the edge then the solution was to play through the middle,” adds Boyd. “The historical solution to that was picking Manu Tuilagi, Ma’a Nonu or another big guy and they truck the ball through the middle and then you can play off both edges. The thinking now is that you can play through the middle of the field now through skill as well as size. Rory Hutchinson is capable of getting you across the advantage line as much as a big guy because he has good such good footwork and such good hands. His skillset is far more suited to the southern hemisphere because he is a high-risk player.” Hutchinson, who had made just four appearances for Northampton in the previous two seasons before Boyd arrived, agrees. “It is the way the game is changing. You see teams not going straight up the middle now. You have your forwards to get you over the gainline and your backs to get the ball out wide to your wings. My instinct is to go around rather than over or use my distributing players to manipulate players.” It is a trait that has not gone unnoticed by Gregor Townsend, who was first in contact with Hutchinson around the time of Northampton’s east Midlands derby win over Leicester in mid-March, in which the 23-year-old starred. He is no stranger to the Scotland set-up, having made 20 appearances for the under-20s and while he is eligible for England until Townsend caps him, he is not about to switch allegiances any time soon, admitting that he thought his World Cup chances were over when a knee injury struck on the eve of the season. “I wanted to play for Scotland. I don’t know where I would be right now if it wasn’t for the Exiles set-up, Scotland Under-18s and Under-20s. I went to the Junior World Cup with Scotland. They gave me the time of day and since then I’ve always wanted to play with Scotland.”