Joe Root has revisited his responsibilities as England’s one-day anchor before the World Cup after admitting he got slightly carried away during the recent ODI series victory against Pakistan. There is little doubt the right‑hander has been central to the four-year revival under Eoin Morgan’s captaincy, chiefly operating as an orthodox No 3 who provides the stability from which his more aggressive teammates can attack. He has flourished in this position too, so much so that since the previous World Cup only Virat Kohli and Rohit Sharma of India can better his 3,498 ODI runs. The Yorkshireman has averaged 58 during this time and hardly been a slouch either, with a strike-rate of 91 comparing favourably to others in the same position. But while scores of 40, 43, 36 and 84 during the 4-0 win against Pakistan appear perfectly acceptable on paper, Root was not entirely pleased with his performances in the middle. His conclusion? Leave the power-hitting to others and put the team’s needs first. “Personally, I was probably a little bit too experimental and trying to play in a manner that didn’t suit myself or the team,” said Root. “It was actually a very good reminder going into the tournament that on occasions I should rein it in a bit and not get too giddy when guys like Jonny Bairstow, Jason Roy and Jos Buttler are flying at the other end.” This self-critique relates chiefly to Root’s role, which he views as a balance between keeping the scoreboard ticking over and yet eliminating risk. Shot selection is the key, with the reverse paddles he produced at Headingley, for example, a better way to go than trying to brutalise the ball in the style of others. He said: “The [paddle shot] doesn’t feel that risky. I think trying to hit the left-arm spinner Imad Wasim over mid-off five times in two games - and nearly get out four times to it - is a bit dumb really and it’s not what I’m about in that format. “My balance is knowing how to pace it and not feel like I’m leaving someone else too much to do. Or similarly not going too early and leaving the guys in a position where they have got to bat too long before they can give it a good clout at the end.” Overall, Root believes England have become a smarter batting unit of late. They are, of course, light on squad depth in this department, with the reserve James Vince boasting just one half-century – a far cry from Alex Hales, who despite six ODI hundreds to his name was dropped for failing a second recreational drug test last month. Hales was in London on Wednesday for this year’s Caribbean Premier League draft, becoming the first player signed when the Barbados Tridents secured his services for £125,000. The 30-year-old declined to comment on his absence from the World Cup bar stating “the guys deserve to win it”, pledging his support for the squad and insisting he will push for a return in the future. Root was speaking at the launch of England’s new pastel-blue World Cup kit which, as the host side, they will wear throughout the tournament. That is not the case for all teams, however, with this the first 50-over World Cup in which away shirts will be worn where colour clashes arise. Of the 10 teams featuring in the round-robin group stage, four – England, India, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka – typically play in blue, while there are three – Pakistan, South Africa and Bangladesh – that have green as their traditional main colour. It means India, whose home colour is royal blue, are due to wear an away kit for their blockbuster match with England at Edgbaston on 30 June. The Guardian understands the as-yet unveiled shirt has a dark blue front, with the shoulders, sleeves and the back of the shirt a bright orange. Sri Lanka and South Africa will play in yellow away kits when required, while those for Bangladesh and Afghanistan are red. The nature of Pakistan’s second strip is yet to be confirmed, although they are the “home” team for the group games against Bangladesh and South Africa. West Indies (maroon), New Zealand (black) and Australia (canary yellow) face no such clashes.