Prodigies abound in tennis but there was no denying proven class on Court Manolo Santana on Wednesday as the 32-year-old Rafael Nadal quelled the clamour growing around the Canadian teenager Felix Auger-Aliassime and moved into the third round of the Madrid Open, a tournament he has won five times. Auger-Aliassime, who helped his country beat Germany in Madrid in the junior Davis Cup final four years ago, soaked up the early pressure, then put perhaps too much faith in his booming ground strokes as he racked up 30 unforced errors. He fought doggedly to save five match points but, after an hour and 37 minutes, Nadal prevailed 6-3, 6-3. Moving with zest and ripping his forehand, Nadal eased concerns about a stomach bug and his stuttering clay season before his next challenge, Frances Tiafoe, who is moving on from prodigy class and who had too much for the veteran Philipp Kohlschreiber over three sets on Court 5. “It’s been a tough few days with the stomach virus,” Nadal said immediately afterwards. “He’s a great opponent and will be a great player.” As for Tiafoe, he said: “Frances is electric and fast, can play very aggressive.” Stefanos Tsitsipas, the No 8 seed, spoke up for youth when he beat the 30-year-old Frenchman Adrian Mannarino, 10 years his senior, 6-2, 7-5, and elsewhere there was gathering gloom for the 30-year-old Juan Martín del Potro on a grey day, when the improving young Serb Laslo Djere bided his time in a fascinating three-setter to beat the injury-hit Argentinian 6-3, 2-6, 7-5, his second top-10 scalp. Kei Nishikori, 29 and never far from the physio’s table, looked fit and strong downing rank outsider Hugo Dellien 7-5, 7-5, although he wasted a swag of his 24 break points, and said: “It’s something to work on.” A day after breaking Johanna Konta’s clay stride, Simona Halep ignored a lingering cold to inflict a double bagel on the 20-year-old Viktoria Kuzmova, winning 80 of the 100 contested points. “I think it was the best match that I have ever had,” Halep said of a 48-12 points differential. The Romanian, who first played here nine years ago and has won the title twice, remains on schedule for a semi-final against the world No 1, Naomi Osaka, who had to work a little harder to beat Aliaksandra Sasnovich 6-2, 6-3 in an hour and 23 minutes on Court Manolo Santana. It reflects Osaka’s growing clout at the gate that she got the main stage on clay ahead of Halep, the reigning French Open champion, and the scoreline suggests the schedulers made the right call. Osaka declared her recovering abdominal strain “fine”. To get to Osaka, Halep must beat the world No 9, Ashleigh Barty, who won her 11th match in a row in dousing the challenge of Yulia Putintseva 4-6, 6-1, 6-2 on Court 4. It will be centre court or bust for Halep or Barty from here to the weekend. Osaka clarified the impression she gave in a recent interview that she is wary of the grass of Wimbledon. “I’m kind of not giving it a fair chance,” she said. “It’s usually because the first tournament I play I’m really nervous on it. I don’t like moving because it scares me. “But then, by the time Wimbledon comes around, I’m fine on it. And then I get, like, pretty good with my serve. But the last two Wimbledons I played, I lost in the third round and the people [she lost to, Venus Williams and Angelique Kerber] made it to the finals, so I was sad. It’s just kind of me being a little bit bratty, but I guess I’ll see what happens this year.”