Languages teachers have known for a long time that GCSE and A-level exams have been subject to harder marking criteria than other subjects. They’ve also known that students find languages more difficult than most other subjects they study. So your report won’t come as a surprise to them (Tough exams ‘are killing off language learning in schools’, 11 May). However, having just returned to the classroom after a 25-year break, it has struck me that it’s not just the perceived difficulty of learning a language that has contributed to the decline in language take-up. It’s also the obsession with testing and assessment and the ever-earlier focus on acquiring GCSE “skills” (essentially exam preparation techniques) from an early age. As soon as students enter school at 11 it’s made clear to them that the overriding reason they are in school is to acquire GCSEs and how vital it is to start preparing for them – exams that are five distant years away, almost another third of their life. This comes at the expense of engendering an enjoyment of the subject. The USP of languages is that they are different from any other subject on the curriculum. Yet they suffer the same dreary subjugation to GCSE task types, mark schemes and grade boundaries as all the rest. A radical reappraisal of the way languages are taught is their only hope for revival and, in the case of some languages, survival. After all, if students know they’re learning a subject that’s going to be harder to get a good grade in, what else is left to encourage them to take up a language other than sheer enjoyment of the subject?Trevor StevensOxford • As a teacher of French currently working in a secondary school, I would not disagree with the sentiments expressed in your article on the perceived threat to modern languages teaching in this country and accompanying letter (11 May), though I would nuance and extend them. It is not simply the harshness of the marking in public examinations that causes language-learners difficulties, but also the perverse pernicketiness of many of the tasks pupils are required to undertake (pernicketiness that many native speakers of the language find bizarre and difficult to navigate). More depressing, however, is the crashing banality of the content of most of the language courses offered in schools: in their desperate (and misguided) pursuit of what young people find “relevant” and “exciting”, shackled to the requirement to deliver the government’s eye-rollingly tedious programme for healthy, upright living, the writers of exam board specifications have also emptied the courses of any engaging intellectual content and any requirement that the pupils truly engage with the culture of the countries whose languages they are learning. The real surprise is that any pupils at all choose to continue with a modern language at school beyond the point to which it is compulsory.Peregrine RandGodalming, Surrey • As a professional linguist, I totally disagree with the 152 academics who recommend making modern language exams easier or marking them more leniently. Learning a foreign language is by its nature a difficult enterprise and that should surely be reflected in the examinations by which pupils are tested. Similar arguments could no doubt be deployed in relation to, say, physics or chemistry, which may well be even harder subjects to master, but if effort is needed to obtain a solid grounding either in a language or in any other discipline, so be it. I am surprised to see eminent academics arguing in favour of making inherently difficult subjects ostensibly easier. Might your correspondents actually be deprecating the need for effort?Philip SlotkinHampstead, London • The problem of the decline of language-learning in schools is disturbing. The fact remains, however, that many languages are difficult to learn. One solution, therefore, would be to revive the GCSE that used to be offered in the easiest language spoken throughout the world – Esperanto. Whether one wants to use it to communicate with the millions of speakers around the world or as a springboard to learn other languages, its merits should not be overlooked.Professor Geoffrey GreatrexDepartment of Classics and Religious Studies, University of Ottawa • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition