Edward Bramson’s defeat at Barclays was heavy. Only 13% of voting shareholders thought the activist deserved a seat on the board. At 25% or so, Bramson would have been able to claim a moral victory of sorts. Instead, the City establishment rallied round the board of an establishment bank. It was the way to bet. But let’s give Bramson his due: he had Barclays rattled for a while. The evidence is the speed at which events have moved since Bramson’s Sherborne fund turned up a year ago with its 5.5% stake. For starters, John McFarlane called an end to his idiosyncratic chairmanship. That was meant to happen anyway, but the guitar-strumming veteran always gave the impression he would happily volunteer an encore. As it was, Barclays named Nigel Higgins as chairman in November, allowing everyone to agree the well-connected new leader should be given time without a member of the awkward squad in the boardroom. Fund managers like such comfort blankets. More significantly, Tim Throsby, the head of Barclays investment bank – the division in Bramson’s sights – was ousted in March. That was embarrassing for the Barclays chief executive, Jes Staley, since he hired Throsby with much fanfare only two years ago. Whatever the reason for the fallout, Staley is clearly not in a mood to take personnel risks now the stakes are higher. Bramson aired similar observations before the annual meeting on Thursday. Fair enough. He could have added that a “disruptive” figure, as Barclays labelled him, might not be such a dreadful idea given the cosy tone in the boardroom over the past couple of decades. Read Philip Augar’s modern history of Barclays, The Bank That Lived a Little, to see how non-executives were dazzled and bamboozled by slick bankers in the past. The outcome of the first Barclays v Bramson showdown, then, is a big win for the bank. But the debate has shifted a little: if the share price is still a miserable 164p a year from now, Staley might feel some proper heat. But, on the subject of the share price, Bramson’s own backers might have questions. To make serious money from this adventure, Sherborne needs Barclays’ shares to trade closer to their net asset value of 266p. Even an electrified Staley will struggle to deliver that in short order. There must have been juicier targets for Bramson to attack. We’re enjoying the sport, but why bother with Barclays? Here’s a good parliamentary question from Andy McDonald, the shadow transport secretary: “To ask the secretary of state for transport whether FirstGroup has met his department’s criteria on railway pensions as a shortlisted bidder for the West Coast Partnership rail franchise.” The relevance is the almighty row that has erupted on the railways after Stagecoach was disqualified from three bidding competitions for the East Midlands, South Eastern and West Coast franchises. On Wednesday, Stagecoach set out the reasons why it submitted “non-compliant” bids, as the Department for Transport puts it. In short, it didn’t want to run the risk of being clobbered with “unknowable” pensions liabilities that it fears could run to a sum “well in excess of £1bn”. Stagecoach has more motivation than most bidders to take a prudent view of risks after its calamity on the east coast line, which was a simpler case of overbidding. But its analysis of the pensions position is powerful: it says franchisees could be forced to fund part of the multibillion deficit in the industry-wide pension scheme that was previously assumed to be underwritten by government. In theory, such risks should look the same viewed from all boardrooms, or at least at private-sector operators. Thus the spotlight has fallen on FirstGroup. If you’re a shareholder, surely you’d want solid reassurance that it’s safe to proceed since, on Stagecoach’s calculations, the potential pensions liability on the West Coast franchise would be £702m, which is serious money. FirstGroup can’t mutter a meaningful word under the usual confidentiality clauses, but the position is bizarre. One public company thinks the DfT’s bidding terms could be ruinous. Another, apparently, is happy. It makes no sense. Craig Donaldson, the chief executive of Metro Bank, says “2019 is a year of transition”. You bet. So far, the “challenger” bank has transitioned from a £16 share price to 650p, and that’s before a planned £350m fundraising is priced. The root cause is a cock-up that led Metro to place £900m of loans into the wrong risk bracket, which we now learn prompted a few “large commercial and partnership customers” to pull deposits. Some transitioning in Metro’s boardroom might help restore some much-needed credibility. No sign of it yet, though.