The Italian Vincenzo Nibali took full advantage of his knowledge of the terrain to unsettle his main Giro d’Italia rival Primoz Roglic in the 15th stage on Sunday. On the roads of one of his favourite hunting grounds, the Tour of Lombardy, the double Giro champion attacked during a steep climb near the end to pull away from the Slovenian Roglic, who lost 40 seconds after crashing in the descent towards the finish. The 232-kilometre stage from Ivrea was won by the breakaway rider Dario Cataldo of Italy but the real action was just behind as Roglic, riding a teammate’s bike following a mechanical problem, could not follow Nibali’s attack in the ascent up to the Civiglio. Ecuador’s Richard Carapaz retained the overall lead and now appears as a strong contender for the title. He matched the Sicilian’s pace and finished with him after being distanced for a brief amount of time in the descent. Simon Yates, who had lost considerable ground in the individual time trial last Sunday, looked fresh as the Briton attacked three times in the stage to end up with Nibali and Carapaz. Roglic, however, was the big loser on the day, going straight into a safety railguard in the descent from the Civiglio. The Jumbo-Visma rider’s lead over Nibali and his self-confidence are now dented. Overall, Carapaz of the Movistar team leads Roglic by 47sec and Nibali by 1:47 going into the second rest day on Monday. Tuesday’s 16th stage is a potential turning point in the race as it features the gruelling ascent of the Mortirolo pass, even if the climb up the equally demanding Gavia pass has been cancelled because of avalanche risks. Stage 15 Ivrea to Como, 232 km 1 Dario Cataldo (ITA) Astana Pro Team 5:48:15 2 Mattia Cattaneo (ITA) Androni Giocattoli - Sidermec 3 Simon Yates (GBR) Mitchelton - Scott +11 4 Hugh Carthy (GBR) EF Education First  5 Richard Carapaz (ECU) Movistar Team 6 Vincenzo Nibali (ITA) Bahrain - Merida 7 Miguel Ángel López (COL) Astana Pro Team +36 8 Rafal Majka (POL) BORA - hansgrohe  9 Domenico Pozzovivo (ITA) Bahrain - Merida 10 Mikel Landa (ESP) Movistar Team General classification1 Richard Carapaz (ECU) Movistar Team 64:24:00 2 Primoz Roglic (SLO) Team Jumbo - Visma +47 3 Vincenzo Nibali (ITA) Bahrain - Merida +1:47 4 Rafal Majka (POL) BORA - hansgrohe +2:35 5 Mikel Landa (ESP) Movistar Team +3:15 6 Bauke Mollema (NED) Trek - Segafredo +3:38 7 Jan Polanc (SLO) UAE Team Emirates +4:12 8 Simon Yates (GBR) Mitchelton - Scott +5:24 9 Pavel Sivakov (RUS) Team INEOS +5:48 10 Miguel Ángel López (COL) Astana Pro Team +5:55