Entering the world of girlband Blackpink – K-Pop’s second biggest export behind the juggernaut BTS – involves huge of investment, of both money and time. Tickets are upwards of £100, while at the venue queues snake outside way past the projected 8pm start and others curl out from merch stands selling, among other things, £30 light sticks that look like heart-shaped pink gavels. Instead of a support act, the pre-show warm-up is simply a playlist of the band’s lavish videos (YouTube views currently stand at more than 6bn), some of which feature the tour’s sponsor, Kia, which is later awkwardly namechecked on stage. The mention is cheered as hysterically as anything that comes out of the mouths of Jennie, Jisoo, Lisa or Rosé, with the screams almost drowning out a frenetic opening salvo featuring shape-shifting trap banger Ddu-Du Ddu-Du (performed again during the encore via a PC Music-esque remix), and the EDM-adjacent Forever Young. By the time the jaunty Whistle snaps shut we’ve been treated to every glorious X Factor-performance gimmick, from tickertape to guffs of smoke. Unfortunately, just four songs in, the momentum stalls as the show transforms into Korea’s Got Talent. In K-pop, perhaps to help maintain the brand, band members are often encouraged to go solo, even if it’s just for five minutes. So Rosé covers the Beatles’ Let It Be, Lisa (the band’s true star) dances to Jason Derulo’s Swalla, Jisoo wails through Zedd’s Clarity while perched on crushed disco balls and Jennie performs her own solo single, Solo (key lyric: “I’m going solo”). It’s a blessed relief when they reunite for futuristic military anthem Kill This Love – but while its accompanying video is an expensive visual feast, its performance here it feels disappointingly basic, with the four backing dancers doing their best to fill the stage. While there are brilliant moments throughout – the effervescent Dua Lipa collaboration Kiss and Make Up and a riotous Boombayah, in which the band’s precision-engineered choreography is loosened up – the overall feeling is of a missed opportunity. K-pop, in all its bold and beautiful belligerence, runs in contrast to western pop’s emotional insularity. But this show doesn’t take enough risks. Blackpink have the world at their feet – they just have a to give a little more back.