In the example clues below, I explain the two parts of each: the definition of the answer, given in bold type and the wordplay – the recipe for assembling its letters. In a genuine puzzle environment, of course, you also have the crossing letters, which will greatly alleviate your solving load if you have them. The explanations contain links to previous entries in this series on such matters as spelling one word backwards to reveal another. And setters’ names tend to link to interviews, in case you feel like getting to know these people better. A large amount of cryptic cluing involves moving letters around. Sometimes, though, the setter won’t call that an anagram. If you’re writing one word backwards to find another, the clue will make it easier for by telling you that you’re not just jumbling the letters willy-nilly. The cycling clue is similarly kind, but easier to miss if you’re not aware of the device. Here’s this paper’s Picaroon … 23dn Cycling French novelist? Certainly not! (5)[wordplay: surname of a ‘French novelist’ with final letters moving to first (‘cycling’)][VERNE with NE moving to front][definition: certainly not] … where VERNE “cycles” to NEVER. In a very similar vein, here’s Nutmeg: 23d German, who drew back when cycling (5)[wordplay: synonym for ‘back’ with final three letters moving to the front (‘cycling’)][STERN with ERN moving to front][definition: surname of a German artist (‘German, who drew’)] This time, we end up – rather than start – with the name of the cultural figure (ERNST), and the definition is a little more hidden, but it’s the same operation. We have cycled less than half, then more than half of a word. In the next clue, almost the whole thing cycles to the front. See if you can solve it before reading the explanation: 23d Aches from cycling round EU country (5)[wordplay: name of ‘EU country’ with final four letters moving to the front (‘cycling round’)][SPAIN with PAIN moving to the front][definition: ‘aches’] The setter is Wanderer, and we put almost all of SPAIN at the front (alternatively, we put only the initial S at the back) to get PAINS. Perhaps because this is a rarer device, it’s not usually combined with others. Morph asks for a combination here … 17d Greek ruin pleasant when cycling (8)[wordplay: fancy word for ‘ruin’ + synonym for ‘pleasant’ with final letter moving to the front (‘cycling’)][HELL + NICE with E moving to the front][definition: Greek] … but it’s still a gentle route to HELLENIC. I haven’t come across any twists on this device, although seasoned solvers may know better, or may have favourites to offer. Beginners: any questions?