Simona Halep is playing well enough to win a third title here, reaching her fourth semi-final in nine visits with a naggingly precise serve that drained even the combative spirit of Ashleigh Barty, whose run of 11 wins on the spin ended on Court Manolo Santana. The Romanian now has an equally formidable task to get past the tenacious Swiss Belinda Bencic on Friday, and she has the added incentive of reclaiming her world No 1 place from Naomi Osaka – who lost in three sets to Bencic – if she wins the final on Saturday. Halep’s 7-5, 7-5 win over Barty was payback for the reigning French Open champion and world No 3, whose charge at the title in Sydney was stopped by the Australian in January. Halep on Thursday was formidable with ball in hand, winning 87% of her first serves, not far behind the tournament leader in that category, Petra Kvitova, giving her a bedrock of consistency the stubborn world No 9 struggled to counter. The match was close throughout, Halep breaking and then returning the favour immediately in each set, before finding the weapons to get over the line. “It’s a huge victory,” she said. “It was very difficult and every point was important. I tried to stay calm. Sometimes I tried to force it and I missed. With her, you have to keep the ball on court and try to mix it up, like she does.” Barty’s breakback in the second set was by way of an outrageous drop shot, and Halep remarked, “At that point I was so frustrated, but I know that she does these things, because she is very talented.” Bencic looked down and gone towards the end of her quarter-final against Osaka but conjured a 3-6, 6-2, 7-5 win in a memorable fight over two hours and 11 minutes. It was her 25th win and fourth semi-final of the season. She will take some stopping, having beaten four top-tenners on the way to the third title of her career, in Dubai earlier this year. “It was very difficult. I didn’t have much rhythm early on. I’m very relieved,” she said courtside. In a quarter-final that tingled more nerve endings than even the first one, Osaka, who has been struggling with injury, broke in the fourth game, only to hand it back straight away. She broke again for 5-3, when Bencic botched a return, and aced to take the set in 36 minutes. As the afternoon shadows crept on to the court, the match swung back towards Bencic, who broke to 30 at the start of the second set and levelled comfortably. There was little in the decider until Osaka broke and held to love; the match looked hers to lose. She dragged Bencic into a deuce struggle with a couple of belting forehands into unattended corners, but the world No 18, one of the game’s toughest competitors, stayed in the fight, then broke to love and held to lead 6-5. Osaka, who was warned for racket abuse, settled herself on the changeover but not enough to still the nerves in her backhand, despondent as her final shot struck the net.