James Haskell, who has endured an injury-plagued campaign with Northampton this campaign, has announced he will retire at the end of the season. The 34-year-old flanker earned 77 caps for England, which included appearing at two World Cups and collecting three Six Nations titles, including a Grand Slam in 2016. He had a stellar career at Wasps, where he made over 200 appearances in a 12-year career, splitting two spells at the club with stints at Stade Français, Ricoh Black Rams, and the Highlanders, before joining Northampton last year. “I have loved every minute of my career in rugby and feel very privileged to have played with and against some exceptional players,” said Haskell. “Retiring is obviously a really difficult decision for me to make – professional rugby has been the centre of my life for such a long time now and while it’s weird to imagine living without it, I look to the future with huge excitement.” He paid tribute to those who had helped him in his illustrious career while acknowledging the disappointment of his time with Northampton. Haskell said: “There are so many people to thank, but in particular I would like to express my appreciation for all the coaches, trainers and physios who I have worked with throughout my career – from Maidenhead minis all the way up to England and the British & Irish Lions, I owe them all a huge debt of gratitude. “My thanks go out to the supporters here at Northampton Saints too who have welcomed me with open arms. I wish I’d been able to offer more on the field this season. This next chapter was supposed to go a very different way, however that is the nature of professional sport. I’ve never spent so much time injured in my entire career, but I’m doing everything I can to help the squad here until my contract ends.” Haskell toured New Zealand in 2017 with the British & Irish Lions, playing against a Hurricanes side that was then led by Northampton’s director of rugby Chris Boyd. Commenting on Haskell’s decision, Boyd said: “James has had a tough time with injuries this season and not run out for Saints as often as he’d like, but despite that he’s had a huge impact here and is an invaluable member of the squad. He has been a wonderful servant to the English game and I’ve no doubt he’ll be just as successful in his retirement.” England head coach Eddie Jones also paid tribute to Haskell’s career. “When I look back at my time coaching James, it will always bring a smile to my face,” he said. “It was a privilege to coach him, but also great fun. He’s what I’d describe as a ‘glue’ player – someone who always tries to bring a squad together. His tour to Australia in 2016 sticks in my mind. He was absolutely outstanding on that tour, amazingly physical, uncompromising and just totally dominant.” Haskell was named as the ‘man of the series’ after England’s 3-0 series victory. “Not only a superb player, but also one of the game’s great characters; rugby will be poorer without the ‘old fella’,” concluded Jones. London Irish, meanwhile, confirmed on Tuesday that Paddy Jackson will be joining the club from Perpignan next season. Jackson is well known to London Irish’s director of rugby Declan Kidney, who awarded Jackson his first international cap in 2013. “Players of the calibre of Paddy Jackson do not become available very often and both myself and [head coach] Les [Kiss] are looking forward to working with him in the future,” Kidney commented. “He is a player with proven international quality who we feel will add value to our squad, and it is pleasing that Paddy sees London Irish as a part of his future.” “I’m delighted to be joining London Irish next season at such an exciting and pivotal time for everyone involved with the club,” said Jackson. “London Irish have a clear vision for where they want to be and I look forward to being part of it.”