I simply have to go for a pint with Jack Fincham. “It’s a performance,” Jack is saying, euphoric, after a dress-rehearsal striptease in front of the baying, feral crowd at Magic Mike Live. “It’s not just getting naked in the pub and going: ‘Eyy, look at that.’” What can he be doing in the pub to make that a contextual reference? What does Jack Fincham do after two sambucas and a Foster’s top? I simply have to go for a pint with Jack Fincham. I simply … I simply have to go for a pint with Jack Fincham. Pint-drinking is an odd mood that settles over the entirety of The All New Monty: Who Bares Wins (Monday 6 May, 9pm, ITV), the third iteration of the awkwardly named, stripping-with-a-heart-of-gold charity revue. In brief: celebrities you’ve vaguely heard of learn and perform a semi-complicated Full Monty routine in aid of male cancer awareness. (This year’s all-female edition, Ladies Night, airs on Tuesday.) It’s fun, but also remember that it’s not. Other moods we tap into include abyss-staring sadness and that of being on the third day of a very tiring stag do. It’s an odd mix – cancer stories and an entire lads’ holiday saying “wahey” at once – but it sort of works. This is TV with a stink to it: of sawdusty daytime dance studios, and sweated-in jogging bottoms; of body oil and backstage frisson, and tanning lotion, and testicles being waxed, one by one. All of this is overseen, for some reason, by the odd-couple duo of Ashley Banjo (choreographer, BGT winner, the Funnest Teacher at School) and Alexander Armstrong (an, uh … intensely posh quizshow host?). It is never explicitly explained why Armstrong is there, wearing a succession of scarves indoors, watching Joe Pasquale strip. He comes across as a mad captain, demanding the soldiers beneath him lay their guns down and Velcro-rip their trousers off instead. Seeing Banjo and Armstrong interact – leaning at the edge of ice rinks; inside the purple, pounding wings of the Magic Mike stage; in the backs of various taxis – is like seeing an adult son reluctantly try to bond with his new stepdad. At any moment you feel as if Banjo’s going to go for a fistbump and Armstrong’s going to gravely shake his hand. Still, it’s all for awareness, isn’t it? One of this year’s participants, the former snooker player Willie Thorne, actually learned he had prostate cancer when he went for a checkup after watching the previous year’s show: he was still fighting the disease while trying to forward roll with Ashley Banjo yelling at him. And there are all the heartwarming-but-funny moments you need: Rav Wilding removing his officer’s hat and storming out of rehearsal after a moral crisis; Joe Pasquale’s curious arm tattoos; footage of Jason Cundy getting an anus wax that’s reminiscent of someone having a difficult birth. At the end, beaming orange and plucked and nude in front of a roaring live audience, each man holds his manhood behind a hat and breathes out. They are proud. They are noble. They have been changed. It’s beautiful, in a way. In another, more actual way, it’s very, very much not.