The age of Brexit and Trump ought to have left ironic respect for clever manipulators as dead as a rat in an OCG. Yet the most acclaimed character in Line of Duty is its writer Jed Mercurio. For all the violent realism in the Organised Crime Group, we think of Jed as much as Ted, the under suspicion superintendent, when the theme pounds; of his strategies, ticks and tricks. Our unreliable narrator is always on screen, and praised everywhere off it. “He wants us to think that Hastings is ‘H’,” we say. “That’s exactly the kind of stunt he’d pull.” We damn him for entrapping us as surely as a blackmailed copper in his plot twists and double crosses. Why, given the knowledge we are being played , have millions cheered themselves up this week with the thought that, whatever fresh hells befall us, at least the final episode of this series is on its way? Why, when the Observer’s TV editor told me on Friday that he’d seen a preview, did I turn my back on him in case the slightest twitch of an eyebrow gave away the denouement? Police officers have complained of the “negative” portrayal of a service awash with corruption. Certainly, few cases make it to court. Only five officers have been dismissed in England and Wales in the last three years. But as Line of Duty viewers would be the first to say, that’s the way “H” would want it. David Zinzan, script adviser, ex-Met commander and an inexhaustible supplier of acronyms, admitted not every scene was inspired by pure realism. He has never come across criminals storing semen-covered bodies in freezers, for instance. My take on why Line of Duty is so compelling goes beyond the acting and direction, superb though both are. Mercurio’s Britain feels real, or real enough, when you turn to it after reading about county lines and knife crime. As for the author, no writer since John le Carré has written interrogation scenes so well. Like Smiley, Fleming, Arnott and Hastings (when he’s not being interrogated himself) do not engage in histrionics or torture. Instead, they display the relentlessness of efficient bureaucracy as they politely pile up the evidence. Above all, like a cook under rationing, Mercurio wastes nothing. Whatever happens tonight, it will have had a place in his larder. Small things that seemed inconsequential – Sam’s desire to get into Arnott’s underpants, the passing mention of an investigation into drug running at an airfield, Operation Pear Tree(which came and went too quickly) – may mean everything. Say what you like about Mercurio, although he tricks us, he never cheats us. He would never do a Game of Thrones and magic up an Arya Stark to make everything OK. You’re not in Westeros any more, fella.