Wayne Routledge’s second-half equaliser denied Derby the win that would have all but booked their place in the Championship play-offs. Richard Keogh’s first-half header looked like giving Derby a three-point cushion – and healthy goal-difference advantage – over seventh-placed Middlesbrough ahead of County’s Sunday game against West Brom. Instead, Frank Lampard’s side go into the last day of the season with a one-point lead over Boro while Bristol City, a point further back, also remain in the hunt. After the game, Lampard insisted he was happy to have his team’s play-off destiny in their own hands, knowing victory at Pride Park on Sunday will secure sixth place. “It’s in our hands. If you offered me that seven or eight months ago I’d have taken it,” the Derby manager said. “The play-offs are where we want to be and it will be an achievement if we get that sixth spot,” he added. “It’s time for us to stay focused and calm behind the scenes. The fans will be excited, but we’ve got to know what the job is.” Derby established early control at the Liberty Stadium, with Bradley Johnson forcing a fine point-blank save from Kristoffer Nordfeldt before the visitors took the lead from a corner. Swansea have struggled defending set-pieces all season and were punished again when Harry Wilson’s far-post delivery was headed in off a post by Keogh. Cameron Carter-Vickers almost diverted the ball into his own net after some Mason Mount trickery, and Nordfeldt saved with his feet to deny Wilson as Derby finished the first half on top. In response, Graham Potter made two changes at the interval and switched to a back three. Declan John and Jay Fulton spurned chances before the home side levelled from a corner of their own. Oli McBurnie’s header was pushed on to a post by Kelle Roos, but Routledge was on hand to slide home his second goal in three games and extend an unbeaten home league record that stretches back to December. Keogh was injured in the build-up to the goal and could miss the West Brom game. “After the first half I’m disappointed because, if we were at fault, it was because we didn’t take the goals out of our first half performance,” Lampard said. “At half time, I rued the fact we weren’t two goals to the good.” Potter revealed after the game that contract talks are planned with 23-goal striker McBurnie. “He’s someone we’re going to speak to in the summer. He’s been great for us, great for me. A fantastic professional, a fantastic person.” On Sunday Middlesbrough are away to relegated Rotherham and Bristol City travel to Hull.