‘That’s not going in … That won’t make it in ... ” Ricky Gervais’s new standup set Supernature has already been bought by Netflix, we’re told in a characteristic bout of boasting at the start of the show. But will any of tonight’s material make it to the broadcast? Such is the line Gervais treads in this 70-minute standup set, now trumpeting his commercial credentials, now casting himself as a taboo breaker too hot for the mainstream to handle. Well, perhaps – if by mainstream we are to exclude the countless newspapers, chatshows and middle-aged male standup sets in which Gervais’s retro perspective on paedophiles, fat people and female comedians would feel perfectly at home. Gervais’s comedy draws fuel from the idea that we’re “not allowed” to say certain things any more. That everyone has a hair trigger, just waiting to be offended. The vision he conjures of a Netflix censor looming over his every joke, scissors at the ready, makes us all feel naughty and complicit, and adds to the fun. And sometimes it is fun. Not for the first time in his standup, our host delivers a homily early on about irony and offence, and why his jokes aren’t intended to hurt feelings. But more than its predecessor, Humanity – his best standup set by far – Supernature is pitched squarely in liberal-baiting territory. He hates “woke comedy”, he tells us. “I’d rather watch Louis CK masturbate.” One routine after another is designed to flout PC propriety and startle us with rudeness. There’s the one about the “Chinaman” who mixes his L’s and R’s. (Yes, really). There’s the one about Gervais wanking over a picture of baby Hitler. I’m not immune to the juvenile pleasures of a 57-year-old man (a high-status one too, as he enjoys reminding us) trading in high-grade playground mockery. In defiance of trigger-warning orthodoxy, his procedure for dealing with complaints is amusingly confrontational, and there’s a droll joke about Liam Neeson’s recent travails. But the returns diminish swiftly, and the punchlines don’t always justify the tawdriness. By his own admission, Ricky’s fantasy about becoming a butch lesbian called Vicky Gervais ends in anti-climax. Shorn of his tittering, the riff on God giving crude instructions regarding Aids would look very thin. There are richer moments, usually when the cacklesome mickey-taking cedes to something more nuanced: a spry gag about homophobia in the paedophile community; a roleplay about a jolly fat person dealing with bad news at the doctor’s. And – in a curiously assembled set – there are moments when Gervais parks the anti-woke gags entirely. A section on his pet cat (the show is ostensibly – but not really – about his love for the natural world) recalls his 2003 show Animals in its anthropomorphic comedy. A detour into his teenage experiences as a labourer promise reflections on class identity, or more personal comedy in the Humanity vein, that never materialise. Then there are the routines about a recent rectal exam and nudity in the changing rooms at the gym – neither well-worked enough to rise above the hack character of the raw material. Some jokes lead nowhere, some are throwaway, and the delinquency is as incorrigible as ever in a show that feels underdeveloped. Netflix will get the finished version, which may be less dependent on reheating old chauvinisms for comic effect. Touring until June 27. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.