Metro Bank shares plunged to all-time lows on Thursday after it revealed an accounting error contributed to a 50% drop in quarterly profits and the loss of some of its bigger customers. The challenger bank’s share price fell as much as 21% in reaction to a first-quarter earnings report published late on Wednesday. It detailed the fallout from the accounting  blunder centred on how it classifies its loan book. Metro’s chief executive, Craig Donaldson, said the bank suffered a 4% drop in deposits following an “adverse” reaction to the disclosure in January. He said a “a small number of large commercial and partnership customers” had withdrawn their funds, while pre-tax profits halved to £4.3m, from £8.6m a year earlier. The lender confirmed in January that hundreds of millions of pounds of commercial property loans and loans to commercial buy-to-let operators had been wrongly classified in risk terms and should have been among its “risk-weighted assets” . Metro is being investigated by the Financial Conduct Authority and Prudential Regulation Authority over the error. Ian Gordon, a banking analyst at Investec, said the latest earnings revealed an “awful quarter for the bank”, saying the accounting issue “continued to snowball for Metro”. Donaldson, who is giving up his £800,000 bonus over the accounting fiasco, tried to soothe markets by saying that deposits started to bounce back in April, but investors seemed wary, with shares falling to all-time lows of 609.5p on Thursday morning before recovering some ground to 667p, down 14%. Metro Bank shares have lost about 70% of their value since the accounting issue was announced. In February, Metro shocked markets with plans to raise a further £350m just months after its last cash call. Metro has denied capital-raising plans were influenced by the loans misclassification. John Cronin, a financials analyst at stockbroker Goodbody, said the drop in deposits was the most worrying for investors and “flies in the face of Metro’s ‘revolutionary’ expansionary strategy”. He now expects a heavy drop in shares. “We believe that the wider market was none-too-pleased [on Wednesday] too and we expect an aggressive sell-off today and, in time, a successful deeply discounted rights issue, followed by further strategy recalibration.”