Kevin Breathnach would like to clear something up: he’s never been a professional skateboarder. Good, you might say, I never said he was. But Breathnach’s debut essay collection Tunnel Vision reveals a relationship with the truth that is dizzyingly fluid, where the problem is not only the repeated telling of lies, but also of undoing them. “This is my opportunity – I never got to address this lie in the book,” he says; understandably, he seems to have lost track of the untruths. “I told everyone at college that I had once been a sponsored skateboarder. Ten years on, people who know me still believe it. It just travelled too fast.” Does he know why he told that lie in the first place, I ask, and he shrugs as if to say, ‘Well, why wouldn’t I?’ For a long time, Breathnach told people he was working on a book about architecture. (Another lie.) Instead, he was producing a strange collection of 12 essays that switch between writing about his own life and artists such as Berenice Abbott, Ingeborg Bachmann and Susan Sontag – creatives who Breathnach feels haven’t had their due. He is the latest example – following Sinéad Gleeson and Emilie Pine – of Irish writers dazzling with essays, and arrives with an endorsement from compatriot Sally Rooney: “His essays demonstrate not only an impressive depth of learning, but an even more necessary depth of feeling.” When Breathnach does choose honesty, it is unflinching. He writes of an addiction to pornography that saw him masturbating for “clammy and eventually painful” 12-hour sessions while snorting mephedrone: “Without allowing myself to notice it, I had been presiding over the destruction of my own sexuality.” He owns up to dabbling with cocaine and MDMA, lying about writing a novel, his unexpressed disdain for friends and a brief sexual relationship with a male acquaintance – an experience he describes with the air of a tourist opting for an exotic dish: “A part of me found the idea of what had happened not a little glamorous.” He is simultaneously detached and cripplingly self-aware, and the end result leaves the reader with a hot, swooping anxiety. As Blake Morrison wrote in his review: “These essays will make anyone over 40 feel very old.” All this self-flagellation might seem indulgent if it wasn’t so enjoyable to read, as in the title essay, which centres on a seven-hour, unedited film of a train chugging from Bergen to Oslo that is a sensation in Norway. (Breathnach estimates he’s watched it 100 times.) It starts: “In this mundane and contemptible existence of mine, there are few moments that fill me with such exhilaration as I feel when, after all the automated announcements have been made, the train creeps from the station and I have not paid the fare.” Does he really not pay for trains? “Yeah?” he says, with a wince. “My poor father. No, most of the time I pay for my train fares. I paid for one this afternoon, in fact.” Breathnach is surprisingly reserved for a man who has now told the world that he has masturbated to the point of pain while high on drugs. He defers to others’ opinions frequently in conversation, pulling out quotes from Susan Howe, TS Eliot, Robert Bresson. It’s sometimes hard to get an answer from him, but it doesn’t seem like evasiveness, more the whirring of a constantly moving mind. He delights in his own “refusal to state exactly what I am getting at”. He likes that people have told him the book made them nervous. To some of my questions, he gives the same answer: “I have to preserve the book’s ambiguity.” “I don’t know if I will ever record my anxieties in the same way again,” he says, when asked if he feels exposed. “I didn’t want to include anything that couldn’t stand in for something larger – I wouldn’t be interested in writing about pornography if I wasn’t also interested in gaze and erasure. I always needed to have a justification for writing about myself. I have no interest in psychoanalysing myself. I claim no wisdom from what I wrote. It is material to me, first and foremost.” Tunnel Vision began after a trip to Germany, where Breathnach was visiting the memorial for the 1958 Munich air disaster, in which his great-uncle, Manchester United footballer Liam Whelan, died alongside seven teammates and 15 others. As a child, Breathnach was raised in Whelan’s shadow, loving football so much that he took Edson Arantes – Pelé’s first names – as his confirmation name. The crash looms over the book, even though it is mentioned in only one essay; the three-part structure of the book mirrors the pilot’s three attempts to take off. While standing in front of the Munich memorial, a motorcycle turned a corner and crashed next to Breathnach; a strange echo of the accident 60 years earlier. By the time Breathnach had walked to the train station, he had his essay. “That’s so cynical though, and probably a moral problem,” he says, though it doesn’t sound as if that bothers him. “There is a precarious sense of reality in the book, but at its foundation it has this event that even I couldn’t really believe had happened.” It is the most affecting essay in the book, combining intimate reportage with literary criticism that fascinates, despite its rarified subject matter. Breathnach is a little sheepish about his snobbery, his constant need to be impressive. Googling Austrian poet Ingeborg Bachmann for the fourth time, I worry whether I might really be as stupid as the book sometimes made me feel. The fact that little is written about people such as Bachmann was freeing for Breathnach: “I have space to research whatever paltry narrative exists about their creative lives. The more absences there are, the more space I have.” He’s aware that readers might find it pompous, but “I have tried to offset that by being fairly self-scathing. I like the idea that I don’t even enjoy what I like. I guess I was interested in figuring out why I was so pretentious.” Did he? He smiles. “I have to preserve the book’s ambiguity.” • Tunnel Vision is published by Faber. To order a copy, go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on orders over £15.