Aubergine doesn’t get much attention in my kitchen; my husband, John, doesn’t like it (though I think this is because he has eaten so many badly cooked aubergines – not by me, of course). But a couple of weeks ago, I found myself pining for aubergine like it was a long-lost friend. I cooked up some fat wedges until they were dark and golden on the outside, topped them with a lime and pistachio crumb, and ate a happy solo lunch with flatbreads and salted yoghurt. I also tried it paired with tamarind in this sweet-and-sour curry, spooned on to sticky jasmine rice. My aubergine craving was quelled and, of course, John licked his plate clean. Don’t scrimp on the olive oil, because you want to ensure your aubergines cook through and are soft and buttery inside – a lot will stay in the pan or drain off once cooked. I used baby aubergines because my greengrocer had them but normal ones will do. Prep 15 minCook 15 minServes 4 as a side 3 medium aubergines3 tbsp olive oil100g shelled, unsalted pistachiosZest of 2 limes Salt For the yoghurt 250ml thick Greek yoghurt Juice of 2 limes1 pinch sumac Cut the aubergines lengthways into six to eight wedges (see picture), depending on their size. In a large, nonstick frying pan, heat the oil and fry the aubergines in batches, turning carefully. Once each batch is golden all over, set aside on a roasting tray and keep warm in the oven while you fry the rest. Toast the pistachios, then chop and mix with the lime zest and a pinch of salt. Mix the lime yoghurt ingredients in a small bowl. Serve the aubergine wedges topped with the lime yoghurt and scattered with the chopped pistachios. Use Thai basil if you can get it (although normal basil will do). If you can’t get lime leaves, add a good squeeze of lime into your curry at the end. Prep 20 minCook 50 minServes 4 Coconut or groundnut oil 4 medium aubergines, halved and cut into thick slices4 shallots, peeled and thinly sliced5cm thumb ginger, peeled and finely chopped 3 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped1 lemongrass, halved and bashed 2 makrut lime leaves1 fresh red chilli, finely chopped 1 tsp ground coriander 300g vine tomatoes, roughly chopped, or a tin of chopped tomatoes2 tbsp tamarind paste 1 x 400ml tin coconut milk 200ml vegetable stock To serve Sticky rice 1 small bunch Thai basil, leaves picked 1 red fresh chilli, finely sliced Put a large pan over a medium heat, add a little oil, then fry the aubergine in batches until golden. Set aside. In the same pan, add a little more oil, if needed, followed by the shallots and ginger. Cook on a medium heat for around 10 minutes, until the shallots are soft and sweet. Add the garlic, lemongrass, lime leaves, chilli and ground coriander, and cook for a further five minutes. Add the chopped tomatoes, aubergine, tamarind, coconut milk and stock, then simmer for 25‑30 minutes, until the aubergines have almost collapsed and the sauce is thick, adding a little more water or stock if needed. Serve immediately with sticky rice, lots of Thai basil and fresh chilli.