The was some rather big economic news on Tuesday that delivered a very sharp poke to the ribs of the government’s economic narrative. It came in the form of a short, relatively undemonstrative line in the latest report on retail trade from the bureau of statistics. It stated that “in volume terms, the trend estimate for Australian turnover was relatively unchanged (0.0%) in the March quarter 2019”. The actual result was a fall of 0.01%, which may seem rather unremarkable, but it marked just the eighth time since the ABS began compiling retail turnover in 1983 that the volume of had fallen. It occurred last in March 2011, twice during the GFC, and then we have to go back all the way to the 1990s recession to find the last time it happened: Suffice to say this is not a good thing. And it came a day after the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, in his debate with Chris Bowen at the National Press Club declared that “the fundamentals of the Australian economy are sound”. Really? Sound? The fundamental aspect of our economy is that economic growth leads to lower unemployment, which leads to higher wages growth, which leads to stronger consumption, which leads to stronger economic growth, which leads to ... That cycle has broken down all to hell. Consider that for the past four years the annual growth of retail turnover has been below the post-1990s recession average of 3.7%: Now sure, you can say we are in the “new normal” of post-GFC low growth, but even if we only look at the past decade, the current annual growth of 1.1% is below the post-GFC average of 2.7% and is the lowest level of growth for eight years: If that is fundamentally sound, then the bar is so low that it almost underground. Consider that for all of the time since the 2013 election the real cash rate has been effectively zero – a level reserved for times when the economy is absolutely struggling and which even during the GFC only occurred for around 12 months: If the fundamentals were sound the Reserve Bank would be looking to raise the cash rate, not lowering it even further. There was some attempts in the Australian to spin the RBA’s decision on Tuesday to keep rates steady as a stamp of approval for the economy because the governor’s statement was “forecasting a pick-up in wages growth”. Indeed the statement did note: “The strong employment growth over the past year or so has led to some pick-up in wages growth, which is a welcome development. Some further lift in wages growth is expected, although this is likely to be a gradual process” Except here’s the governor’s statement from last month: “Continued improvement in the labour market is expected to see some further lift in wages growth over time, although this is still expected to be a gradual process”. And six months ago: “The improvement in the economy should see some further lift in wages growth over time, although this is still expected to be a gradual process” In effect the RBA did not change its position in any way – wages growth is coming but it is going to be a gradual process. And that gradualness is now very much reflected in household’s lack of spending. But the treasurer on Monday also boasted of our current annual GDP growth of 2.3% (a laughably low rate to boast about) suggesting that it was second only to the US among G7 nations. Now first, we’re not part of the G7 so it is a bit of an odd comparison, but he is correct. Except he is fortunate that the next GDP figure only comes out in June after the election because our economy slowed dramatically in the second half of last year, and most economists expect little improvement: Among the OECD nations our current annual GDP growth is in the middle of the pack, but over the last half of 2018 we are seventh worst: But if we compare using GDP per capita – which takes out the impact of population growth – we are decidedly less “sound”. Our current annual GDP per capita growth is in the bottom third of the OECD, and the past six months has us as one of just six nations who went backwards. And if we look at the growth since the last federal election, Australia comes third last: The other fundamental aspect of an economy is productivity growth. And yet here again the word “sound” does not spring to mind. Because annual productivity growth can be quite erratic it is best to average it out over three or five years to get a real sense of how things are going, and right now things are terrible – almost back to the pitiful levels last seen during the WorkChoices years: Yes, employment growth has been solid – although as I have noted – the level of underemployment remains historically high. But other than that very few of the “fundamentals” look good. Building approvals are falling, wages growth remains stuck in the doldrums, demand in the economy is so weak that in the first quarter this year inflation didn’t even rise. And even with unemployment at 5% we still have a central bank considering cutting rate to further record lows. Add in the fact that household disposable incomes have been flat in real terms for nearly five years, and it means if you think the fundamentals of the economy are “sound”, then you are essentially settling for mediocrity. • Greg Jericho is a Guardian Australia columnist and economics writer