In another life, this could be a rousing riot grrrl yowl but in Miya Folick’s hands it’s a soft descent into Stepford Wifeism. The whispered intro listing all her Barbie accessories – “My vehicle, my credit card, my Vogue, my ice-cream, my coconut” – is a satisfying gateway into a song about the numbing effects of feminine conformity, which also doubles as an anthem for anyone who feels they missed the bit of adolescence when everyone learned how to apply foundation. Craig David’s career is basically built on one melody put over various types of music – that’s not a diss, it’s a good melody – and it’s back for its 2019 closeup. Here, it’s accompanied by a housey backdrop complete with hollow drainpipe beats, canned finger snaps and piano stomps that sound like a night out at Wolverhampton Oceana in 2008. If you don’t yet know what love is, let me fill you in: love is not making me go on a night out to Wolverhampton Oceana in 2008. A toxic relationship bop we can all enjoy this summer, courtesy of the returning 5 Seconds thereof. It’s a bit like one of those terrible stories from the Relationships subreddit set to all available arpeggios. “I love my partner so much that I hate her” isn’t exactly the healthy sentiment we’re all looking for in 2019, and nor is “I think I hate my partner but she’s, like, a nine and I’m not sure I can do any better”. However, the song is good! Finding yourself liking one Sheeran song is one thing but if it’s two then perhaps you just have to come to terms with the fact that he’s … good now? First came I Don’t Care with Justin Bieber and now there’s this catchy little collab. It’s kind of “Jamie xx but make it Radio 2” but, honestly, it works. Sheero’s just announced an album of collaborations so maybe the secret is making sure someone other than Ed Sheeran is on each Ed Sheeran song? Works for me. The subject of much debate about whether she’s an “industry plant” or a “true DIY bedroom pop connoisseur”, Clairo hasn’t always been easy to like but there’s no denying that this is a lovely, typically wispy reverie about whether showing too much emotion might drive someone away. Bonus fact: that’s indie’s favourite muso for hire Danielle Haim on drums.