This article is part of the Guardian’s 2019 Women’s World Cup Experts’ Network, a cooperation between some of the best media organisations from the 24 countries who have qualified for France. theguardian.com is running previews from two countries each day in the run-up to the tournament kicking off on 7 June. Martin Sjögren’s first major tournament with the Norwegian team turned out to be an utter fiasco. There were big expectations for Norway at the Euros in 2017 but the squad (which included future Ballon d’Or Féminin winner Ada Hegerberg) had to return early after failing to score a single goal in the group stage. What followed was even more dramatic as Hegerberg chose to take a break from international football. She later said she could not be herself with the national team, as she felt she was placed in a system that did not fit her. However, other players have since stepped up to the plate to take responsibility in her absence and Sjögren did an impressive job with the team in qualifying for the World Cup after beating the 2017 European champions Netherlands in the decisive qualifier in Oslo. The Swedish manager is likely to go with a 4-4-2 formation in the World Cup. He has spent a lot of time trying to improve the defensive structure of the team, and the two Chelsea players Maren Mjelde and Maria Thorisdóttir are likely to play an important part in the heart of the defence. In midfield Caroline Graham Hansen (who has moved from Wolfsburg to Barcelona this summer) is, at her best, a tremendous force while the striker Isabell Herlovsen is a constant goal threat. She had, by mid-May, scored 57 goals for the national team having made her debut as a 16-year-old in 2005. In Hegerberg’s absence, the responsibility of scoring falls on Herlovsen. The 30-year-old has played for Hegerberg’s current club Lyon, but has spent most of her career in the Norwegian Toppeserie, apart from a few months in Chinese football. The striker, who is currently on loan at Kolbotn from Vålerenga, scored the winner in the decider against the Netherlands and she could be the key going forward in the World Cup because of her finishing skills and her uncanny positional sense in crucial moments. The young midfielder Ingrid Syrstad Engen (LSK Kvinner) has made huge strides for the national team recently and she could be handed an important role in the World Cup despite a lack of international experience. Engen is one of several young players who have not yet peaked while at the other end of the spectrum there is the goalkeeper Ingrid Hjelmseth, who at 39 gives the squad so much in terms of experience. Ultimately, Norway’s World Cup chances are likely to depend on their defence. Kristine Minde (Wolfsburg) and Ingrid Moe Wold (LSK Kvinner) are likely to be the full-backs but the fitness of Thorisdóttir is a concern as she has missed much of this season through injury. Martin Sjögren’s appointment in December 2016 was a surprise. The sympathetic Swede had taken Linköping to the league title in his home country and now seems to have recovered after a horrible start to his tenure. Caroline Graham Hansen, without a doubt. The Barcelona player will be extremely important for the national team this summer. The 24-year-old winger, who grew up playing for Lyn, is a complete footballer with pace, dribbling skills and the ability to create goals out of nowhere. In her younger days, Guro Reiten had some – let’s say unorthodox – pets. In addition to more common fish in her aquarium, she also owned three pet shrimps. Interest in women’s football in Norway has grown in recent years. One of the first women’s matches in Norway was played in 1928, with the famous Sonja Henie as the main attraction, but it was a strange setup with the final of the tournament decided on style points rather than goals scored. The Norwegian Football Federation (NFF) first officially recognised women’s football in 1976 and the first national team was established two years later with Per Pettersen becoming Norway’s first manager. The first ever win for the female national side came against Northern Ireland and the first major achievement came in 1987 when they won the European Championship after beating Sweden in the final. Eight years later Norway won the World Cup in Sweden, beating Germany in the final, and followed that up with Olympic gold in Sydney in 2000, beating the US thanks to a a Dagny Mellgren golden goal in extra time. Since then Germany have become Norway’s nemesis, beating them in two European Championship semi-finals, in 2001 and 2009, and in the 2005 Euros final. Guro Reiten. The 24-year-old has a majestic left foot and the technique to score from distance. The midfielder has been superb for LSK so far this season and has the capacity to elevate her game even further this summer. Several big clubs will be looking at Reiten in France and she may well leave LSK Kvinner after the tournament. The clear – and ambitious – aim is to win a medal at the World Cup. The team ended up in a tough qualifying group, but showed strength by beating Netherlands in the decisive qualifier last September. Sjögren’s players should have a good chance of advancing from the group stage – where they face France, South Korea and Nigeria – and the quarters or semis should be within their reach. They have experience but in terms of quality they are probably just a bit behind the best teams. The women’s budget this year is actually higher (14.8m Norwegian kroner (£1.3m)) than the men’s (12.4m NOK) because it is a World Cup year. This however, does not include the salaries for the two coaches, with the men’s coach, Lars Lagerbäck, earning far more than his fellow Swede Sjögren. Interestingly – and impressively – the women earn as much as the men (6.8m NOK per year) after the men took a pay cut in 2017. According to the Norwegian Football Federation, there are 96,107 registered female players (13 years or older) in Norway. Adrian Richvoldsen is a writer for Nettavisen. Follow him on Twitter here.