9pm, BBC Four If this gritty but often swaggering Danish thriller has taught us anything, it’s that those who launder money rarely get away clean. The climactic double bill of season three sees goth hash dealer Nicky looking even paler than usual after barely surviving a stab-happy social call. As Alf’s strike force race to apprehend him, will he ever see his son Milas again? Meanwhile Nicky’s white-collar accomplice Anna belatedly realises how much danger she has put her family in by getting cosy with impatient criminals. Graeme Virtue 8pm, ITV Week five, with Amanda Holden the only judge left who hasn’t been overcome with emotion enough to press her golden buzzer. Will any of tonight’s hopefuls spark a glistering shower of ticker tape? The acts have been so-so, so far: have the producers kept a humdinger in reserve? Jack Seale 8pm, Channel 5 What is it like to be caught up in a “mega tornado”? Thanks to a few brave members of the public, this doc has real footage of the extreme weather events. From the calm before the storm to the devastation afterwards, there are interviews and footage to flesh out the experience. Hannah Verdier 8.30pm, BBC One Burly DIY boffin Nick Knowles abandons his spirit level to present the first in a new (12th!) series of the oddly intriguing gameshow, which sees two pairs of strangers battle to outdo each other on a given topic. The first to win two rounds gets to play for £50,000, with a chance to increase their winnings with each successive victory. Mike Bradley 9pm, Channel 5 A tangled mess of headless skeletons and a neighbouring pile of skulls uncovered during excavations in Dorset form the basis of a puzzling ancient murder mystery. Ultimately, it takes a canny descendant of the Norsemen to unravel the true history of the macabre find. MB 9.15pm, ITV The host welcomes comedian Romesh Ranganathan and Line of Duty’s Stephen Graham, who is sure to remain contractually tight-lipped as the nation awaits tomorrow night’s finale of Jed Mercurio’s nailbiting BBC One police procedural. Music comes from Ellie Goulding, who will chat and perform. MB 13 Minutes: The Plot to Assassinate Adolf Hitler, 12.30am, BBC Two Downfall film-maker Oliver Hirschbiegel directs this account of an attempt to assassinate the Führer in 1939. Christian Friedel is carpenter Georg Elser, whose bomb exploded too late. This poignant film flashes back from his interrogation to show how it came about. Paul Howlett Snooker: World Championship, 10am, BBC Two The semi-final stage concludes. Premier League Football: Bournemouth v Tottenham, 12noon, Sky Sports Main Event Cardiff v Crystal Palace airs at 5pm on BT Sport 1. Women’s FA Cup Final: Manchester City v West Ham, 5.10pm, BBC One The 2017 winners City take on first-time finalists West Ham.