Epsom racecourse was bathed in sunshine for the annual Breakfast With The Stars event here on Tuesday to preview the Derby meeting next week, but the fog at the top of the ante-post betting for the Classic on 1 June scarcely lifted as both Aidan O’Brien and Hughie Morrison declined to firmly commit leading contendersSir Dragonet and Telecaster to the race. Sir Dragonet, perhaps, seems more likely to put his unbeaten record on the line in the Classic after O’Brien told the audience that he expects to run “a good crew” of colts from his Ballydoyle stable on Saturday week. The trainer named Sir Dragonet on a long list of possible Derby runners, including Mohawk, Anthony Van Dyck, Broome, Circus Maximus, Cape Of Good Hope, Japan and Norway, in the Classic, with only Mohawk mentioned as possibly switching to the French equivalent at Chantilly. The trainer, who will be hoping to win the Derby for a record-equalling seventh time, also underlined the importance of the race to the Coolmore Stud syndicate which underpins his training operation. “Every horse [in the yard] is bred and raised to be there,” he said. “If I had to bet on it, I think the lads would prefer to go to Epsom [with Sir Dragonet] rather than France [for the following day’s French Derby]. We don’t have to make our mind up until the supplementary stage but we are favouring Epsom.” It was still some way short of a firm commitment, however, and O’Brien will also be mindful that Sir Dragonet won the Chester Vase on easy ground, which is more likely to prevail in France than it is in Surrey. Like Sir Dragonet, Telecaster has also recorded an impressive win in a major Derby trial within the last fortnight, but neither colt currently holds an entry in the Classic and will require an £85,000 supplementary fee in order to run. The deadline for supplementary entries is midday on Monday and, understandably, both trainers see no reason to rush to pay the money. Morrison’s main concern is that his colt will have had just 16 days to recover from his defeat of Too Darn Hot in last week’s Dante Stakes at York. “He had a very hard race last week at York and one has to be realistic about horses recovering,” Morrison said. “Often you don’t find out until about a week afterwards whether the adrenalin has come out, but we’re perfectly happy with him and he’s doing everything we’d like him to do after a race. “I haven’t really sat down with the owners to discuss it in detail. If the horse did run, I would not be able to put my hand on my heart and say he’s fully recovered. Sixteen days after a big race, you can’t really tell and he’s not the sort of horse you’d be working five days before the time because he doesn’t need a lot of work. “We’ll definitely push it until as late as possible on Monday. When you’re spending that huge amount of money, you leave it until five to 12.” One colt who will definitely be in the line-up if all is well is Andrew Balding’s Bangkok, who beat Telecaster in a maiden at Doncaster earlier in the season when Morrison’s colt was running for the first time in public. Bangkok runs in the colours of King Power Racing, which was founded by the late Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha, the former chairman of Leicester City, who was killed in a helicopter crash in October. “It’s all fallen into place this year after last year was very much a development year,” Alastair Donald, King Power’s racing manager said, “and it’s very sad that he’s not around to see the fruits of his investment coming to light. We largely bought three-year-old types, it would be a great acknowledgement if we could win but also very sad at the same time.” Balding has no concerns about heading into the Derby without a further run in a trial after Bangkok’s victory in the Classic Trial at Sandown in late April. “The reason we ran at Sandown was to give us the option to go again if things didn’t work out, but they did,” Balding said. “He’s a horse that gives generously in his work in the mornings, he’s very well balanced with a wonderful pedigree and he’s an ideal type for the race.” Morrison may be concerned about a 16-day gap from the Dante to a Classic for Telecaster, but Too Darn Hot, the runner-up at York, could yet line up for Saturday’s Irish 2,000 Guineas at The Curragh just nine days after finishing second to Telecaster at York. John Gosden, Too Darn Hot’s trainer, said on Tuesday morning that his colt will be left in the race to allow a final decision to be made later in the week. Ayr 2.00 Mellad 2.30 Mr Shelby 3.05 Universal Gleam 3.35 Friendly Advice (nap) 4.05 Vivianite (nb) 4.35 Maulesden May 5.05 War Advocate 5.40 Betty Grable Yarmouth 2.10 Molten Lava 2.45 Path Of Thunder 3.15 The Resdev Way 3.45 Nasee 4.15 Local History 4.45 Mubhij 5.15 Oud Metha Bridge Warwick 2.20 Yccs Portocervo 2.55 Kereman 3.25 Desert Sensation 3.55 Peruvien Bleu 4.25 Vosne Romanee 4.55 Marcle Ridge 5.25 Olly The Brave Southwell 5.45 Jaboticaba 6.15 The Wicket Chicken 6.45 Twycross Warrior 7.15 Henrietta Bell 7.45 Global Tour 8.15 Taras Day 8.45 Amelia’s Dance Kempton 5.55 Capofaro 6.25 Divine Messenger 6.55 Hotsy Totsy 7.25 Brazen Safa 7.55 Harbour Breeze 8.25 Diamond Reflection 8.55 Chloellie