While Newport County seethed at the injustice of it all Tranmere cherished returning to League One after a dramatic winner from Connor Jennings sealed successive promotions for Micky Mellon’s side. Four years after the nadir of dropping out of the Football League Tranmere were entitled not to apologise about benefiting from some generous refereeing. They rode their luck at times, especially when Emmanuel Monthe risked giving away a penalty with a clumsy trip on Jamille Matt shortly before the end of normal time, but the glory belonged to Mellon and his revival of a club that was in the doldrums not so long ago. For Mellon, all that mattered was the moment when Jake Caprice found space on the right and crossed for Jennings to head home the winner with a minute left of extra-time. “I’m not going to bother with VAR,” he said. “I just got promoted.” Not that Newport were minded to go quietly. They had Mark O’Brien sent off in the 89th minute and Michael Flynn did not hesitate to point out that Ross Joyce, the referee, probably would have ended up penalising Monthe for his challenge on Matt if VAR had been in use. “We are at the home of football,” Newport’s manager said. “We have all the VAR equipment. You’ve got referees who are full-time referees and a big decision killed us. It was a stonewall penalty and I can’t believe it wasn’t given. “It’s a very poor decision. We all talk about big improvements, but you can’t get big decisions like that wrong in play-off finals. We’ve got the facilities here. They want the final here. If they are not going to use all the facilities at hand, what’s the point of having it here? It’s a state-of-the-art stadium. I haven’t got a clue why they don’t use it. You’d have to ask the powers that be.” Tranmere came closest to breaking the deadlock during a tight first half, James Norwood testing Joe Day with a powerful effort in the 25th minute. Newport’s goalkeeper was fortunate that the sharpest striker in League Two clipped his shot straight at him. Norwood soon spurned another chance to score his 33rd goal of a prolific season, sending a header too high from an unmarked position, but Newport were on top. Their fans were making most of the noise and Flynn must have been encouraged by the way his team’s direct approach pinned Tranmere back at times. The question was whether Newport were capable of turning their territorial dominance into something more substantial. They struggled to come up with a convincing answer. A lack of nous ruined too many of Newport’s attacks and when they finally managed to earn a clear sight of goal, Matt let Tranmere off the hook by aiming his header too close to Scott Davies, allowing the goalkeeper to turn the ball against the woodwork. The mood changed when O’Brien received a second yellow card following a tangle with Norwood. Newport tired after the loss of their captain and Tranmere made their numerical advantage count when Jennings capitalised on poor marking just when it seemed the final was destined for a penalty shootout.