Purveyor of no-look yellow cards, hider of souvenir hat-trick footballs up the back of his shirt, Premier League centurion of “off you pop” dismissals, pedantic pacer of 10-yard distances and … er, occasional carrier of golf bags on the Ladies European Tour, Mike Dean has been a fixture on the Premier League refereeing circuit for 19 years and in that time has developed something of a reputation for making big games all about … well, him. Much like David Brent, we will never have another referee like him, somebody who’s basically a chilled-out entertainer. An occasionally pompous showman who has endeavoured to keep his personal football allegiances carefully hidden through the cunning ruse of convincing fans the length and breadth of the country he is biased against every team, on Monday night there was a suggestion he let the mask slip. In the away end at Forest Green to see Tranmere Rovers reach the League Two play-off final, Dean was caught on camera, standing on a barrier, arms raised aloft, leading the celebrations at full-time. And while it has been widely presumed that Dean was openly cheering on his local team, The Fiver couldn’t help but think back to the last time he was caught giving it the big one on camera. Specifically, the famous occasion when he refereed a match between Tottenham Hotspur and Aston Villa and appeared to openly celebrate Mousa Dembélé scoring for the London side. As it happened, Dean simply had his arms outstretched to signal an advantage and subsequently celebrated his own good work with a self-congratulatory fist pump en route back to the halfway line, but try telling that to tinfoil hat-wearing conspiracy theorists in the Holte End. It certainly lends credence to the notion that, on Monday, he may only have been celebrating his colleague Eddie Ilderton’s excellent technique when it came to peep … peep … peeeeeeeeeeeeping on the final whistle. Dean is unlikely to be at The Hawthorns on Tuesday evening, where his heartless colleague, Chris Kavanagh, will be leading the team of match officials. The ref who gave José Holebas a red card – since overturned – that would have ruled the Watford full-back out of the FA Cup final, is in charge of maintaining order when West Brom and Aston Villa duke it out again for a place in the Championship play-off final. Leading 2-1 from the first leg, Villa will fancy their chances of progressing, not least because Dwight Gayle is sitting this game out on the Naughty Step after being shown a red card of his own at Villa Park. Having been booked for time-wasting so early in Saturday’s game that his team had hardly arrived at the stadium, the West Brom striker received a second yellow after being rather harshly adjudged to have “left one in” on Aston Villa goalkeeper Jed Steer while trying to get on the end of a cross. While Baggies fans were predictably apoplectic about the decision, Dean’s feelings on the matter remain known. “When people talk about football they often associate it with big salaries and luxurious living but the reality is that many of our staff – as we all do – live within their means. And that becomes very difficult when you have not been paid for a couple of weeks. It has hit home hard” – Bolton club chaplain Phil Mason on news that an emergency food bank has been set up to help Wanderers staff who have gone unpaid for two weeks. Come for the important film about abuse in grassroots refereeing, stay for Michael Butler’s get-ups. David Squires on … the end of the Premier League, co-starring Janet, Jim Bowen and Tranmere’s top boy. Join Max and co for the latest Football Weekly podcast. “As if it weren’t bad enough for the former oldest Football League club in the world, Notts County, what with the manager turnover, player turnover, various flirtations with promotions and relegations over the last 30 years, being the most stressful club to support in the UK (allegedly), only having a river to separate you from your noisy neighbours (and probably now the oldest League club in the world) and, of course, Big Alan and Little Alan, now Juventus have ditched the famous black and white stripes loaned to them by County (yesterday’s Quote of the Day). You wonder how things can possibly get any worse, but this is Notts County. I’m sure they’ll find a way” – Ferg Slade. “It’s interesting to see that in the Argentinian League, Tigre finished ninth out of 26 teams and qualified for the Copa Sudamerica (Big South American Vase), which they could also still qualify for via the Superleague Cup and are doing well in. However, simultaneously and rather weirdly, Tigre have also been relegated as it is on the basis of performances over the last three seasons, not just this one, so will be barred from the competition. I’m trying to find an equivalent analogy of a system that seemed good at the time but ends up flawed with an end result that no one seems happy with, but one doesn’t spring to mind” – Noble Francis. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Ferg Slade. Manchester City insist they have provided “comprehensive proof” of their innocence to the Uefa body looking into allegations of FFP irregularities, amid reports that investigators could end up pushing to ban them from Big Cup. The Vatican has launched its first women’s team, with a first test coming up against Roma on 26 May. “Even if they lose 30-0, this doesn’t matter,” tooted Vatican sporting suit Danilo Zennaro. “What matters is that these women get the opportunity to know professional players. Win or lose, it’s also about creating connections and friendships.” Daniele De Rossi will end his Roma career after 18 years, 615 appearances and 63 goals, having been told that he wouldn’t be offered a new deal. “I apologised to Daniele, on behalf of the club, for not speaking to him sooner – it has been a problematic season,” sighed chief suit Guido Fienga. “The club is aware of the mistakes we’ve made, and we are reflecting on that.” Bulgaria have appointed former international midfielder Krasimir Balakov as coach. “He is one of the greatest footballers of our time,” whooped Bulgarian FA president Borislav Mihaylov. “A man who believes in Bulgarian football and the Bulgarian national team.” Mansfield Town have taken their League Two play-off exit to Newport well, sacking manager David Flitcroft and replacing him with academy coach John Dempster. And Gigi Becali is back in the news, having given FCSB coach Mihai Teja the old Dracarys. “I told him that we are breaking up, I don’t have to reproach him,” sniffed Becali after FCSB failed to win the Romanian league. The very best Premier League pictures of the season. Jonathan Wilson learned a shedload tactically from the 2018-19 Premier League, so he wrote about it. It was a great season for the WSL, but there’s still plenty to improve on, explains Suzy Wrack. Liverpool look well set to avoid the curse of the runner-up, reckons Sachin Nakrani. Richard Williams is the latest to point out that Pep Guardiola is great. Chris Hughton paid the price for not being sufficiently attacking, argues Nick Ames. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!