A “sexual wellness company”, AKA a condom manufacturer – with a name, Skyn, that sounds like a poorly reviewed Netflix Original – has launched a browser extension designed to block pictures of babies. For those of us who can’t really tell the difference between many mini-humans and for whom scrolling through social media can be like being presented with the same Rorschach test over and over, this is good news. Babies – and I speak even as a recent proud aunt – are like dreams: your own are only really interesting to you. There are, of course, worse things to plaster all over Instagram – weightlifting selfies, pastel-coloured front doors – but some new parents could do with a gentle reminder that not all of their followers want to feel as though they are entering a creche when they open their apps. (Which brings me to the key problem with Skyn’s “Baby Blocker”: it works on desktop Facebook only.) Still, it is possible for parents to share updates on the apples of their eye – unless they are Gwyneth Paltrow, whose daughter Apple told her off for posting a photo without her consent (“We have discussed this”) – in a way that isn’t insufferable. Here, on behalf of all your childless friends, are some pointers. No consecutive posts. Under no circumstances should parents post numerous baby pics separately and in a short space of time. It is fine to post multiple pics, but use the album feature for exactly that, so that the images are contained in a single post. Nobody wants to scroll down and see baby after baby after baby, like the police lineup for a dummy theft. Do post cute videos. Cute videos are allowed because this is where babies are fun. Posting videos of babies saying and doing fun things – acting in a way that is objectively adorable and interesting – is allowed. But be selective in your uploads. Gurgling is not a talent. Make it funny, even if your baby doesn’t. Act like your kid is the second coming and watch your follower count drop. Don’t take yourself too seriously and people won’t get annoyed by baby content. The posts I appreciate most are those from my friend Maggy, who relentlessly teases her baby daughter with funny captions or filters. Think of your future child. A part of me feels sorry for those babies having every single moment of their existence endlessly documented on social media when they have no say in the matter. Until they’re old enough to clap back like Apple Martin, it’s just not cool. Set up a separate presence. Parents setting up a social account for their three-day-old makes me want to go hide in the woods somewhere. But setting up a new account or group is actually a decent compromise if you must insist on endless baby content. This way, new parents can huddle round each other’s sensory class updates, while the rest of us can dip in and out for the good bits. Just like in real life.