Pity poor Scarlett Johansson, AKA Black Widow in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. No sooner has she been finally handed a standalone movie and given a marginally more central role in Avengers: Endgame than she is written out of the timeline altogether. Iron Man’s self-sacrifice at the end of the studio’s 22nd film feels right, for here is a superhero who has been at the forefront of Marvel matters since the beginning, bringing the curtain down perfectly on the MCU’s first decade after countless heroic adventures. This is what it took to defeat Thanos and restore half the universe to life – and, as fans, we just about buy the death of Tony Stark because it was never going to be easy. Black Widow’s decision to trade her life for the Soul Stone on Vormir, in order to allow Hawkeye to return to the bosom of his resurrected family, is on the other hand deeply unsatisfying. Johansson, despite her reported $20m-a-movie salary, has always been handed the role of a lesser member of the Avengers – a sidekick who started out as someone for Stark to leer at in Iron Man 2 (2010) before graduating to something akin to wise best mate, plus occasional Hulk love interest. There is a sense that her story was cut short before we really got a chance to get to know her – and they didn’t even bother to give her a funeral. Reports suggest that the mooted Black Widow solo movie will now be a prequel, set just after the first Avengers movie. This would also be deeply depressing. There are numerous story threads from the Marvel movies and comics that could be picked up, from Black Widow’s regular banter with Hawkeye about their infamous jaunt to Budapest to the 2005 graphic novel Black Widow: Homecoming, which dealt with her past as a Russian black-ops spy raised in the legendary Red Room. But it would be churlish to expect fans to get excited about a belated backstory for a character the studio couldn’t be bothered to keep alive. The whole point of Captain Marvel’s 90s-set origins story was that we got to meet a superhero who would soon be playing a vital role in the main continuum. With Black Widow, we will be denied this sense of continuity. If Black Widow really does stay dead, then Marvel appears to have made something of a rod for its own back. Part of the joy of the MCU is the ability of characters to cross-pollinate – Thor joining the Guardians of the Galaxy at the denouement of Endgame is the perfect example. But the only version of Natasha Romanoff we are now going to see is one who can never again be part of the main Marvel timeline. She will be stuck in the past, hanging out with fellow Avengers for standalone adventures, rather than playing a central role in the main narrative. Where is the fun in that? Marvel could pursue a different path, one that was seeded in Endgame and could be teased during mid-credit sequences for forthcoming MCU entries. Banner reveals during the film’s finale that he tried to resurrect Natasha when sporting the Infinity Gauntlet. He laments his own failure, but who is to say that the stones didn’t restore Black Widow to life on Vormir, where she would presumably have quite a bit of explaining to do to a stony-faced Red Skull. It’s also possible that Steve Rogers was able to trade the soul stone for Natasha’s life when he returned it to Vormir, thought that doesn’t seem to be how the Infinity stone works. Even if she hasn’t been restored to life, perhaps Natasha is languishing somewhere in the “soul world” pocket universe that sits within the soul stone in the comics, just waiting to be rescued by her fellow Avengers. The story of her rescue would make for a more intriguing Black Widow movie than an origins film for a character we’re never going to see again. Critics of these theories – Endgame screenwriters Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely have already dismissed similar ideas in an interview with the New York Times – suggest that any resurrection for Natasha would result in the Red Skull taking back the Soul Stone. But would that necessarily restore the reality in which Thanos once again destroys half the universe, now that this version of events seems to have been comprehensively averted? Others will point out that the final outcome in Endgame was the only scenario in which Thanos might be defeated, as pinpointed by Doctor Strange during the events of Infinity War. Trying anything cheeky, such as the resurrection of characters not destroyed by Thanos, risks total disaster. But if there is one thing Endgame (and Tony Stark’s convenient invention of time travel) taught us, it is that if you can’t find your way out of a narrative dead end like the mad Titan’s famous fingersnap, it is perfectly acceptable to cheat. •This article was amended on 2 May 2019 to correct the decade in which Captain Marvel was set.