Their captain has scored all of 267 one-day international runs, their best player is a grumpy 35-year-old fast bowler, their top order is fragile, their spin stocks are thin, their fielding is frequently comical and their coach was fearing for his job only months ago. Have any previous champions ever arrived at a World Cup in such disarray as Sri Lanka? Having lost 24 of the last 28 ODIs they have completed, expectations are low and predictions are bleak. Can they manage one upset win? Can they avoid the wooden spoon? Will they even be competitive? How Sri Lanka, a top-four ODI team only five years ago, nosedived this dramatically, is a long and involved tale featuring (you guessed it) self-interested administrators, a bloated domestic system, nefarious political intrusions and a baffling tendency to change coaches, captains and players at the first hint of failure. The current coach, Chandika Hathurusingha, is the fifth (counting interim appointments) since the last World Cup, for example. The new captain, Dimuth Karunaratne, who by the way had not only never led the one-day side before this month he had not even played an ODI since 2015, is the fourth captain in the past year. Sri LankaICC world ranking 9 (as of 6 May)Captain Dimuth KarunaratneCoach Chandika HathurusingheWorld Cup best Winners 1996 Fixtures (10.30am unless stated) 1 June v New Zealand, Cardiff4 June v Afghanistan, Cardiff7 June v Pakistan, Bristol11 June v Bangladesh, Bristol15 June v Australia, The Oval21 June v England, Headingley28 June v South Africa, The Riverside1 July v West Indies, The Riverside6 July v India, Headingley And yet, if there remains a wisp of hope, it is in the thought that chaos is occasionally one of the conditions that has been known to spur Sri Lanka to incredible feats. In Tests in South Africa earlier this year, Karunaratne, captaining the Test side for the first time, led an outlandishly inexperienced side to a historic 2-0 series whitewash. It was this victory, born of his capacity to galvanise a struggling team, that propelled Karunaratne into the ODI helm. When Sri Lanka won their most-recent global tournament – the 2014 World T20 – they had also dropped their captain midway through the tournament, and were in the midst of a contracts standoff with their board. There have been plenty of chaotic moments in Sri Lankan cricket that led to woeful results as well, of course, but the point is, it does not necessarily mean their failure at this World Cup is guaranteed. If they are to make a fist of this campaign, there are several glaring weaknesses that must be hastily addressed. Frequently in positions such as 100 for 5, the top order has rarely suggested it is capable of mounting the kinds of gargantuan scores that are likely to be required on the unflinchingly flat pitches that have come into vogue in England. It is hoped that Karunaratne, a solid but unstodgy Test match opener, can provide stability at the top of the order, but like so much about this Sri Lanka campaign, this is merely a hope. There are other problems: the attack is woefully toothless through the middle overs, and is generally over-reliant on Lasith Malinga, and the lower order hitters, though devastating on their day, are notoriously unreliable. The only hope (there’s that word again) is that the format of this World Cup, where every team is guaranteed at least nine matches, may allow Sri Lanka to find their feet once the tournament begins. With Karunaratne at the top of the order, Sri Lanka will probably attempt to conserve wickets in the first 15 overs – a strategy completely at odds with their trademark ODI approach over the past 20 years – before the top order yields the floor to the likes of Thisara Perera and Isuru Udana, who hit the ball as cleanly as anyone in World Cricket, if not quite with the regularity of a Jos Buttler or an Andre Russell. With the ball, Malinga will be called upon to take early wickets, and keep things tight at the death, with the off-spinner Dhananjaya de Silva and the leg-spinner Jeevan Mendis likely to operate during the middle period. Malinga is not as quick as he once was, and he has a little extra around the mid-section these days, but like a latter-day Elvis, he can still make a stadium scream with his old hits. That famous toe-crushing yorker still confounds plenty of hurried defensive strokes, the slower ball is arguably even better now than it used to be and the new ball still swings late. Although not the best bowler on show at the recent Indian Premier League, he did deliver the tournament’s high-pressure final over, and proved, in defending nine runs, that he is as guileful as ever. Most are predicting the wooden spoon, but it wouldn’t be a World Cup without a couple of Sri Lanka upsets. They will not make the semi-finals, but with a bit of luck, they will not be unwatchably woeful either. Andrew Fidel Fernando is the Sri Lanka correspondent for ESPNcricinfo