‘Hostile, false and biased.” That was how Israel described a UN report concluding that Israeli soldiers may have committed crimes against humanity on 14 May 2018, when more than 60 Palestinians were killed and well over 2,000 injured during protests at the Gaza border. Could anyone honestly say the same of Olly Lambert’s film One Day in Gaza, assembled from stunningly clear footage and extensive interviews on both sides of the fence? They’ll surely try, but this was about as level-headed and even-handed as documentaries about Israel and the Palestinians can be: that Lambert was dealing with a single day meant he could cover the ‘well actuallys’ and the ‘ah buts’ comprehensively enough for this to be a clear picture of the situation, unfogged by endless context and historical dispute. The Israel Defense Forces explained their actions, while an Israeli civilian who lives near the border voiced how frightened she was by the concept of a “Great March of Return”. Her suspicion that some of the protesters aimed to penetrate the border was shown to be right – as was the allegation that IDF soldiers had been fired at, albeit to a very limited extent, after Hamas had infiltrated and manipulated the ordinary Palestinians making a point about living under the Israeli blockade. Those who wish to portray the carnage visited on the protesters as inevitable or excusable or proportionate or deserved were, in other words, given all the ammunition available with which to do so. What they can’t do is deny the carnage itself, because Lambert had sourced crisp, bright footage of men lying with their brains leaking into the dirt, or standing in a stationary crowd before a crackling gunshot left them writhing and hopping. When reading about violence from afar, it’s all too possible to remain detached from what reports really mean: often Palestinians, in that curiously passive and vague phrase, “have died”, as if from a mystery virus. Not here, with these almost unwatchably vivid images of fresh wounds. The melding of new filming technologies – smartphone videos of a quality almost indistinguishable from professionally shot footage, and drones rising with eerie elegance through the black smoke of the protesters’ tyre fires – gave One Day in Gaza a clarity that most coverage of this conflict has, for decades, lacked. Even something as simple as an overhead shot showing where everyone was standing was rare knowledge. Seeing the dead and hurt was still not as powerful or illuminating as getting to know them as people. Viewers become attuned to the grammar of documentaries like this, spotting which characters who feature in footage have not been interviewed about it, but have been described by loved ones talking softly in the past tense. An old still photograph of them wearing a carefree smile confirms it: so it was with Moussa, a hulking, bear-like Palestinian working that day as a paramedic and deemed a terrorist because he was employed by the Hamas government. But there was another dreadful guessing game to play here with Bashir, a committed activist who had survived to evangelise about resisting the Israelis. We’d seen Palestinians take bullets in the legs. We’d only seen Bashir filmed from the waist up. The penny dropped. An IDF colonel was given airtime to explain that any adult male who is seen “systematically go[ing] back and forth” near the border and who “riles up the crowd” is engaging in “a military action”: in those circumstances, “we authorise a sniper to shoot him in the leg”. Bashir, now revealed to be an amputee, reported that he’d been hit by “a bullet of pride”. This was perhaps One Day in Gaza’s most profound insight: the protest was shown to be something more than defiantly standing closer to the border than Israel decrees acceptable. The younger and more militant among the marchers were indeed intent on responding to Donald Trump’s inflammatory relocation of the US embassy to Jerusalem by getting through the fence. We saw astonishing pictures of them hunkered down right by it, egging each other on to dash forward. So was this the “danger of imminent massacre” that should have been given more media attention, according to a former US ambassador who’d been at the embassy opening in Jerusalem? Or a people radicalised by desperation, resorting to suicidally futile gestures? Bashir relayed what happened to one man who ran a few yards into Israel, and another who climbed the fence and unfurled a Palestinian flag: “Psscht.” A gunshot. Even Wesal, a 14-year-old girl we saw standing somewhere further back, away from the frontier, had said “I want to be a martyr” before attending the latest of her many protests. She didn’t tell us that herself, of course. Her mother did, talking softly in the past tense.