The year 2007 changed cricket, a transformation that pivoted on India’s performance in its two international tournaments – their early exit from the 50-over shindig and their triumph in the inaugural Twenty20 one. In a Caribbean World Cup that opened with four groups of four from which only two teams progressed, the competition’s defining day was not its concluding one – when Australia emphatically beat Sri Lanka to secure a third successive crown – but its fifth, on which Pakistan and India crashed to cataclysmic defeats, against Ireland and Bangladesh respectively. Pakistan’s tournament was then engulfed by tragedy with the death of their coach, Bob Woolmer, while India’s was a strictly cricketing calamity – but one that reverberated throughout the game. Having elected to bat first at Port of Spain, they were up against it from the off, with the paceman Mashrafe Mortaza taking four wickets before Bangladesh’s spinners Abdur Razzak and Mohammad Rafique bamboozled their more feted opponents to dismiss India for 192. Bangladesh then knocked off their target stealthily, a young Tamim Iqbal leading the way with 51, to win by five wickets. Indian morale was jolted and though they made short work of Bermuda, winning by 257 runs, they went into their final group match needing to beat Sri Lanka. But their batting failed again as they were bowled out for 185 in pursuit of 255, their innings containing the collector’s-item double of ducks for both Sachin Tendulkar and MS Dhoni. India were out. Their early departure horrified Indian fans and the game’s bean-counters alike, prompting reforms to the tournament that minimised the risk of the game’s cash-cow sides suffering anything so vulgar as an early-rounds upset in the future, culminating in this year’s deadening, minnow-deficient format. Six months later, India made amends by winning the first World T20 in style, which turbo-charged the launch of the Indian Premier League the following year and powered us along the road to now. TD This, pound for pound, might be the worst World Cup campaign of the lot. Australia were the hosts, the holders and the best team in the world, yet didn’t even get past the round-robin stage. They had a helluva batting line-up – Steve Waugh sometimes came in at No 7 – yet only Zimbabwe scored more slowly. The Aussies were ambushed by their co-hosts New Zealand in the first game of the tournament – Dipak Patel and all that – and never really recovered, losing four of their first six games. In isolation, the defeats weren’t shocking, but the cumulative impact was. New Zealand, South Africa, England and Pakistan were all games Australia could lose, but they could not lose all of them. Which they did. The greatest ignominy came in Sydney, when their bogeyman administered one last beating: a 36-year-old Ian Botham took four wickets for no runs in seven balls, bashed the only World Cup fifty of his career, and did a silly little jig on Australia’s grave. RS No piece on Cricket World Cup chokes would be complete without at least one South African entry, but we’ll bypass the rain interlude and rule-quirk that left them needing 21 off one ball at Sydney in 1992 (sheer bad luck), and the last-ball chaos of the 1999 semi-final (one of the all-time great matches against one of the all-time great sides), and zone in on the mess they made in their own backyard 16 years ago. Set 269 to win their final group match against Sri Lanka and seal qualification, to a backdrop of ominous Durban clouds and weather warnings, South Africa needed to measure their chase against Duckworth/Lewis targets at every step. The formidable Herschelle Gibbs and the young tyro Graeme Smith had got the Proteas off to a decent start, but their innings stalled around the midway point before a perky partnership between Shaun Pollock and Mark Boucher got them back on track until the former’s dismissal. Opting to take control with a new batsman at the other end and the rain beginning to tip down, Boucher belted the fifth ball of Muttiah Muralitharan’s over, the 45th of the innings, for six, taking South Africa to 229 for six – a score the batsman mistakenly believed put them ahead on D/L. He punched the air with joy and nonchalantly nudged the final ball of the over to leg for no run before the umpires took the players off in the downpour. Except Boucher had been given a bum steer – the teams were in fact tied and South Africa were a single short. “We knew that it was a tie,” said Sanath Jayasuriya, the Sri Lanka captain. Their opponents did not, and were out. Yet South Africa would not have been in such a desperate situation had they not lost to West Indies in the opening match and been well beaten (on Duckworth/Lewis again) by New Zealand. As it was, a talented group never lifted the major trophy that should have been well within their capabilities. TD We are spoilt for choice when it comes to picking England’s worst World Cup campaign: the eliminated-before-the-song-came-out, home soil fiasco of 1999, the humblings of 1996 and 2011 – but 2015 is the standout, simply for how it exposed them as so horribly behind the times. There was an air of impending doom from the outset, England travelling to Australia and New Zealand with a far from settled team, having only just jettisoned Alastair Cook from the side and following an evisceration by Sri Lanka in a warm-up series just before Christmas. Eoin Morgan’s side lacked variety, still too heavy on established red-ball mainstays and too light on the uninhibited talent that has been let loose in the last four years. England’s campaign began with a predictable drubbing by Australia and, though much is made of the ultimately decisive defeat by Bangladesh (who were a fine side in 2015) the capitulation to New Zealand also stands out. But it was the loss to Sri Lanka that most exemplified England’s bloodless “we need to have a look at the data” approach. How pleased with themselves they looked after topping 300 only for Lahiru Thirimanne and Kumar Sangakkara to make mincemeat of a target of 310, each scoring unbeaten centuries in a nine-wicket shellacking. Failure did England a favour in the long run though, ushering in the Paul Farbrace/Trevor Bayliss revolution; within months theey were setting records, thrilling crowds and building a team that would become favourites for their home tournament in 2019. What could possibly go wrong? TD India entered the first World Cup as one-day novices, having played their first ODI only a year earlier, but in an era when the first-class and limited-overs games were not as distinct from each other as they are now, more might have been expected of Srinivasaraghavan Venkataraghavan’s side, whose talents included Sunil Gavaskar, Gundappa Viswanath, Bishan Bedi and Farokh Engineer. And it was Gavaskar whose name is most associated with India’s abject failure in this tournament. It seems unbecoming to berate a giant of the game for stupidity but his baffling unbeaten 36 from 60 overs in India’s first ever World Cup match went down in infamy. Set a daunting task after England had racked up 334 for 4 at Lord’s, Gavaskar seemed determined to be there for a long time, not a good time. India managed only 132 for – a decent tea-time score in a Test match on a tricky pitch but a totally useless one in ODI cricket, Gavaskar’s approach to new-fangled developments like that of an ageing grandparent grappling with a smartphone. India fans invaded the field several times to record their disgust and their manager, Gulabrai Ramchand, called it “the most disgraceful and selfish performance I have ever seen”. Gavaskar himself admitted it was the worst innings of his career. He improved against the minnows of East Africa, fairly rollicking his way to 65 not out off a mere 86 balls as a target of 133 was knocked off without loss. But India’s feeble first World Cup was snuffed out by New Zealand in the final group game, at Old Trafford. After the Kiwis dismissed India for 230, their opener Glenn Turner demonstrated how to see a run-chase through from the top with an unbeaten 114. TD The majority of sports fans are snobs, who dismiss or belittle the minnows at major tournaments. They use the word “minnows”, for a start. But though this is elite sport, we needn’t be so elitist. On the Snob Index, Canada had a shocker in 1979: three games, three heavy defeats, bowled out for 45 (in 40.3 overs) by England. Yet they all had experiences that will keep them warm in their dotage, and achieved things you and I never will. The new-ball bowler John Valentine, on unpaid leave from his job as a teacher, took the cheap wickets of Pakistan’s Majid Khan, the England captain Mike Brearley and Australia’s Rick Darling. In the first over of that Australia game, Glenroy Sealy panned four consecutive fours off a steam-powered Rodney Hogg. With run-rate inflation, sixteen off the first over in 1979 is worth about 25 now. It’s so easy to forget, as we vicariously reach the knockout stages of a World Cup from our front rooms, just what it means to actually qualify for one. When Canada played England, Valentine turned to Bob Willis. “It’s the biggest thrill of my life,” he said, “to be over here playing against you guys.” And there’s nothing calamitous about that. RS