Edwin van der Sar, the former Manchester United gloveman now working as chief executive of Ajax, has admitted that Matthijs de Ligt will be off in the summer, with the Dutch side two games from the end of the Eredivisie season and engaged in a thrilling battle for glory with PSV Eindhoven. “I think these will be De Ligt’s final games with Ajax, but I hope he goes out on a high,” the Dutchman told Sky. “He’s been here since he was a child and will end up at a big club. I think he’ll go to England or Spain.” And so the break-up of this Ajax team continues. In addition to Frenkie de Jong, whose departure to Barcelona has already been agreed, and the ever-popular De Ligt, Donny van de Beek has at least one significant suitor. Kicker suggests that Borussia Dortmund, whose sporting director, Michael Zorc, was in Amsterdam for Wednesday’s dramatic Champions League semi-final against Tottenham, are keen on the 22-year-old. Marca say that Barcelona’s much-touted move for De Ligt might be derailed by the €14m fee demanded by the Dutchman’s agent, Mino Raiola. The Blaugrana have several other deals to be getting on with, though, with Mundo Deportivo reporting that their decision-makers have given the “green light” to a move for Antoine Griezmann. “The club’s technical staff have given their blessing to the Frenchman’s arrival,” they write. “His price is considered fair given the quality he would add, along with goals and competition in the squad.” That price, incidentally, is €120m. “A few months ago, tired of Atlético’s regular defeats, the Frenchman offered to return to the economic agreement he made with Barcelona a year ago. He wants sporting glory and at Atléti he watches it from afar,” they write. “Barcelona’s directors were not receptive to the offer, but when Griezmann’s message reached the technical area the reaction was different. In summary, the Griezmann option is very much alive. That they need to sign a striker who brings a goal threat is obvious. The Anfield debacle was the clearest possible evidence of that.” It will be a busy summer for Barcelona, who are also in negotiations with Internazionale over the departure of Ivan Rakitic as a wide-scale squad overhaul clanks into gear. Inter are also, um, inter-ested in the Newcastle striker Ayoze Pérez, but face competition from Arsenal for the 25-year-old. The Spaniard admitted last month that “in the summer there are going to be options” and so it would seem, with Inter and Napoli both keen and Unai Emery apparently willing to outbid them. According to the Sun the Gunners are “eyeing up a host of lower-fee transfers”, and hope Pérez will be one of them. Maurizio Sarri has insisted that he is not planning to return to Italy “at the moment” after Chelsea’s qualification for the Europa League final. Eden Hazard was similarly caught up in post-match euphoria, insisting of his potential departure that “in my mind I don’t know yet”. Back in Italy Sarri is nevertheless mentioned on the front page of Friday’s Tuttosport, on a list of potential candidates for the Juventus job alongside Antonio Conte, Pep Guardiola, Didier Deschamps and Mauricio Pochettino. Sheffield Wednesday are after Arminia Bielefeld’s German centre-back and captain Julian Börner. The 28-year-old is definitely moving to England, after Arminia said as much in a stroppy statement on their website which revealed that “a verbal agreement on a contract extension was reached weeks ago” but “several dates for signing the contract had been cancelled or repeatedly postponed” by Börner or his advisors, before he suddenly informed them that he was off. “Playing in England has been a lifetime dream of mine, which is now going to come true,” the player said. “I am very sorry that I had to go back on my word.” He has been dropped from Arminia’s squad for their last two league games, leaving Börner free to follow his heart.