Bury football club, already in the grip of a financial crisis, are facing further pressure for the repayment of £4.2m in loans from their former owner’s property company, which has collapsed into administration owing a similar sum to creditors. The loan was recorded in Bury’s last published accounts, for the year to 31 May 2017, from Mederco Ltd, a company which built student accommodation in Bradford and is owned by Stewart Day. An investor in Mederco, Warren Harding, who bought one of the 160 units in the Bradford block which was sold with a five-year guarantee of rent, has told the Guardian that he and other leaseholders are owed more than £7,000 each. He said that a large group of creditors had instructed a solicitor to inquire into whether the investors’ money was in effect loaned on to Bury, and to seek repayment of it. “As we have not been paid the rental due on the properties we bought from Stewart Day’s company, we were surprised to see that the company had made a £4.2m loan to Bury football club,” Harding said. “We are keen to see that pursued and to see if we can get the money back.” The administrators of Mederco, Phil Deyes and Julien Irving of the firm Leonard Curtis, stated in their official report on the company’s insolvency in March that they had asked the Mederco accountant to provide financial information on the loan to Bury. The report estimated that Harding and the other leaseholders in the Bradford block were owed £1.1m, with £605,000 owing to HMRC in tax, and creditors owed £4m altogether. Day, who took over Bury during a previous financial crisis in 2013, suddenly announced in December that he was handing his shares over to a new owner, Steve Dale, saying that he was leaving the club “in a stronger position than it was in when I arrived” and that he wanted to spend more time with his family. The Mederco administrators’ report revealed that at that time the company had already been issued with a winding-up petition from HMRC and that they considered it was insolvent; it went into administration in January. Several other of Day’s property companies have also fallen into administration. Dale, who has been the focus of Bury supporters’ anger particularly since last week when the players went public about having not been paid since February, has said the club’s financial problems are much worse than he had realised when he agreed to take it on. He said he is trying to save the club from being wound up and is open to offers to sell it. Promoted to League One last month, Bury have a series of loans from a company, Capital Bridging Finance Solutions, taken out during Day’s tenure at the club, which Dale says now total £3.7m and carry interest of almost £1,500 a day. In 2014 one of Day’s companies took out a £1m loan, guaranteed by the football club and secured on Gigg Lane, at 10% interest a month, a cumulative 138% annually. That loan is recorded as having been satisfied, and new loans were subsequently taken out, secured on Gigg Lane, including the outstanding one. Bury face a winding-up petition on 19 June led by HMRC – Dale said the unpaid tax bill is now up to £800,000, and that the debts now total £8m. Dale, who has a business history of taking over insolvent companies and making money by selling their assets, said the club had had no communication with Leonard Curtis about the Mederco loan. He said he had believed that Day left only personal loans to the club, which were effectively written off when Day sold the club to Dale for £1. Dale said he was aiming to agree a settlement of the loan on Gigg Lane, then he may transfer the stadium to a company he has formed, Bury Leisure Ltd, and the club could pay rent to play there until he is personally paid off. Some of the club’s trophies and memorabilia have been transferred to another new Dale company, Bury Heritage; Dale has denied that this is asset stripping and said it was for safeguarding, because bailiffs had been seeking to repossess them on behalf of creditors. He has said publicly that he is looking to lay off staff, who have also had to wait for their wages, which has caused distress. His aim, he said, was to reach a settlement with the other creditors too, which would enable Bury to survive the winding-up petition. “I didn’t create the mess,” he said, “although yes, it has accrued and got worse while I’ve been there. It’s like being stuck in the dam; you’ve only got so many fingers to put in the holes.”