David Warner missed a chance to nail down a spot at the top of Australia’s World Cup order, falling for a duck after he was promoted to opener in a World Cup warm-up game in Brisbane. Warner was named to open alongside captain Aaron Finch in the second of three practice matches against the Black Caps, with Usman Khawaja sliding down to No 3. But Warner lasted just six balls, chipping a drive to cover in a limp exit at Allan Border Field. Fast bowler Mitchell Starc will return from a pectoral injury to lead an Australian XI attack later in the day against New Zealand. Pat Cummins, Jason Behrendorff and Nathan Coulter-Nile have been rested for the clash after the trio each took three wickets in Monday’s tight win. Starc was sidelined after the Canberra Test in February but has trained strongly off his long run in Brisbane this week. He will bowl on Wednesday, less than a month out from the start of Australia’s World Cup defence, against an understrength New Zealand team missing regular skipper Kane Williamson, Martin Guptill and Trent Boult. But Jhye Richardson’s recovery efforts will now focus on the Ashes after the quick was scratched from the World Cup squad. The West Australian dislocated his shoulder while fielding in an ODI in March, with results of scans this week enough to convince team staff that he would not be fit for the opener on 1 June. Still hopeful of joining the Australia A tour of England before the first Ashes Test on 1 August, he has been replaced in the squad by Kane Richardson with Josh Hazlewood again overlooked for a berth. “This is obviously very disappointing news for the team and for Jhye, who has been exceptional throughout his rehabilitation,” team physiotherapist David Beakley said. “After his most recent assessment and attempting to bowl in the nets, it was clear that Jhye was not progressing as fast as required and therefore, in consultation with selectors, we made the decision to withdraw him from the squad. “Jhye will continue with his rehabilitation and we will look to resume bowling in the coming week.” The 22-year-old Richardson had been viewed as an exciting prospect in England given his pace, swing and control, which has netted him 24 wickets at 26 in his first 12 ODIs. Warner belted 692 runs in 12 IPL innings before he joining the Australian squad, mounting a compelling case for a return to the top of the order despite the rousing form of Khawaja and Finch during an eight-game ODI winning streak. Coach Justin Langer has remained coy on who will open the batting on June 1 against Afghanistan in Bristol, with this week’s practice games in Brisbane no clear gauge of what to expect in England.