Air passengers should pay a 50p levy to ensure they can be flown home should their airline go bust, a government review has proposed. The airline insolvency review, which was commissioned after the collapse of Monarch in 2017, said the fee would mean passengers were protected when abroad, but not at the expense of taxpayers. The government stepped in to repatriate 85,000 Monarch passengers, with the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) organising a mini-airline operation at a cost of £60m. Airlines, however, said the plan would pile on costs, and claimed the review was overstating the risk of carrier collapses. Alongside the core proposal for a new flight protection scheme, the review proposes changes to UK airline insolvency rules to allow an airline’s planes to be used to repatriate passengers should the company fail. In the case of Monarch, the aircraft remained grounded. Customers with future bookings should also be told more about the risks and safeguards available, the review says. Peter Bucks, the chair of the review, said that although about 80% of UK passengers had some sort of financial buffer, only about one-quarter – those on packages covered by the Atol scheme – were fully protected should an airline collapse while they were abroad. “Passengers have told us that this is their greatest concern, and that they would be willing to pay more for their tickets to be sure they will be able to get home in a timely way, at little or no additional cost,” he said. There would be some cost increases in setting up and administering the scheme, under the aegis of the CAA, he said. But there was a “widely supported principle” that costs should fall directly or indirectly on passengers, rather than being “under the current informal arrangements, in effect subsidised by taxpayers”, Bucks added. The travel association ABTA, which has long campaigned for reform of the Atol system, said it welcomed the recognition of the gap in consumer protection and would be examining the recommendations closely. But the trade body representing the majority of airlines operating in the UK said most recent collapses, such as that of the Icelandic budget carrier Wow Air, required no government intervention, and the risks were overstated. “We do not support a passenger levy to build a fund since the vast majority of consumers who contribute in higher airfares would never receive any benefit,” said Dale Keller, the chief executive of the Board of Airline Representatives in the UK. Another trade body, Airlines UK, also criticised the plans. “Fifty pence may not sound much, but airlines operate on wafer-thin margins … The chances of booking with an airline that goes bust remain extremely small,” said Tim Alderslade, its chief executive. The transport secretary, Chris Grayling, said the government would consider the review’s options. “We will swiftly introduce the reforms needed to secure the right balance between strong consumer protection and the interests of taxpayers,” he said.