The texture of life in any country is made of a pattern of small things endlessly repeated until they become too familiar to be visible at all: what is it like to go to work or to buy a drink or snack, what clothes are in the shops. All these things can appear exotic to foreigners, however little the natives tend to think of them. That is why one symbol of England is – or was – a red postbox, while Holland is remembered for a cheese. These are the sort of things that go unnoticed till they disappear. Judged on these everyday standards, England contains two countries as different as two other European nations, even if they speak the same language. London stands out from the rest of the nation by almost every cultural and financial measure. One of these pervasive yet hardly noticed differences is in the quality of public transport. Londoners have an integrated system which mostly works. Buses, tubes and suburban rail services will take you almost anywhere you might want with a simple and comprehensible fare structure. Most of the time this is quicker than car travel as well as more civilised and better for the environment. But outside the city, as our research highlights, things are very different. As a consequence of disastrous and ideologically driven privatisations, bus fares are opaque and far higher per mile than they would be in London. The routes are awkward; the companies involved do not coordinate their efforts. Everywhere the buses have been deregulated, they are run in the interests of the shareholders and not the stakeholders, who include everyone who depends on public transport: poor, old and disabled people. All are cut off from full participation in the life of the cities. They find work, shopping and social life made more difficult and more expensive. This is only the start of a vicious circle. The less attractive public transport becomes, the less profitable it is, and so the more the network shrinks, rises in price and loses convenience. All this takes place at a time of ecological crisis, when we need urgently to discourage the use of private cars in cities. The divide isn’t simply a matter of financial inequality, important though that is. A pint of beer in the same chain costs more than twice as much in the most expensive parts of London as it does in the poorest parts of England. Drink, food and shopping habits all diverge between London and the rest. The house price bubble in London and some of the surrounding areas vastly distorts the distribution of assets in the country. For families inside the bubble, the unexceptional and still common experience of owning a family house means a steady annual profit, well outstripping the rate of inflation. It brings no such security and underlying optimism to those on the outside. One of the most important aspects of the divide is the profound effect such expectations have on mood, and ultimately on health. Increasingly, the two nations fall ill and even die at different rates, and are treated differently when catastrophe strikes. Depression rates are much higher outside the capital; life expectancy is falling in the north, while in the south it is still rising. Opioid prescription rates are much higher outside London, and the NHS is still more threadbare. All these factors have gone to the making of the political faultline that underlay the earthquake of the Brexit vote. But that vote, and the outcome of the present process, will do nothing to bring the two nations together. That will require a political reimagining – a redistribution of power, of agency and ultimately of wealth – that will transform both.