Prep 20 minCure OvernightCook 1 hr 20 minServes 4 You can skip the cured egg stage, but the yolks make a lovely counterbalance to the garlicky spuds. 4 egg yolks (optional) 15 good-quality green olives (eg, nocellara), pitted and chopped, plus all the brine from the jar – olive brine is a product that is mostly tipped down the sink; as well as a curing agent, I also use it in salad dressings along with caper brine700g new potatoesSalt1 shallot, peeled and sliced2 sticks celery, sliced thinly1 bay leaf6 cloves new season garlic, peeled and sliced 1 white onion, peeled and diced50g butter 1 small bunch wild garlic leaves, thinly sliced1 big handful flat-leaf parsley leaves, chopped2 tbsp capers, drained If using the egg yolks, put them in a shallow bowl a day ahead, and pour over enough olive brine to submerge them. Leave in the fridge to cure overnight, until firm-ish. You can skip this stage, but the yolks make a lovely counterbalance to the garlicky spuds. Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Peel the potatoes, reserving the skins, and cut the flesh into 2cm dice. Put the peel on an oven tray, bake for 15 minutes, then tip into a big pot with 700ml water, a pinch of salt, the shallot, celery, bay and two cloves of garlic. Bring to a boil, turn down the heat and simmer gently for 30 minutes. Turn off the heat, leave to infuse for 10 minutes, then strain. You can do this ahead of time, if need be. Put the potatoes, onion, butter and the rest of the garlic in a pan over a gentle heat and stir until they begin to sweat. Add a ladle of potato peel stock, stir while it simmers and reduces, then add another ladleful and repeat, much as you would a risotto. When the potato is cooked but still retains its shape, turn off the heat and stir in the wild garlic, parsley, capers and olives. Serve in four bowls, topping each with a cured yolk, if using, lifted carefully out of its brine with a slotted spoon. Prep 10 minCook 45 minServes 4 as a side Rock salt500g jersey royals50g butter150g podded fresh peas (or frozen)1 shallot, peeled and finely diced1 tbsp wholegrain mustard100ml single cream1 bunch fresh mint, leaves picked and finely shredded Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Scatter a thin layer of rock salt on a baking tray and arrange the potatoes on top. Bake for 35-40 minutes, until cooked through. Melt the butter in a pan, add the peas and cook, stirring, for two minutes. Stir in the diced shallot, mustard and cream, then add the potatoes and toss to coat. Off the heat, scatter over the fresh mint and serve. Prep 15 minCook 25 minServes 4 Colatura di alici is an ancient Mediterranean anchovy sauce made in wooden barrels, which you can get in good Italian delis; it’s not cheap, so use a good-quality fish sauce instead, if need be. 800g jersey royals, scrubbed and cut into 2cm-thick slices1 white onion, peeled and finely sliced4 cloves new season garlic, peeled and finely sliced1 bay leaf50-100ml good-quality, peppery extra-virgin olive oilZest of ½ lemon5 salted anchovies, rinsed and finely chopped1 tbsp preserved lemon rind and flesh, finely chopped1 drizzle colatura di alici (or fish sauce) Parmesan or bottarga, to garnish (optional) Put the potatoes, onion, garlic and bay leaf in a large pot and add enough cold water just to cover. Bring to a boil, then turn down the heat and leave to simmer gently for about 20 minutes, or until the potatoes start to fall apart when poked with a fork. Remove and discard the bay leaf. Stir in the oil to taste, then season with the lemon zest, anchovies, preserved lemon and colatura di alici (or fish sauce). Divide into four bowls, scatter over some finely grated parmesan or bottarga, if using, and serve. Prep 10 minCook 30 minServes 4 as a side You can find nori in the world food aisle at big supermarkets. It’s much easier to blend in bulk; so while you need only a scattering here, you can jar the rest and use to flavour butter or as a seasoning. You can buy dulse – a red seaweed – in big supermarkets and healthfood shops. 4 sheets dried nori 400ml milk400ml waterSalt450g new potatoes, scrubbed and quartered30g dried dulse, chopped finely with scissors 20 rock oysters1 tbsp creme fraiche1 squeeze lemon juice Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Put the nori on a small oven tray, bake for five minutes, then leave to cool completely. Cut the nori into small pieces, then whizz to a fine powder in blend ut into the small bowl of a food processor (make sure the bowl is dry) and store in an airtight container. Put the milk, water and a pinch of salt in a large saucepan. Add the potatoes, bring to a simmer and leave to bubble gently until just cooked. Off the heat, add the dulse to the pot and leave to cool slightly in the cooking liquid. Heat a griddle and, once it’s smoking gently, lay in the oysters, cover and leave for 90 seconds, until steam splutters out (or cook them directly on hot barbecue coals for a minute). Carefully lift out the oysters with tongs, then leave to cool a little. Carefully remove the oysters from their shells – they may pop open in the heat, but if not, they’re easily shucked – reserving any juices as you go. Strain the potatoes, tip into a bowl, then stir in the creme fraiche, lemon juice, oysters and some of their reserved juices, to taste. Scatter over a little nori powder and serve. • Recipes by Robin Gill, chef/owner The Dairy and Sorella, both in London SW4, and Darby’s, London SW8, which opens later this month. His new book, Larder, is published by Absolute Press at £26. To order a copy for £22.88, go to guardianbookshop.com