Marks & Spencer is accelerating its retreat from the high street by closing a further 20 of its full-line stores, which sell clothing and food under one roof. The retailer said it planned to close 85 of its big high street stores, on top of the 35 it has already shut. The company is battling the transfer of clothing sales online and it had already told the City to expect about 100 closures. The news of the extra branches being axed came as the group pointed to “green shoots” of recovery, despite annual profits being pulled down by a £440m bill for a modernisation programme. The overhaul of the struggling chain will also involve the closure of 25 of its Simply Food convenience stores. The M&S chief executive, Steve Rowe, insisted its store closure plan remained broadly in line with what had previously been announced, which is a 25% reduction in the selling space devoted to its clothing and home ranges. It would end up with roughly the same number of stores but the balance between its food and clothing ranges would shift, Rowe said. In the end he suspected the number of full-line closures would be “110ish”. The locations of the additional branches being closed have not yet been disclosed. Pre-tax profits were only £84.6m in the year to 30 March after £440m of exceptionals, about half of which relate to the store closure programme. In March, the company announced it was buying half of Ocado’s UK retail business for £750m, a tie-up that will result in Ocado stocking products from M&S rather than Waitrose from next year. M&S on Wednesday launched a £600m cash call to fund the deal. Shareholders are being offered one new share for every five held, at 185p a share, a discount of about 30% on the current price of 264p. After more than a decade of failed attempts to revive the high street giant, Rowe is attempting to stop the rot at Britain’s biggest clothing retailer with a major overhaul that includes revamping its clothing and food ranges as well as a push online in partnership with Ocado. “We are deep into the first phase of our transformation programme and continue to make good progress restoring the basics and fixing many of the legacy issues we face,” Rowe said. While there are green shoots, we have not been consistent in our delivery in a number of areas of the business.” M&S admitted that despite improving the design of its clothing, the performance of its fashion arm had been stymied by the most popular lines, such as those promoted by TV presenter Holly Willoughby, selling out because it had not bought enough stock. Like-for-like clothing sales were down 1.3% in the first three months of 2019. There was a slight improvement in the performance of its food halls, where underlying sales were down 1.5% over the same period. The Retail Economics chief executive, Richard Lim, said M&S continued to “struggle against the rapidly changing consumer environment. The race is on to pivot M&S towards a more sustainable proposition.” Lim believes the company needs to take more radical action “if it is to survive this unprecedented era of disruption”.