‘I’m doing the right thing because I sleep better at night,” says an exhausted-sounding Julian Richer, after a momentous week in which he won plaudits for handing control of his Richer Sounds business to staff. For once though, the entrepreneur’s good deeds have cost him sleep. The 60-year-old has been up all night after being engulfed in a media storm after the Guardian revealed he had transferred 60% of his shares to a John Lewis-style trust. In a world of precarious work and heavy retail job losses, good deeds are as rare as hen’s teeth. The act was made all the more impressive by Richer’s decision to give a third of the £9.2m windfall he received for his stake back to more than 500 staff, handing them £1,000 for every year’s service. “Capitalism is inherently evil because it’s based on greed so you have to rely on people to do the right thing,” he says. “I’m doing the right thing because I sleep better at night, and my business is better off because of it, but a lot of people don’t and that is why the state needs to be firmer.” He made the big reveal on Tuesday morning at the retailer’s annual store manager conference. Crammed into a small Salvation Army hall in central London, some employees were suspicious but later confessed they had anticipated some extra annual leave. With an average payout of £8,000, the announcement was initially met with hushed silence but within a short space of time Richer would receive a standing ovation from cheering staff. The driven entrepreneur, who founded Richer Sounds in 1978 at the age of 19, can sometimes seem too good to be true. Over four decades he has championed providing secure, well-paid jobs because he believes a happy workforce is key to business success. His ongoing largesse, at a time when the use of zero-hours contracts would come to disrupt the labour market, has been rewarded with loyalty from staff who appear to worship him. At the conference employees reel off examples of the support he had given them through personal crises such as battles with cancer. With 23 years of service under his belt, Neville Hart was overwhelmed: “This amount of money is life-changing for anyone. I was nearly in tears but it doesn’t surprise me. Julian is an amazing person.” Richer had already passed responsibility for shifting stereos and speakers some years ago to a team of loyal lieutenants including chief executive, Julie Abraham, and these days is preoccupied with cleaning up capitalism. “I’m on a mission to make the world a better place,” the committed Christian says. “The gap between the rich and poor is getting much bigger and people hate it. I hate it. It gives good capitalists a bad name and makes it harder for them too because other people are taking short cuts.” Business leaders, trade unions and politicians praised Richer’s decision to pass the baton to employees with Josh Hardie, deputy director general of the CBI, the business lobby group, describing it as a way to “improve engagement and share prosperity”. Last year Richer’s book The Ethical Capitalist made the case for “responsible” versus “uncontrolled” capitalism. Capitalism is in crisis, he agrees: “But I haven’t found a better way.” Richer is the first to admit he is “full of mad ideas” to shake up the status quo. He is financing Taxwatch, a non-profit organisation which pores over the opaque finances of multinational companies, and is considering funding a test case against zero-hours contracts. Another project is a “Good Business” charter which he is currently “irritating” business leaders with. “I put the ideas out there and don’t give up until they get off the ground.” Before Richer’s plan was made public the Rich List estimated his fortune to be £160m, with around half of that down to his outright ownership of Richer Sounds. In his youth he was a bon viveur, buying his first Rolls-Royce at 23 and four years later a Georgian mansion in Yorkshire, where he still lives today. “I had jets, helicopters, cars and all that,” he says of the high life. “I had two helicopters at the same time. One wasn’t enough.” These days he is content playing ping pong with Rosie, his wife of 35 years, and going for days out to the coast at Whitby. Reaching the age at which his father died led him to accelerate the handover timetable which was in his will. “I was thinking about how the banks and credit insurers might react,” he says. “I thought I’m 60 now. It’s time.” Despite a creeping awareness of his own mortality, Richer appears in rude health. Still slim, with his trademark slicked back long hair, the Brompton bicycle rider is a ball of energy. He has put his funk band Ten Millennia on hold but only to free up time for his philanthropy, which he thinks will have a bigger impact than his drumming. “I’m very actively giving money away,” he says, listing charitable interests that include a foundation that supported 400 organisations last year. The power shift comes at a tough time for a high street rocked by sweeping changes in shopping habits. The growth of online shopping has seen a swathe of retailers use an insolvency process known as a company voluntary arrangement to shut stores and seek lower rents. Richer Sounds has been shielded from the storm by the founder’s decision to buy the freeholds on most of its 52 stores. “Any idiot can sign a lease,” he says. “I always wanted to be in control of my own destiny by owning the freeholds.” Today its rent and rates bill is just 1.5% of turnover, a figure many retail bosses can only dream of. “We’ve got small stores that are in very busy, secondary positions … so when business migrated to the web we weren’t decimated,” he says. Richer’s business ideas have, he says, been reinforced by his decision to embrace Christianity in later life, but an early influence was a “socialist” housemaster at his boarding school, Clifton College in Bristol. “I was baptised when I was 47 and I’m very proud of that,” he says. “I call my faith practical Christianity. I just want to try and make the world a better place.”