In Keith Waterhouse’s 1989 comedy Jeffrey Bernard Is Unwell, the Spectator columnist recounted his life during an all-nighter at his favourite Soho pub, the Coach & Horses. The play has been given a 30th-anniversary revival, somewhat uneasily combining topicality with datedness. The unexpected relevance comes from this being a site-specific staging, in a locked-in Coach & Horses, to publicise the attempt of its independent landlord to resist a takeover by a pub chain. James Hillier’s immersive staging has Robert Bathurst performing a trimmed hour-long monologue version of the original five-actor play. Bathurst, who dealt superbly with an interruption caused by an audience member in distress, strolls among viewers perched on bar stools and around tables, the accumulating lines of empty glasses becoming extra set-dressing. Through clever positioning, when Bathurst goes out of direct view, he can be picked up in the bar-length mirror. An anti-contemporary element came from a tangible unease, even within a first night audience of sympathetic invitees, at a piece celebrating a character who is definitely an addict of alcohol and gambling, and arguably a misogynist. To be fair, Waterhouse does include attacks on Bernard’s behaviour from some of his wives and lovers, and admirers may feel that the rise of anti-betting legislation and the NHS drinking guidelines in the three decades since the premiere make this hymn to cirrhosis and bankruptcy even more countercultural now than then. I felt uncomfortable, especially as Bathurst maintains throughout his natural honeyed clarity that is sweet to the ear, but ducks the slurred growly reality of Bernard’s speech, just as his costume ignores – unlike Barry Humphries’ Sir Les Patterson – the likely urine- and vomit-stained consequences of the character’s lifestyle. It’s impossible, though, to resist the set-piece anecdotes, particularly those with the punchlines, “Put those triplets back where you found them!” and “No one accuses me of cat-doping!” However it was the pub itself that seemed to me finally more worthy of preserving than the play. Jeffrey Bernard Is Unwell is at Norman’s Coach and Horses, London, on Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays and Sundays until 9 June.