Rafael Benítez has suggested he is close to recommitting to Newcastle United and could soon renew a contract that expires next month. The Spaniard has sometimes cut a tense figure in recent weeks but on Friday his body language seemed relaxed, he was all smiles and there was a sense the club had indicated willingness to try to fulfil at least some of his ambitions. “I was talking to Lee Charnley [Newcastle’s managing director] this week, we will continue talking and let you know as soon as we have more news,” said Benítez as he prepared to face his former side Liverpool at St James’ Park on Saturday night. “I am positive that we are talking and everybody knows what is my idea. At least we can move forward a little bit. I would like to see this club growing and growing, and going where I think it deserves to be.” When asked for confirmation that the talks had been constructive and he was now inclined to stay, his reply hinted at a breakthrough having finally been made after months of impasse. “Yes,” he said. “I can say yes, it seems that things are at least moving forward. Maybe we are getting closer. “It was positive because Lee knows what I’m talking about and what I think. And I know what they think. We can now move forward. At least we’re talking now.” Newcastle supporters have long been lobbying Mike Ashley, the club’s owner, to reach agreement with his manager and Benítez emphasised the strength of the emotional bond he enjoys with the St James’ crowd before indicating that compromise with Ashley over an ambitious managerial manifesto could be in the Tyneside air. It even looks as if a rare face-to-face encounter with the owner could be imminent. “I have had the conversation,” said Benítez. “And he said we will organise a meeting. “I know the fans are supporting me and trying to convince me to stay and I appreciate that. I am really pleased with that. I am happy in the city. I am happy here and the staff, everybody, is doing a very good job and we are very comfortable here. “But the point is we want to progress, we want to be more competitive and we want to be in a better position. “But there are a lot of positives and one of them, for sure, is the fans behind us. I know what the fans want, we have the same feeling. They’re happy when they see us creating chances and winning. They want that and I want that.” Benítez spent six years in charge of Liverpool, winning, among other things, the Champions League in 2005, and narrowly missing out on the Premier League title. Now a man whose family home remains on the Wirral has the chance to possibly help determine whether that latter prize is destined for Merseyside or Manchester City. Not surprisingly, he is keen to quash talk of potential bias or any loss of professional integrity. “I have friends in the Liverpool camp, I have friends also in the Manchester City side,” he said. “I have a good relationship with both Guardiola and Klopp. My relationship with Liverpool, the city, the fans, is there. I was there six years. I have good memories but we have to do our job. We will be professional and we want to win. I have nothing to say about the destination of the title.”