Joan Bakewell is about to receive a Bafta fellowship for a lifetime’s contribution to television: 50 years of making it, shaping it, breaking its assumptions and putting them back together. Every square inch of wall or table in her north London home is covered by a painting or a book. She is open and generous with her reminiscences, but talks of them only fleetingly; there’s always something more pressing, more meaningful, to get to grips with. “We were the first programme that went into colour,” she says, of Late Night Line-Up, the iconoclastic BBC Two review show, in which the rebel intellectuals of the 60s and early 70s – Bakewell, Denis Tuohy, John Stone, Michael Dean, Nicholas Tresilian, Sheridan Morley, Tony Bilbow – dissected British creativity, sometimes including the output of the same channel earlier that evening. “Before we went into colour, we were the test. I was taken shopping, to see whether spots would work, what stripes looked like, before the colour camera. So we were part of change, and we knew that change would always be good. It felt like that because all the marvellous laws were getting passed: easier divorce, no hanging, homosexual tolerance. It was real. The changes were real.” She adds: “We were having a good time, as well.” Sheer enthusiasm is a constant refrain, from her time studying economics at Cambridge – “51 to 54, we’d just won a war, everybody was incredibly upbeat. We were going to create the new Jerusalem, there was no doubt about it” – to 10 years later when: “I had a job, and I had children, and later on I was having an affair as well, so that was all quite busy.” “Busy” is certainly an elegantly economic description of her relationship with Harold Pinter, probably the most famous extramarital tryst of the era. But there’s no need to elaborate, since Pinter already did it: “You’ve seen Betrayal?” she asks. I have – it’s the playwright’s account of their relationship, written in 1978, and made into a film in 1983 with Patricia Hodge as Emma, Bakewell’s character. “Well, it’s true. Except one of the lines is: ‘We’ll be perfectly safe, whoever goes to Kilburn these days?’” In fact she says, the flat she and Pinter met in was in Kentish Town. “That’s the only change.” She’s never nostalgic about her past work, talking about it rather briskly. “You have to know that there was a lot of rubbish [on Late Night Line-Up]. There was a lot of silliness, there was a lot of stuff that didn’t work. People were boring, sometimes people were drunk, there would be misconceived ideas and afterwards we would say, ‘Well, that was rubbish.’” So, when she says: “You couldn’t do it now. They wouldn’t let you. They couldn’t finance it. They wouldn’t be able to define it, because even we couldn’t define it,” it’s less a critique of managerialism – although she makes those too – than a tenderness for the age of glorious chaos. In many ways, that show, which made Bakewell famous, was itself an unexpected second act: she had children by the age of 25 and expected that to be an end to it. “I think women then thought they would have an interesting job, until they had the greatest job of all, which was bringing up the next generation. They saw motherhood as the great calling. I’m sending it up slightly talking like that, but we’d all read Bowlby [the attachment theorist], and the Winnicotts. That was a huge revolution in the way we looked at bringing up children, and it needed women to be at home to do it.” Since then, there have been so many more acts that her life is more box set than play. Since 2010, she has been in the House of Lords, Baroness Bakewell, on the Labour benches; although her views align with the British pressure group Charter 88 when it comes to the second chamber – lament its unelected nature, but enjoys it while it lasts. “There’s me trotting along with my little conscience in my bag, saying: ‘I can’t vote for article 50.’ Didn’t make any difference.” But it has been a creative and principled time for the Lords, or maybe the contrast with the Commons just makes it look that way. “I’ve got caught up in it far more than I thought I would. I thought it would be a nice thing to turn up occasionally and speak for old people. That’s what Ed Miliband had in mind.” Instead, the past three years have been very high stakes, with peers on both sides arguing against the government, though obviously the Labour benches have taken the lead. I asked what they made of their party, its position, its leader. “Jeremy Corbyn doesn’t get mentioned. Sometimes people raise an eyebrow. But we just say: ‘We’ve got a job to do here, they’re sending us the law as they’ve written it, it’s fairly scrappily done, it needs to be improved. We don’t go to the leadership issue at all. I have my own private views I’ll share with friends.” About the Conservatives, she is more frank, but never outside the bounds of courtesy; well, maybe when she talks about Boris Johnson, but that’s off the record. Really? After everything? “We’ll see,” she says. I think she feels bad for Stanley Johnson, with whom she has been in a book group for 15 years. (The group also includes Julia Neuberger, Sir Jeffrey Jowell and Liz Forgan. It sounds like quite an unlikely gathering. “It was at Stanley’s house last time, and we all tacitly agreed not to mention Brexit.”) Bakewell does not see herself as terrifically political – the arc of her career was defined by her interest in the arts. “I didn’t look out at the wider world, I didn’t look at the politics of the day.” She favours solutions where people reach a consensus – citizens’ assemblies and democratic reform come up frequently. However, one shouldn’t mistake this for a mild, arc-of-history-tending-toward-justice view. Bakewell sees herself as poster girl for social mobility – her father grew up in a home “for fatherless artisans”, and educated himself at evening school; her mother traced blueprints. She had to give that up when she had children, after which she became catastrophically depressed. “She would be silent for long periods of time. She didn’t have the vocabulary to express what she was feeling. She would only express it in bouts of rage against me, because I was up in Cambridge.” Bakewell is doubtful about social mobility today, in the arts. “You don’t get the Albert Finneys and the Tom Contis. It’s all these old Etonians.” And she is doubtful, too, about gender equality, not that there hasn’t been any progress. She watched Carrie Gracie give evidence to parliament on the BBC’s pay gap, and, “she was wonderful. So self-possessed. It’s something the young people have that my generation didn’t have, knowing she was right, she wasn’t going to be gainsaid.” Yet describing her own pay gap in the 60s, she says: “There was a strong sense of solidarity. I was earning less than the male presenters of Late Night Line-Up, and the men just said: ‘That’s an outrage,’ went to the editor and said: ‘She’s as good as us, pay her the same.’ And he went: ‘Oh, all right.’ People had freedom and authority in those days, which they don’t have now. An editor could just make a decision. I haven’t heard that in the last 20 years.” It’s a poignant point: those early gains for women came not only from the feminist movement, but from a generalised sense of mutual support between workers – even arts journalists! – against The Man. “I co-present with Stephen Mangan [for Sky Arts’ unusually successful Portrait Artist of the Year, “Bake Off with paint,” Bakewell calls it]. He has a much bigger role, I’m sure he earns a lot more. But I would never dream of asking and he wouldn’t ask me. Much as we like each other, it’s a different business. It used to be very personal.” Bakewell’s only concession to being 86 is an afternoon snooze. “You need to make friends with younger generations, because your own is dying out,” she says. (At this point, it’s all I can do not to say: “Choose me! I’m middle-aged!”) She prizes her good health. “The slightest thing, I rush round to the doctors. I’m never happier than when I’m having a test.” But the really ageless thing about her is the active, intense attention she gives to things that matter. We start on #MeToo and end at Troilus and Cressida; start at Brexit, end at Greenham Common. Bakewell speaks so respectfully of the arts. “The arts desk was always considered very lowly, as it is in the cabinet. But the community you visit when you cover the arts is so interesting. People are always converted.” Her curiosity is its own work of art. • This article was amended on Monday 6 May to correct the spelling of Carrie Gracie’s surname.