Activist investor Edward Bramson has vowed to continue his battle with Barclays despite losing a contentious bid for a seat on the board of the UK bank. Shareholders at Barclays annual general meeting in London on Thursday voted down his proposal to be installed as a director of the lender, with fewer than 13% of votes cast in favour of his resolution. The New York-based investor has criticised Barclays’ underperforming investment bank, saying its strategy has failed to benefit shareholders. It came as Barclays was hit by a surprise revolt over pay, with nearly 30% voting against its remuneration report. Shareholder advisory firm ISS said the bank should have withheld a bigger chunk of Jes Staley’s bonus after he tried to unmask a whistleblower in 2016, given the subsequent blow to Barclays’ reputation. Others groups raised concerns over the size of Staley’s pension, which amounts to nearly 30% of his annual cash pay. Bramson, who owns a 5.5% stake in Barclays, made an appearance at the Barclays annual shareholder meeting, conceding early defeat over his resolution to become a director of the bank He told reporters: “We’ve known it for a couple of weeks.” He declined to comment on his next move after losing the vote. “If you talk to Barclays nothing happens, I can tell you that from personal experience. If we were so inclined we’d have to do something other than talk. What that is, I think, would be premature to say.” The activist stressed that his investment vehicle, Sherborne, is not focused solely on scaling back the investment bank. Instead, he said, it is looking at overall performance of the share price, which has fallen from 260p to about 160p over the past three years. His concerns over poor investor returns were echoed by a number of shareholders. “I don’t want to say this but I support Mr Bramson coming on this board so he can wake this board of directors up,” one shareholder said. Others claimed Bramson’s motivations were entirely selfish. “He doesn’t appear to have any reasonable direct banking experience and his involvement in businesses really seems only to cause difficulties, strip out assets, strip out money and to hell with shareholders, small shareholders the staff and the pensioners,” another shareholder said. “Bear in mind he’s making money for himself and his investors,” they added. Bramson, a British-born lawyer, has built up a stake in Barclays through his Sherborne Investors vehicle, making him the third-largest shareholder after the investment fund BlackRock and Qatar’s sovereign wealth fund. The activist investor did not speak in the open forum of the AGM but was acknowledged in McFarlane’s opening speech. The outgoing chair said the board didn’t support Bramson’s appointment “particularly as we have just recovered from a turbulent past”. McFarlane said they remain “engaged with Bramson” and treated his concerns “very seriously”. McFarlane’s departure paves the way for incoming chair, Rothschild’s Nigel Higgins. He also attended the AGM, which was disrupted by climate protesters. Nearly a dozen activists stood up half way through chief executive Jes Staley’s speech, linking arms and calling for “climate justice”. They were subsequently led out of the QEII Centre in Westminster by security. Bramson said his own efforts have been successful in raising the issue of falling share prices and poor returns for investors. “[Investors] told us the points we’re making are valid and important, but they’ve had a personal appeal from the new chairperson saying that he thinks that he should get an opportunity to fix the thing – if you like – himself, without our assistance.” Bramson did not agree with their take, but conceded that it was a “fair position”. “So if Higgins wants to take a shot at it himself that’s fine with us. The only thing we’d say is having been given a chance to do that we’re expecting to see results.” Responding to the pay revolt, Barclays said: “We are disappointed in this outcome and will seek and reflect carefully on feedback from our shareholders in order to understand more fully the reasons for the opposition to this resolution.” A handful of shareholders raised concerns over pay and bonuses at Barclays AGM, while others focused on the bank’s environmental policy, banking services, the departure of chairman John McFarlane and the impact of Bramson’s agitations.