Round. Short. Female. And the wrong side of middle aged, to boot. Try being all of those things and see what happens when you go swimming. A lively debate erupted this week after Ellie Mae O’Hagan wrote about being sick of sexist behaviour by men in British swimming pools. But I find that I am liable to be judged by everyone in the pool – regardless of their gender. As I get older and rounder, it seems I have sunk to the bottom of the swimming food chain, not only prey to “sexist” men who splash and duck, but also young, svelte women with no cellulite who see me as fair game. “Move over, Granny, I’m coming in!” Only this week I was happily ploughing up and down at my busy local lido, minding my own business in a blissful, zen-like state, about to turn and push off the wall, when – bang! – a young woman in a brightly coloured swimsuit, who’d been standing around in the shallow end for ages, pushed off determinedly right into my path. This heinous swimming crime – a manoeuvre dubbed the “loaf and lunge” by a male swimming friend of mine – is perpetrated just as frequently, in my experience, by women as by men. On a bad day, someone will look at me as they saunter to the water’s edge, eye me up and down, paying attention to my age, height, and size, and will quickly judge me as less competent in the water than they will ever be. Perhaps if I’m already swimming, and they are standing at the end of the pool chatting, they’ll also see my dodgy stroke, slightly lazy left arm and the relaxed cadence of my arm turnover, and think “she’s old and slow”. They will loaf and lunge – or even worse they will “sprint past and block”, another classic crime perpetrated on swimmers everywhere. Other swimmers’ snap assessment of my appearance and thus abilities will inform any number of infuriating habits. But just as I am judged by – and on the receiving end of bad behaviour from – both men and women, so I too judge indiscriminately. You, with the board shorts! You in the teensy-weensy bikini! How dare you be fast when you don’t even have the proper swimming attire? And you over there with the flailing arms! I know that you’ve beat me over one length, but that’s because you’ve only swum one length. I will eyeball you as you gasp and huff and puff, and I turn. I will take great joy in looking you right in the eye with a silent fleeting stare that says: “Watch me turn and push off as you clutch the wall. Is that all you’ve got?” But worst of all is the red mist that overcomes me when a head-up breaststroker with no swimming cap overtakes me. My indignation when this happens is alarming even to me. I know that I’m being ridiculous, because the breaststroker with no swimming cap could be an Olympic swimmer on their day off for all I know. But I will do everything in my power not to be overtaken by them. On a bad day I can also fume and splash unreasonably. On a generous day I just shrug and roll my eyes and attribute bad behaviour to utter witlessness, to the chlorine, to the stresses of life. More often than not, when confronted with bad etiquette I will just move lane, leave more distance between me and my fellow swimmers, and instead choose to smile and marvel at the beautiful cooperation required to swim in a busy urban pool. I’ll concentrate on the fact that I can jump into a lane, slot myself into the appropriate place between eight to 10 half-naked strangers all swimming at different speeds, with differing skills, swimming different strokes, and we can make it work. No language is needed: there is an implicit understanding of the rules of the pool, of water, that apply wherever you might be in the world. I marvel that we can swim up and down in harmony: overtaking, capitulating, motioning to pass with a silent frantic wave, smiling a nod of thanks between gasps and tumbles. A beautifully seamless, slow-motion dance. Nothing makes me smile more than a lane well shared. But if you are having a bad day of your own – a word to the wise. I may be older, shorter, rounder (and even more female) than you. I may even be slower. But don’t grab my leg, grope me, or loaf and lunge: take a moment to look at me properly. My goggles mask a glint in my eyes that bespeaks a thousand swims, longer and colder and harder than you could ever contemplate. If you smile and ask me nicely, I might even stop swimming for a moment to tell you about some of them. • Sally Goble is a long-distance swimmer who has swum the English Channel solo. She writes about swimming for the Guardian swimming blog