Youth is wasted on the young and so, in my case, was undergraduate education. I can count on the fingers of one hand the number of lectures I attended during my three years, too busy with the more serious business of propping up bars and pursuing romantic complications. One of those whose lectures I studiously avoided 20 years ago was a relatively new employee of the university, Emma Smith, who must have been only a few years older than me. She has since become one of our leading Shakespeare scholars, publishing a brilliant, exhaustive history of the First Folio in 2016. Like many, I regretted not applying myself more diligently to my studies, and so it felt like a second chance when, 10 years ago, Smith began to release podcasts of her undergraduate lectures online. These lectures have since become a staple of my cultural life, essential preparation for encounters with the Bard in theatre and film, pressed eagerly on friends real and virtual, shamelessly cribbed from whenever I review a Shakespeare play on the radio. There was a lovely moment on the train up to London late last year when, taking my 10-year-old son to his first Shakespeare – Christopher Eccleston’s Macbeth at the Barbican – we shared an ear each of an Emma Smith podcast, and I felt as I always feel when I introduce someone to her work: as if I’m passing on a gift, one that simultaneously enchants and demystifies the work of our greatest literary genius. Smith’s written voice, like that of her lectures, is disarmingly frank, refreshingly irreverent, full of pop culture Now Smith has turned 20 of her Approaching Shakespeare podcasts into a book, expanding upon and weaving together her original lectures to create This Is Shakespeare, already burnished with glowing praise from Hilary Mantel and James Shapiro. In her epilogue, Smith imagines other books she might have written that are “present in the archaeology of this one”. She summons the beautiful image of the ghost buildings and settlements revealed by the “long, dry summer” of 2018 to trace these works buried within her own book. She might, she tells us, have composed a literary biography of Shakespeare (like we need another one of those), or a theatrical study of his work in performance, or a historical treatise exploring ideas of “Elizabethan succession politics, religion, social organisation and city life”. What she is doing by conjuring up these unwritten books is subtly reminding you that her book is all of these and more. This is the power of her central thesis: we find Shakespeare not in speculative biopics or the reductive quibbling of academic exegesis, but rather in the work itself. This, she is saying, is Shakespeare; he is his plays. “There’s nothing more to say about the facts of Shakespeare’s own life, and vitality is a property of the works, not their long-dead author.” Smith’s written voice, like that of her lectures, is disarmingly frank, refreshingly irreverent, full of pop culture, from Homer Simpson to Friends to screwball comedy. “Confession: I don’t really care what he might have meant, and nor should you,” she says at one point. Smith claims she wants the book to appeal to everyone: “Readers, theatregoers, students and all those who feel that they missed out on Shakespeare at some earlier point and are willing to have another pop at these extraordinary works.” To achieve this, she sets about slaughtering a whole herd of sacred cows, holding up for examination many of the pieties about Shakespeare that we are taught to observe at school. The central idea behind This Is Shakespeare is that it is the “sheer and permissive gappiness of his drama” – what Smith calls the “radical uncertainties” in Shakespeare’s plays – that makes it so universal, so consistently relevant to its times. It is the gaps he leaves for readers, actors, directors and audiences to inhabit that gives these “partial, shifting, unstable survivals from a very different world… the extraordinary ability to ventriloquise and stimulate our current concerns”. The gaps are also why it’s a mistake to seek definitive answers from a Shakespeare play. “I don’t think Shakespeare writes his plays to convey messages,” Smith says. “He asks questions rather than answers them.” Taking a cue from this, Smith structures the book as a series of questions asked in turn to each of the 20 plays. She asks, what happens if Katherine and Petruchio don’t kiss at the end of The Taming of the Shrew? What if Isabella refuses to marry the Duke at the end of Measure for Measure? What if we don’t buy into the twee Victorian vision of A Midsummer Night’s Dream and see it, instead, as the “much darker, sexier” play that it is? How have world events altered the status of King Lear in our cultural consciousness? Why does Coriolanus forget the name of the “poor man” who sheltered him during the Volscian war? What does the contemporary belief that The Tempest comes late in Shakespeare’s canon do to our understanding of the play? These questions are brilliantly illuminating and serve both as introductions to the plays for those in need of a refresher and prompts for deeper thought for those more familiar with the work. There’s a huge amount of other criticism here, both historical and contemporary, but This Is Shakespeare is far more than merely synoptic. Smith’s own close reading of Shakespeare’s plays is dazzling, her original research – on doubling, on the crossing of generic boundaries, on male friendship – totally convincing. What This Is Shakespeare gives the reader most of all, though, is a licence to enjoy the plays without the cultural and historical baggage they so often carry. Smith is, above all else, great fun, and it’s impossible not to get carried along on the tide of her enthusiasm. This Is Shakespeare is the best introduction to the plays I’ve read, perhaps the best book on Shakespeare, full stop. With the monstrosity of that sham-intellectual buffoon Boris Johnson’s book on the Bard lurking just over the horizon (although apparently still unwritten), this is like an anticipatory reprimand, a model of unpretentious, deeply researched, profoundly approachable criticism. It’s a book to give to anyone who loves Shakespeare, but particularly to those who think they don’t. • This Is Shakespeare by Emma Smith is published by Pelican (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99