When Sophia Alexandra Hall received the response to her application for the University of Oxford in 2015, she opened it in front of everyone at her school. “I ran into the canteen and burst into tears,” she says. “I was sobbing, and I remember my headteacher saying: ‘Stop crying – you got into Oxford!’ No one at social services believed me.” As a care leaver, the odds of Hall making it to university, let alone Oxford, were very slim. As of 31 March 2018, 75,420 children were living in the care system in England. When I lived in children’s homes in Oldham 15 years ago, some care staff were content with children choosing PlayStations over the classroom, and it felt as if they were apathetic to our wellbeing in general. Things haven’t changed much. In September 2018, social care inspectors found that children from a privately managed care home in the town would regularly abscond, were involved in “county lines” drug running and had “minimal engagement” with education. This month, the Centre for Social Justice, a centre-right thinktank, found that care leavers in the UK are “more likely to end up in a prison cell than a lecture hall”, while a recent BBC Newsnight investigation discovered that teenagers in care are being left in unregulated accommodation to be exploited by organised criminal gangs. The proportion of care leavers entering higher education is routinely cited at about 6%, but this figure does not provide a complete picture because it only tracks students until they are 21. A study conducted by Neil Harrison, the deputy director of the Rees Centre at the University of Oxford, followed care leavers until they were 23, reflecting the fact that many take longer to progress through the education system. This found that 12% of care leavers in England had entered higher education at that point. But even 12% is still significantly less than the 49% of the general population attending university in England. With so few care leavers going to university, what makes the difference for those who do attend? I meet Hall, 22, in Hyde Park in London, just down the road from Imperial College London, where she is studying for an MA in business. Hall says that, after she went into care following a family breakdown when she was 16, she felt her life would never be the same. “I considered running away more times than I should have. I was self-harming, and I was drinking quite heavily,” she says. Despite moving between several foster homes, Hall remained at the prestigious Purcell school for young musicians, to which she had won a scholarship, and was determined to succeed. “I don’t think I’m ridiculously clever; I just worked really, really hard. Especially when it came to GCSEs and A-levels because going into care was a kind of kick up the arse for me, and I went: ‘If you want to get out of this situation, you’d better work hard.’” Hall won another scholarship to support her undergraduate degree and says that if it wasn’t for the support that Oxford offered, she wouldn’t have been able to go. Understanding that university isn’t an ivory tower, but a reasonable aspiration for anybody willing to apply themselves, is vitally important. Yonatan Rice, a 39-year-old doctor practising in Jerusalem, entered the British care system after a family breakdown when he was 14, and experienced a disruptive education that saw him expelled at 15 for poor attendance. Rice says he received little encouragement from his care workers, who were indifferent to his truancy. “No one said: ‘Don’t mess this up; don’t lose this.’ It didn’t make any difference to them,” Rice adds. Despite his expulsion, Rice aspired to go to university, and resat his GCSEs during his late teens and early 20s while supporting himself with low-paid jobs. He made it to medical school when he was 22. A lot of children in care don’t go to university because they don’t see it as an option for them. “One thing I had from my parents growing up was an idea that I would, one day, go to university. They both went to university, and it’s something they spoke about,” Rice says. “If it’s not planted in your mind as something that adults do, you’re very unlikely to do it.” Indeed, as far as I’m aware, I am the only person among the 20 or so children with whom I grew up in the care system who went on to study at university. Expelled from almost every school I attended, I didn’t make it to university until I was 23. I had ended up in care after my home life was turned upside down, so it is hardly surprising that I was disoriented at school and fell into a pattern of disruptive behaviour. I was expelled for the final time when I was 15 and left school without any qualifications. At 17, I began living on my own and spent years either collecting benefits or packing boxes and stacking shelves. But, like Rice, I had university at the back of my mind. Probably the reason I made it, while the kids I grew up in care with didn’t, is that members of my family had attended. I was accepted at Manchester Metropolitan University after 18 months of evening classes while gardening for Oldham council during the day. My parents are not alive any more and it is very tough, especially over the summer Emily Jones (not her real name), a 21-year-old law student in her final year at Brunel University London, entered the care system when she was five and feels she didn’t receive academic support from the two foster placements she moved between. “I used to get into trouble at school a lot,” Jones says. “Obviously, because I was flicking between two homes, I wouldn’t always have the right equipment or the right uniform. The teachers weren’t really lenient with that; they would take it out on me, so I’d often get detention and get into trouble for things that weren’t necessarily my fault.” Jones didn’t like secondary school and narrowly avoided expulsion, but enjoys education and was determined to study A-levels after getting Bs and Cs at GCSE. Yet reaching university was a struggle. Even though she has been in the system since infancy, she says her local authority told her she wasn’t eligible for the support that care leavers receive because she had been looked after by a special guardian instead of a foster carer. That guardian kicked her out two weeks after her 16th birthday. “If this had happened before my birthday,” she says, “the council would have had a responsibility to find me new foster parents, and I would subsequently have been supported by them now, and until I finish my education. My parents are not alive any more and it is very tough, especially over the summer.” From reduced tuition fees to bursaries, access to counselling and year-round accommodation, universities have become much better at supporting care leavers over the past 10 years. I was fortunate enough to be entitled to support – but, like many care leavers, was unaware of it. As a result, I racked up huge rental arrears that left me homeless before my finals. Sam Turner, of the care leavers’ charity Become, says the fact that there is financial help available is “not information that necessarily reaches the people who really need to hear it the most”. He adds: “If they had all the awareness of the different bursaries that universities can offer and the different kinds of funding that local authorities can give them, it’s actually a really realistic proposition for a lot of people.” The main problem, however, remains encouraging those who grow up in care to pursue higher education in the first place. Ruth Kelly, the former education secretary and the current pro vice-chancellor at St Mary’s University in west London, believes we need to do more to persuade children in care that they belong at university. “This needs to happen from an early stage,” Kelly says. “We can’t wait around until students might be on the verge of entering higher education. The flight path to university needs to begin much earlier.” The First Star academy at St Mary’s exposes schoolchildren between years nine and 10, who have or had “child looked after” status, to university life. The St Mary’s campus runs a four-week residential academy over the summer where students receive life-skills training as well as tutoring in English, maths, science and IT. Students continue to receive academic support throughout GCSE and A-level education. “Our first cohort of 30 pupils from the care system are thriving,” Kelly says. “Higher education becomes not just a visible option for them; it is an option they have already begun to live and breathe.” A project such as First Star is welcome, but it is a drop in the ocean. Even though Hall, Rice and Jones had little support, they all made it to university through hard work and self-belief, and they were fortunate enough to avoid the pitfalls to which lots of children growing up in care succumb. But children in care shouldn’t have to rely on lucky breaks to get a chance at a better life. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.