The rise in life expectancy in Britain from 2001 to 2016 was largely driven by better medical care of heart attack patients. People are now more likely to survive heart attacks and live instead with heart failure, where the organ is weakened but limps on, even if severely underpowered. But the improved survival rates for heart attack patients have levelled off since 2016, leaving doctors desperate for fresh approaches to fight cardiovascular disease. Even though 80% of heart attacks can be prevented by a healthy lifestyle, UK hospitals still deal with about 100,000 cases every year. Medicines ranging from cholesterol-lowering statins to pills for high blood pressure already prevent scores of heart attacks, but patients are not always good at taking preventive medicines. Kiran Musunuru, a geneticist at the University of Pennsylvania, said a third to a half of US heart attack patients who leave hospital with a statin prescription are no longer taking their medicine a year later. A gene therapy that protects against heart attack could transform how those at risk are treated. Instead of taking daily pills for the rest of their lives, the injection would potentially slash their risk with a single jab, much like a vaccine. The treatment that the firm Verve Therapeutics hopes to develop will use a gene editing tool called Crispr-Cas9 to target genes that raise levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL), the “bad cholesterol” in the bloodstream. High levels of LDL cause cholesterol to build up in blood vessels. When this breaks off, the cholesterol gunk can form clots that block the arteries supplying blood to the heart. But an experimental therapy will always have risks, so the first patients lined up for trial will be those with a rare and life-threatening genetic disorder called homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH). The condition affects up to one in 160,000 people and leads to extremely high blood cholesterol. Many have heart attacks in their 30s and 40s. For patients with FH, the benefits of an experimental gene therapy may easily outweigh the risks. But for the 7 million people in Britain who take statins to lower their risk of heart attack, the situation is less clear. Medical regulators will want to see convincing proof that the therapy is safe and effective before approving it for reasonably healthy people whose risk of heart attack is only slightly higher than average. Such proof could take many years to collect. In principle, a gene therapy that slashes cholesterol could be used to create designer babies who are born with built-in protection against heart attacks. But Sekar Kathiresan, the co-founder of Verve Therapeutics, said that was not part of the plan: “We will not edit any sperm, eggs, or embryos. We are only focused on adults who can actually give consent for an experimental therapy.” Safety is not the only challenge. Health services and pharmaceutical firms are used to treating cardiovascular disease as a chronic illness, where patients are kept on relatively inexpensive drugs for many years. A one-off gene therapy that slashes bad cholesterol would upend that financial model, raising the possibility that the treatment could be so expensive that poorer countries miss out, or that it fails to reach the market at all.