A current risk in artistic awards ceremonies – and culture more generally – is the suggestion that a progressive message matters more than creative innovation. The 2019 Bafta voters may not have been immune from this instinct in honouring shows that dealt with suffragettes; gun crime; drug addiction; the Cambridge Analytica data scandal; Britain’s war dead; and a teenager killed by loans he was unable to repay. Some of these shows were exceptional: BBC Two’s Gun No 6, tracing the history of a multiply murderous firearm, was as technically skilful as it was journalistically urgent. But I fear that a major reason for the shocking underperformance of the BBC’s farcical bio-drama about the former Liberal leader, Jeremy Thorpe, A Very English Scandal – with Hugh Grant missing out to Benedict Cumberbatch for leading actor, and only Ben Whishaw winning for supporting actor – may have been that it is hard to draw a warming message from a lying, homicidal politician getting away with it. And did the inexplicable overlooking of Channel 4’s Derry Girls for Best Scripted Comedy reflect unease from some panellists about the Northern Irish Troubles as a subject for a sitcom? If such concerns did exist, then Killing Eve – a darkly funny and subversive story, but also progressive because of its strongly female creative team – was well placed to benefit. Jed Mercurio, whose Line of Duty has also been undervalued by Bafta, saw his Bodyguard – last year’s most-watched drama – snubbed by judges. Revealingly, the sole award won by the political thriller was the Must-See Moment, the only trophy decided by public vote, which suggests a gulf between audience and industry values, of which the Oscars have also often been accused. Two controversial ITV figures had contrasting evenings. The judges for Entertainment Programme baulked at giving the trophy to Ant & Dec’s Saturday Night Takeaway, for a series from which Anthony McPartlin was absent for the last two episodes after a drink-driving conviction. Ant and Dec were also, very unusually at Bafta, denied the Entertainment Performance prize. However, with Britain’s Got Talent judged the most entertaining programme, McPartlin came to the stage as part of its team. He also joined Declan Donnelly and Holly Willoughby on stage when they were picked as best presenters for the run of I’m a Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here! they presented while Ant was in rehab. Given that McPartlin’s actions could have killed people, some may feel that TV has rehabilitated him a little too quickly. Piers Morgan has peevishly tweeted that he had been given a seat that would make it hard to reach the stage if Good Morning Britain won News Coverage. A more modest figure may have realised that award ceremony placements are based on need to access the podium, as it proved. The night’s most unexpected winners reflected industry politics. Sky took three of the first four awards handed out, including Best Mini-Series for Patrick Melrose. Impressive as the adaptation of Edward St Aubyn’s novels was, few expected it to beat A Very English Scandal. So Sky’s exceptionally good night may also have reflected a continuing resistance among voters to the BBC’s long dominance of these awards. Aside from judges’ desire to spread the prizes, Sky may also have benefitted this year from no longer being owned by Rupert Murdoch, who, in the past, sometimes left liberals ill-disposed to the network’s shows. It felt fitting that part of the winning slate was Succession, the brilliant drama about a Murdochian media dynasty. However, in another judging room, the decision to favour Killed By My Debt over Black Mirror: Bandersnatch, a truly innovative interactive edition of Charlie Brooker’s technological horror series, may be thought to reflect hostility in the UK TV community against Netflix. In a year when some exceptional work was honoured, the fear is that moral and maker sometimes trumped content in the judging rooms.