A year ago, Purplebricks’ boast about being a “world-leading” competitor to traditional estate agents sounded cheeky, but not hopelessly so. The would-be UK disrupter had launched in Australia, Canada and the US. In doing so, it caught the eye of Axel Springer. The German publishing company snapped up an 11.5% stake for £125m in March last year, apparently confirming Purplebricks’ status as a rare beast – a UK technology startup worth more than £1bn. Partnership with Axel Springer “will propel Purplebricks further towards our strategic goals and global ambition”, declared its co-founder and chief executive, Michael Bruce, unwisely. He has now been pushed out of the company, the victim of a boardroom coup carried out by the chairman, Paul Pindar, with the blessing of major shareholders. For good measure, the Australian operation will be shut and the one in the US will be shrunk. Ditching a founder is a major event at a five-year-old company, but you can’t blame the Germans – nor, presumably, 29% investor Woodford Investment Management or 13% holder Merian – for concluding something had to happen. Axel invested at 360p, but the share price now is 119p, and the reason is easy to spot: hefty marketing bills in Australia and the US weren’t producing much revenue. That, one assumes, is what Pindar meant in his mea culpa about capital being allocated in “suboptimal” fashion and the rate of geographic expansion being “too rapid”. You bet: cash balances have fallen from £153m soon after the Springer proceeds arrived to “not less than £62m” a year later. That’s some rate of cash burning. Retreat to the UK, plus Canada and pockets of the US, looks essential. Pindar, who owns 4%, should explain why it has taken so long for reality to bite. Still, the new note of humility in the boardroom is welcome. There is a lot of goodwill towards Purplebricks. Its formula of low upfront fees, as opposed to commissions expressed as a percentage of the sale price, won’t suit everybody, but it’s useful for everybody that the model exists to serve as a brake on traditional agents’ prices. Yet the company’s relentlessly bullish tone had started to grate. Make some decent returns in the UK, and not just on an “adjusted operating” basis, before declaring a global triumph. It’s not only investors in water companies who want to know what an incoming Labour government would pay for their shares. Remember, Royal Mail is also on the nationalisation ticket. In the case of the postal service, though, there is a complication for any Labour chancellor seeking a purchase at below market price: 140,000 Royal Mail workers were given free shares at privatisation and most, it is thought, are still on the register. Indeed, there was a row in October when, on the fifth anniversary of privatisation, Royal Mail staff were able to sell the first tranche of their 913 free shares without paying tax. The problem was the company issued a heavy profit warning a fortnight earlier, sending the share price skidding. Before the warning, the free allocation was worth almost £4,500; suddenly, it was worth closer to £3,000. The price has got worse since. Royal Mail, controversially floated at 330p a share by the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government, now trades at 242p. Crystallising the market price – let alone a lower price – may not impress those workers who have held their shares in the hope of recovery. To date, most of the nationalisation focus has been on the English water industry: the Sunday Times reported at the weekend that a Labour internal document proposed paying as little as £20bn for equity that might, even on a conservative basis, be valued at twice as much. The politics at the Royal Mail, given the direct holdings of a chunk of a heavily unionised workforce, look even trickier. “Outlook remains subdued as uncertainty continues,” says the European commission in its shorthand summary of the outlook for the UK economy. Fair enough. Predicted growth of 1.3% this year, and the same again in 2020, could indeed be described as subpar, and it would be perverse to think Brexit isn’t a factor. But if 1.3% is subdued, how can the commission justify its mild enthusiasm for Germany? “Moderate growth with resilient domestic demand after 2019 dip,” says the report, semi-cheerfully. Eh? The actual projections for Germany are 0.5% in 2019 and 1.5% in 2020, so a lot slower than the UK this year and only slightly faster next. By all means give the UK a deserved thump over Brexit, but please be even-handed: those German figures are not good.