Goalkeeper: Dean Henderson (Sheffield United) The Manchester United loanee is on Gareth Southgate’s radar after a league-high 21 clean sheets. Another outstanding season away from his parent club after shining at Shrewsbury. Right-back: Max Aarons (Norwich City) The marauding teenager started the season on the periphery – Aarons made his league debut in September – but finished it as one of the first names on Daniel Farke’s team sheet. England’s next big thing at right-back. Centre-back: Adam Webster (Bristol City) Rarely flustered, Webster oozes class, sweeping up and striding out with possession. Stayed fit after being bogged down by injuries at Portsmouth and Ipswich. Centre-back: Liam Cooper (Leeds United) When he joined Chesterfield in League Two in 2013, Cooper thought his career was heading only in one direction but he has been at the heart of revival under Marcelo Bielsa. Eligible for Scotland, a defensive Braveheart. Left-back: Jamal Lewis (Norwich City) The 21-year-old, who competed for England in athletics in his teens, hit the ground running after missing the start of the season. Like Aarons, also poached from Luton’s academy, he has been a breath of fresh air. Centre-midfield: Kalvin Phillips (Leeds United) An Armley boy, Phillips is one of their own. A huge presence under Marcelo Bielsa, he has hoovered up in the anchorman role. “When he plays well, the level of the team increases clearly,” the Argentinian says. Centre-midfield: John McGinn (Aston Villa) Wembley winner capped a magnificent campaign. A relentless force, he has hassled and harried countless opposition into the ground. His 25-yard volley against Sheffield Wednesday in September was mesmerising. Attacking midfield: Harry Wilson (Derby County) Relished the responsibility handed to him by Frank Lampard, scoring 18 goals; five were piercing free-kicks, including a peach at Old Trafford. The Liverpool winger is going as a fan to the Champions League final. Right wing: Jarrod Bowen (Hull City) An outstanding 22 goals from the flanktells only half the story. The former Hereford scholar is a rare breed: a workhorse of a winger. Bowen plugs away when others have given up – brilliant at the basics and capable of the divine. Striker: Teemu Pukki (Norwich City) Picked up on a free, Pukki – an unselfish, persistent and clever forward – represents the signing of the season. The Finn scored 29 goals to take the golden boot ahead of Billy Sharp, Che Adams and Neal Maupay, all of whom also shone. Left wing: Saïd Benrahma (Brentford) Could not have wished for a better debut season. After scoring his first league goal in December, went on to hit double figures in goals and assists, despite starting 63% of league matches. Manager: Chris Wilder (Sheffield United) Guided his boyhood club back to the big time. Will fly the flag for workaholic English coaches in top flight, having won promotion from the ninth, fifth, fourth, third and second tiers. “I’ve missed a couple out but I don’t fancy going back,” he jokes. Goalkeeper: Adam Davies (Barnsley) A class act, made his Wales debut in March. Kept joint-league high of 19 clean sheets. Aaron Ramsdale also made a huge impact, on loan at AFC Wimbledon. Right-back: Jack Stacey (Luton Town) Has flourished since leaving Reading two years ago, winning back-to-back promotions. Loves to attack; contributed eight assists and four goals. Centre-back: Ethan Pinnock (Barnsley) At the heart of the division’s meanest defence, the former Dulwich Hamlet player, rejected by Millwall, has matured into a fine centre-half. Centre-back: Matt Clarke (Portsmouth) That the 22-year-old picked up 13 end-of-season awards says it all. A classy defender, Clarke was ever present in a team that went close. Brighton-bound. Left-back: James Justin (Luton Town) The latest academy success story, the 21-year-old was influential in a free-scoring side. Joined hometown club aged seven and lives with his parents. Centre-midfield: Herbie Kane (Doncaster Rovers) Made a splash on loan from Liverpool. Played rugby from the age of four and used his strength to outmuscle opposition. Idolised Steven Gerrard. Centre-midfield: Aiden McGeady (Sunderland) Often the difference between a good or a bad team performance, McGeady provided a touch of class. Technically gifted, the 33-year-old led promotion tilt. Centre-midfield: Tom Bayliss (Coventry City) Injury ended his season but his stock continues to rise. Tall and slight, Bayliss, 20, was a late developer but with 50-plus appearances is making up for lost time. Right wing: Jamal Lowe (Portsmouth) A primary school teacher until two years ago, he plays with a child-like enthusiasm. Had a fine campaign, scoring 17 goals, including a beauty at Wembley. Striker: Lyle Taylor (Charlton Athletic) “I wear nine on my back and try and score goals,” said Taylor, a free transfer after leaving Wimbledon. Twenty-five goals later, he was a big hit. Left wing: Ronan Curtis (Portsmouth) Fizzled out following a freak finger injury but enjoyed a spectacular campaign after signing from Derry City. Chris Coleman’s godson, made Republic of Ireland debut in November. Manager: Lee Bowyer (Charlton Athletic) Made a thankless task look relatively easy, winning promotion despite not spending a penny on players and losing Karlan Grant in January. Wally Downes deserves acclaim for keeping AFC Wimbledon afloat. Goalkeeper: Joe Day (Newport County) Pulled off plenty of stunning saves, including in the FA Cup. Raced to hospital following Middlesbrough victory after wife Lizzie went into labour with twins. Right-back: George Edmundson (Oldham Athletic) Backed up fine loan at AFC Fylde by holding down a regular berth. Impressed amid chaos behind the scenes. Set to depart. Centre-back: Jason Shackell (Lincoln City) Dropped to the fourth tier after years across the Premier League and Championship. Ever present, the 35-year-old won a fourth promotion. Centre-back: Krystian Pearce (Mansfield) Nicknamed ‘The Chief’ since his Birmingham days, the captain was at the the soul of the division’s best defence. Did not miss a minute of league action. Left-back: Dean Lewington (MK Dons) Captain, leader, legend. The 35-year-old, who broke the 700-game barrier, may not be the quickest but proved reliable en route to a League One return. Centre-midfield: Danny Mayor (Bury) The No 10 fuelled Bury’s promotion, causing havoc drifting in off either flank. Scored a beauty against Grimsby. Central midfield: Hiram Boateng (Exeter City) The former Crystal Palace youngster impressed, epitomised by preposterous skill before a fine finish against Port Vale. Has joined MK Dons. Attacking midfield: Sammie Szmodics (Colchester) Sixteen years after joining, the playmaker had his best season, hitting double figures in goals and assists. Difficult to envisage him in League Two next year. Right-wing: Tyler Walker (Mansfield) Son of the former England defender Des, the Nottingham Forest loanee did everything but help Mansfield over the line. Missed crucial spot-kick in play-off. Striker: James Norwood (Tranmere Rovers) A serial goalscorer (55 in 99 games), he was the most prolific striker outside the Premier League, level with Sergio Agüero on 32 goals. Left-wing: Nicky Maynard (Bury) After joining on a short-term deal in September, the former Bristol City and Crewe striker struck 21 times, averaging a goal every 140 minutes. Manager: Micky Mellon (Tranmere Rovers) Capped another remarkable season by completing back-to-back play-off final victories. He couldn’t make it three in a row, could he?