As researchers in sunlight and vitamin D, we welcome the advice by Professor Steve Jones to “get out in the sun” and to take vitamin D supplements when there is not enough sun (Scientist urges people to take vitamin D, 27 May). Levels of vitamin D deficiency are high in the UK, and this is likely to impact on the nation’s long-term bone health, with an increase in childhood rickets and adult bone disease. Vitamin D cannot be easily obtained from diet, so sunlight and supplements are the main options to address deficiencies. Our research provides more context and detail on this: daily sunlight exposure for just 10-15 minutes in the middle of the day (25 minutes for people with darker skin) during the spring and summer months should provide sufficient vitamin D to avoid vitamin D deficiency all year round. For most people, this will be a safe level of exposure. Exposing lower arms and legs during warm weather will further optimise a good supply of vitamin D. We agree with Professor Jones’s message to “get out in the sun”, and highlight that low levels of exposure are all that are required, minimising risks of skin cancer.Professor Ann Webb, Professor Lesley Rhodes University of Manchester • Urban planning should take account of sunlight (For the sake of our health, we need to kick the indoor habit, 27 May), but the appeal court thinks otherwise. It recently ruled that land at Royal Wootton Bassett in Wiltshire could not be registered as a town or village green because it lay within an area scheduled for development. The future inhabitants will thus be denied the right to open-air recreation close to their homes on land safeguarded for that purpose. Developers should be required to create permanent new green spaces and paths, and the government should enable local authorities properly to manage and improve their parks and green spaces. From a purely financial point of view this makes sense, by cutting the costs to the NHS of an unhealthy population.Kate AshbrookGeneral secretary, the Open Spaces Society • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition