A house in Sydney’s south-west advertised with a now famous interpretive dance video has sold before auction for more than $1.7m, a good price for the suburban neighbourhood. The four-bedroom house with a pool on a quiet street in Padstow shot to fame last month over the unusual efforts by the real estate agent to sell it. Alongside the regular interior photographs was a video, which its creator swore was “supposed to be funny”. In it, a couple – at least one of whom was not in the wedding pictures on the wall – dance their way through the house, leap onto benchtops, twirl through the dining room, and attempt to swim, before jumping into bed. That it synced almost perfectly with Time of My Life from the movie Dirty Dancing was just a happy coincidence. The video prompted a huge amount of attention – including both delight and derision – on social media, but for at least one of the watchers it was serious, and came with a price tag that gave the owners the last laugh. Sam Nader, the LJ Hooker real estate agent listing the property, said a 23-year-old man saw the video on social media and booked an inspection. “He’s a first-time buyer, he fell in love with the place and bought it,” said Nader. With an auction scheduled for Saturday, Nader said they hadn’t gotten to the stage of setting a reserve price yet, but the young man’s offer of $1.72m was much higher than what the owners were expecting. The median price for a four-bedroom house in Padstow over the last year was around $970,000, according to domain.com.au. “This buyer really wanted it,” said Nader, adding that the young man intends to live in the house. Nader said more than 1,000 people went through the property on open house inspections. When asked how many were serious buyers he said they gave out more than 25 contracts. Nader credited the video for the quick and successful sale. “I can’t give it all the attention but that’s probably it,” he said. The agency has a couple of videos planned for other properties.