Small Island, with a running time of three and a quarter hours, sounded in advance as if it was in danger of turning into Long Island. It was easy to suppose that Rufus Norris’s production of Andrea Levy’s novel, partly inspired by her father’s experience of travelling to England from Jamaica in 1948 on the Empire Windrush, would travel heavy or be cooling its heels. After all, even the 2009 Bafta-winning TV mini-series saw fit to divide itself into two episodes. But there was not a second during this transporting evening of being even slightly tempted to glance at one’s watch or to remember one was in a theatre at all. The show has dazzling attention to detail, seamless transitions between the West Indies and England, a mix of naturalism and playfulness and fine ensemble playing from a 40-strong cast. But it stands out most of all because of what it has in abundance – that rarest of qualities in an epic – charm. It’s in Jamaica that we first meet Hortense. Leah Harvey captures the girl’s delicious pride in being herself, an assistant teacher in a pretty, green hand-me-down frock (her white employer’s gift). She stays proud even when she moves to England and the country seems intent on seeing her sparkle fade. It’s irresistible to watch; she is at once absurd and touching as she holds her back ramrod straight and head high, whether remembering a childhood reprimand, enduring a broken heart or realising that the slices of raw potato she has care-fully served her husband are not what the English mean by chips. Hortense’s life has been changed forever by charismatic Michael Roberts, with whom she grew up and whom she has never stopped loving. He comes and goes through the evening as he did through the novel, played with fly-by-night glamour by CJ Beckford. Hortense’s English counterpoint is Queenie, a farmer’s daughter living in London’s Earl’s Court. As Queenie, Aisling Loftus has an extraordinary gift for subtly giving away her private feelings to the audience via the tiniest flickers of expression – another charming performance. Queenie has been lumbered with a casualty of a husband, Bernard, a wan figure of fun (or lack of it), played by a suitably stricken Andrew Rothney. She endures his defectiveness in bed – and elsewhere – but allows herself to wonder what romance might mean until, one day, Roberts knocks at her door and answers her question. Queenie also ends up having to care for Bernard’s speechless father, Arthur, an impeccable comic turn by David Fielder, who looks like Raymond Briggs’s old man in Ethel & Ernest, given to fluttery fits in lieu of words. Queenie rents out a room in her house to Gilbert Joseph, Hortense’s husband of convenience (and inconvenience). He is superbly played by Gershwyn Eustache Jnr, his buoyancy tested by the abject and diminished world that turns out to be England. Designer Katrina Lindsay uses the Olivier’s space ingeniously to exploit its potential for the curved panoramic, from tropical views to Piccadilly Circus. She can organise peaceful sunsets or a hurricane, with black-and-white film of seething palm trees, and, when the time eventually comes, offers a magnificent black-and-white photograph of the mighty Empire Windrush that dominates the stage and into which several actors, in a thrilling trompe l’oeil, climb, as though disappearing into history. Helen Edmundson is a virtuoso adapter of novels (she has tackled War and Peace, Thérèse Raquin, Mill on the Floss) and navigates her way through Levy’s rich plot making sure there is not a slack line anywhere. Benjamin Kwasi Burrell’s music offers an emotional underscoring, tactfully deployed. And the evening is an education into why this Caribbean story is also ours. It is, as Levy wrote in a 2014 essay quoted in the programme, “as much a part of British history as the Norman conquest or the Tudors”. Levy died earlier this year, and I could not help but reflect on how sad it is that she did not survive to see this wondrous show. Julia Leigh is the author of Avalanche: A Love Story, a memoir about her experience of IVF that she has now adapted for the stage. The book was a page-turner in which you pursued a happy ending that refused to materialise. What mattered, eventually, was Leigh’s settling for her own fate and resolving to find a new way of being happy, of mending. Maxine Peake stands alone, a tiny figure on the enormous Barbican stage with unreliable white walls behind her that move sympathetically (if a bit oddly) according to her story (designer Marg Horwell). Sensitively directed by Anne-Louise Sarks, Peake holds the audience in the palm of her hand – or the palms of her two expressive hands – for an hour and a half. She restlessly tells Leigh’s story with naturalness and wan intensity. Her warm voice has in it a reassurance movingly at odds with her material. Sometimes she pronounces words with effortful precision as though to reveal the labour, the underlying pain of having to speak at all. This brave, true, open piece is valuable, and Peake’s performance a tour de force. It matters to talk about a grief that too often, in our nonchalantly child-obsessed society, dare not speak its name. Inua Ellams had a terrific hit with Barber Shop Chronicles (now on tour), but his new play The Half God of Rainfall works better on the page than on the stage (it is published in an elegant hardback edition by 4th Estate). It’s a rhyming ballad in which no clues are offered as to which character should be speaking, as if it resisted being a play at all. His entertaining idea is that the greatest sportsmen are half gods. Demi (Kwami Odoom), a star basketball player, is the bastard son of Zeus and a beautiful Nigerian woman, Modupe (Rakie Ayola), whom Zeus raped. Ellams is, as you would expect, outraged by violence against women but throws no new light on the subject. On stage, the two dynamic actors (strongly directed by Nancy Medina who at times treats storytelling as a form of dance) do their best to embody multiple characters in a beautifully lit space (Jackie Shemesh). But it’s all in vain: too many gods – Yoruba and Greek – make for a congested narrative that is hard to follow and curiously (especially given the thunderbolts for punctuation) underpowered. This is an ambitious, well-written, exposed piece, but it asks too much of itself and not quite enough of us. Star ratings (out of five)Small Island ★★★★★Avalanche: A Love Story ★★★★The Half God of Rainfall ★★ • Small Island is at the Olivier, National Theatre, London SE1, until 10 August; Avalanche: A Love Story is at the Barbican, London EC2, until 12 May; The Half God of Rainfall is at the Kiln theatre, London NW6, until 17 May