They are the best team in Europe, which means we knew already they are the best team in England. Whether Saracens go on to clinch the relevant gong at Twickenham next weekend remains to be seen – sport is a funny old thing – but if we wanted evidence of how much further ahead they are of the congested mid-table sprawl of the Premiership, of which Gloucester were the leaders, we had it here. However unpopular they may remain in certain quarters – and a failure to sell out a home semi-final highlights, as much as any salary-cap investigation, the ongoing problems with their business model – the myth that they play boring rugby was exploded here as it should have been some years ago. Yes, they will treat you somewhat roughly should you venture into their lair, but the sophistication of their attack continues to dazzle, more so now than even in the era of Schalk Brits, the epitome of brilliance where there should be none. There is no sign of any let-up either. “It’s almost perfect,” said Mark McCall. “To have won comfortably and scored some good tries, but to have a frustrated changing room and players understanding that there are certain things that have to be way better.” That would appear to be a reference to a final quarter in which Gloucester scored two tries, but as that period began with Saracens 44-7 up any developments in that period would have to rate as academic. There was also the first two minutes, when Gloucester took an unlikely lead with the game’s first try. Otherwise, the one worry centres around Brad Barritt, captain and guardian of the flame, who was off before the half-hour mark with a hamstring injury. “We’re devastated to lose Brad in a game like this,” said McCall. “He’ll be very unlikely to play in the final.” None the less, on came his deputy Nick Tompkins, another academy product who would waltz into most teams. By the hour mark he had a hat-trick, showcasing his manifest gifts. The storm unleashed on the visitors was devastating. Kicks rained down on Gloucester, followed in short order by insatiable chasers. Then, once ball was secured, as it invariably was, the power, invention and angles were relentless and bewildering. Gloucester were dizzy in no time, popping up loose balls, forcing plays long before any sensible team would want to anywhere, let alone against this lot at this place. Ben Morgan had that first try for Gloucester – and it was a beauty. Mark Atkinson and Danny Cipriani featured prominently, before Morgan ran in. “We only irritated the giant,” conceded Johan Ackermann, Gloucester’s coach. Sure enough, the response was immediate. Liam Williams won the restart and a deadly chip behind by Owen Farrell set up Sean Maitland for a simple finish. Farrell could not convert but his penalty had Saracens in the lead in the 16th minute. The direction of the match had been set. Much had been made of Farrell versus Cipriani, England fixture versus double player of the season. This was not a day for the latter, however sweet the customary touches of class. Indeed, amid the general carnage, he seemed as ruffled as anyone. At the start of the second quarter, it looked as if he might be free as he ran from his own tryline, but by the time he had reached his 22 Billy Vunipola had chased him down and into touch. Seconds later, Vunipola was charging away from a maul, then Maro Itoje was galloping away and Ben Spencer was over for Saracens’ second. A penalty and a Williams try, the latter after the superb Alex Lozowski had plucked a Farrell high ball from out of Cipriani’s grasp, had Saracens 23-7 up at the break – and it was over to Tompkins. His first try, less than two minutes into the second half, was imperious, his speed too much for Gloucester out wide, then his second was dogged, his strength too much from short range, and finally his intelligence saw him on hand for the hat-trick, well before the hour mark, the best try of the day. That was Saracens done on the scoring front, and Gloucester showcased their wares in the last quarter with two tries of their own. They can play, all right. That much we knew. It is just that this Saracens team have taken domestic rugby to new heights.