There have been 25 Classics run in Great Britain over the last five years. Aidan O’Brien’s pre-eminent Ballydoyle stable in County Tipperary has won a dozen. It is a daunting statistic for William Haggas to consider as he prepares to saddle Skardu in Saturday’s 2,000 Guineas, the first Classic of the year and one in which, yet again, O’Brien’s runners have an iron grip on the betting. Skardu, according to the bookmakers at least, is the colt with the best chance of keeping the Guineas in Newmarket. He is already a winner over the Classic course and distance, having eased to a neck success in last month’s Craven Stakes, a significant Guineas trial, on what was only the second start of his career, so he should improve significantly for the experience. Yet even after victory in a major Guineas trial he is no better than a 15-2 chance against O’Brien’s Ten Sovereigns (7-2) and Magna Grecia (5-1), who were both Group One winners as juveniles and have swapped places in the betting after Ryan Moore’s name appeared next to Ten Sovereigns at Thursday’s final declaration stage. “I think it’s an incredibly open race this year,” Haggas said this week. “Aidan might win it and win it convincingly with either of his but it looks at this stage to be very open and we’ve as good a chance as any. He really impressed the time people when he won his maiden [at Newmarket in September]. My son said straight away that it was a Group-class effort in a maiden. “He’s now won both of his races and gone from a maiden to Group company but this is a huge step up. But the last step was quite big as well, so I’m not saying he can do it, but he’s obviously going the right way.” Haggas has a fine record in the Epsom Classics, having won the Derby in 1996 with Shaamit, his first runner in the race, and then repeated the trick with Dancing Rain, his first starter in the Oaks, in 2011. He has yet to trouble the judge in either of the Guineas, however, although a memorable season in 2018, in which his career total of Group One wins rose from 10 to 14, suggests that Haggas may be closer than most to bridging the gap to the titans of modern Flat racing. “It’s very hard to get the horses,” he says, “especially when you’ve got two magnificent operations like Coolmore [in Ireland] and [Sheikh Mohammed’s] Godolphin , where they breed fantastic horses [and have three runners on Saturday]. “The horses we’re buying at the sales are basically the horses that are left and there are so many of the proper mares in [Khalid Abdullah’s] Juddmonte, [Sheikh Hamdan al-Maktoum’s] Shadwell, Godolphin and Coolmore hands, so it’s pretty difficult to find one. “We’re all trying to get better, and to get better horses, but you talk about all those major operations and then you have John [Gosden, also in Newmarket], who has all the major owner-breeders and trains for the big four. So it’s hard to compete and get a Classic horse, and then everything’s got to go right in their preparation.” The 19-strong field for Saturday’s Classic is the biggest for the 2,000 Guineas since 2010, which is another unknown for such an inexperienced colt as Skardu. Several horses with the form and pedigree to merit a run in the race are missing, however, including last year’s top juvenile, Too Darn Hot. As such, it is a reminder that simply getting to the start for the first Classic of the season is an achievement. “I thought he gave them all a bit of a start [in the Craven] and James [Doyle, his jockey] never really touched him,” Haggas points out. “I think James was impressed with the way he picked up and handled the Dip [about a furlong out] for an inexperienced horse. If you look back at the betting for the Guineas at the end of last season, the front two don’t run, [Godolphin’s] Quorto and [Gosden’s] Too Darn Hot, and there were probably a stack of others that could have made it to the Guineas and didn’t, so we’re very glad to be there.”