What to do after you have conquered death itself? Dany, Jon and co are about to find out, as their heavily depleted forces prepare for an encounter with Cersei’s decidedly fresh ones. Will infighting sink the northern forces? And, more importantly, will the rest of the season seem an anticlimax after last week’s spectacular? Gwilym Mumford “Out of every 100 rapes reported to police, only about 3% end in conviction of the rapist,” reveals the opener to this important series about high-profile student sexual assault cases in the US. It provides an account of the difficult, much-publicised investigation that followed Nikki Yovino’s claim that she was raped by two fellow students in a bathroom at a university party. Every bit as disturbing as Louis Theroux’s recent foray into the same topic, this is a real eye-opener. Mike Bradley Richard Ayoade brings this series of short-haul hilarity to a close with the best episode so far – a jaunt to the German city in the company of Bob Mortimer. Cue a Beatles tour of the red-light district, hipster cocktails, ukelele buskers, burgers in the rain and a beach bar overlooking the shipyards. MB Ashley Banjo once again corrals celebs into stripping for cancer awareness. This year, Love Island’s Jack Fincham and snooker veteran Willie Thorne are among the novice male nudes, while the ladies follow tomorrow. TV gets its kit off for all sorts of spurious reasons; at least this is for a good cause. Ellen E Jones For the Shakespeare scholar Dr Islam Issa, there are two Cleopatras: the great politician he learned about at his Egypt-born parents’ knees, who turned her capital, Alexandria, into a global seat of learning; and the asp-clasping one we know from literature and films. So, which is more representative? Ali Catterall A solution to Alison and Mike’s money worries is in sight as film-makers hire Button House for a costume saga. But can the ghosts be persuaded to play ball? Both funny and a feat of performance and direction – a drama within a comedy, but peppered with disruptive incorporeal beings from another dimension, too. Phil Harrison American Graffiti (George Lucas, 1973), 11.40pm, TCMGeorge Lucas’s anthem to his California youth follows a group of teenagers through one long, hot night in 1962. It is a beautifully played and affectionate portrait of small-town life, jump-cutting from one worried youngster to the next (it features Ron Howard, Cindy Williams and Richard Dreyfuss), all backed by a pulsating period soundtrack. Paul Howlett Motor racing: British Superbikes 1pm, Eurosport 2. Round two of the season from Oulton Park, Cheshire. Snooker: World Championship 2pm, BBC Two. The final concludes. Who will succeed Mark Williams as champion? Premier League football: Manchester City v Leicester City 7pm, Sky Sports Main Event. A crucial match in the title race. Can City hold their nerve?