Boris Johnson has said the UK must leave the EU by the end of October with or without a deal, as he set out a hardline Brexit stance just hours after Theresa May resigned. Johnson is the favourite among Conservative members to take over as prime minister by the last week of July, but will face competition from as many as 20 Conservative MPs vying for the top job. The foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, was the first cabinet minister to say he would stand, while Dominic Raab, the former Brexit secretary, said he would take time to think over the weekend. The environment secretary, Michael Gove, and the home secretary, Sajid Javid, are also expected to announce leadership bids in the coming days. The contest is shaping up to be a test of where the candidates stand on Brexit, with Johnson taking a firm stance on leaving by the EU’s next deadline of 31 October. According to Reuters, Johnson told a conference in Interlaken in Switzerland: “We will leave the EU on October 31 deal or no deal.” “A new leader will have the opportunity to do things differently and have the momentum of a new administration,” he said, suggesting that he could try to renegotiate a better deal with Brussels before pressing ahead with the possibility of a no-deal Brexit on 31 October. Raab, another leave supporter, is attracting support from some Brexit hardliners on the right of the party, so Johnson will come under some pressure to demonstrate how prepared he is to leave without a deal. At the same time, soft Brexit candidates, such as Rory Stewart, the international development secretary, will be keen to position themselves as the choice for those who oppose leaving without a withdrawal deal. The Conservative party said the leadership contest would begin on 10 June, with MPs allowed to whittle down a large field of candidates to a shortlist by the end of that month. After the three-week process, the strongly Eurosceptic Tory party membership will vote to choose their leader, who will automatically be the prime minister. In previous contests, there have been two candidates put forward to the membership round, but the party could not immediately confirm that the same format would be followed this time. The party chairman, Brandon Lewis, and two vice-chairs of the backbench 1922 Committee, Cheryl Gillan and Charles Walker, made a joint announcement about the timetable, saying: “Successive rounds of voting [by MPs] will take place until a final choice of candidates to put to a vote of all party members is determined. “We expect that process to be concluded by the end of June, allowing for a series of hustings around the UK for members to meet and question the candidates, then cast their votes in time for the result to be announced before parliament rises for the summer.” Summer recess dates have not yet been announced but last year the Commons rose on 24 July. Conservative MPs expect up to 20 of their number to announce leadership bids in the coming days, as senior figures struggle to resist having a shot at becoming prime minister without having to face a general election. Johnson, a former foreign secretary and leading leave campaigner, has already declared that he will run, with James Wharton, a former MP, acting as his campaign manager. Jacob Rees-Mogg, chair of the Eurosceptic European Research Group, is a key backer and there have been reports that election guru Lynton Crosby is providing informal advice. His nearest rival is Raab, who has assembled a campaign team advised by Hanbury Strategy’s Paul Stephenson, a former Vote Leave staffer, and is backed by David Davis, the former Brexit secretary. The leading candidates from May’s cabinet are Gove, Hunt, Javid, and the health secretary, Matt Hancock – all of whom may struggle with the membership over their support for the prime minister’s unpopular Brexit deal. Andrea Leadsom, a leave supporter whose decision to quit as leader of the House of Commons helped trigger May’s departure, is another significant candidate on the Eurosceptic wing of the party. She was May’s adversary last time and dropped out of the race before the Conservative membership had a chance to vote. Other hopefuls who sit in the cabinet include Penny Mordaunt, the defence secretary, and Liz Truss, the chief secretary to the Treasury. An array of backbenchers and junior ministers also fancy their chances. James Cleverly, recently promoted to be a Brexit minister, is expected to throw his hat in the ring and Sir Graham Brady, the chair of the 1922 Committee, is another candidate who is currently considering whether to stand, despite having little name recognition outside Westminster. The former chief whip Mark Harper is also thought to be preparing a campaign. From the hard-Brexit wing of the party, Esther McVey, the former work and pensions secretary, has declared she will run, while Steve Baker, one of the most vocal holdouts against May’s deal, has said he will consider whether to stand over the weekend.