Welcome to theguardian.com review of the 2018-19 Premier League season. We have nominated some contenders for this category but this is just to get the discussion going: offer your suggestions below the line … Maurizio Sarri said it “would have been better to go for a cigarette” than continue watching his defence get carved open time and again, yet escape with only conceding twice thanks to woeful Arsenal finishing. It was one of those gloriously frantic early-season games in which trying to make sense of anything was pointless. It was best summed up by Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang skying over from 12 yards only for Arsenal to be so hell-bent on committing men forwards after just 19 minutes that one long ball from César Azpilicueta left Álvaro Morata one-on-one with Shkodran Mustafi, to make the score 2-0. Arsenal took it upon themselves to pop the ball around beautifully, as though they had tricked themselves into believing they were in command and leading, creating two fine goals, missing about half a dozen other inviting chances, and going in level at half-time when they should have been about 5-3 up. The second half was loads of fun too it but could never live up to the madcap brilliance of the first. Marcos Alonso settled the game on 81 minutes after Eden Hazard jumped off the bench to further expose a few more holes. Two-nil down at home after 10 minutes to a team with two points and no wins after eight games? José Mourinho looked like he would be a goner at half-time. But, by the final whistle, Old Trafford resembled the vibrant, joyful and noisy place it had been in better times. Mourinho threw caution to the wind for once. Juan Mata came on after just 19 minutes, Marouane Fellaini leapt off the bench at half-time and match-winner, Alexis Sánchez, was thrown into the fray just three minutes before the comeback started in earnest on 70 minutes. Wave after wave of United attacks finally wore Newcastle down. Mata swept home a 20-yard free-kick, Anthony Martial whipped a lovely finish around Martin Dubravka six minutes later and, spurred on by a raucous atmosphere, Sánchez completed the astonishing revival act with a header in the final minute. Pulses were racing again at Old Trafford. Not that this renewed vigour under Mourinho lasted much longer. Players of the seasonGoals of the seasonMatches of the seasonManagers of the seasonSignings of the seasonYoung players of the seasonFlops of the seasonGripes of the seasonPundits of the seasonInnovations needed for next season  Without this match we may not have had such a thrilling title race. For 32 minutes it looked like this would be a routine City win to keep them within a point of leaders Liverpool. Ilkay Gundogan had given the champions a 1-0 lead and his team were enjoying 78% possession. No alarms and no surprises. But then Wilfried Zaha burst past Aymeric Laporte and crossed for Jeffrey Schlupp to fire past Ederson. And before City had a chance to feel indignant, Andros Townsend scorched home a volley from 35 yards that was met by the sound of 54,340 jaws hitting the Etihad floor. “It’s definitely the best goal of my career, against the best side I’ve ever played,” said Townsend. Luka Milivojevic’s penalty on 51 minutes further added to the sense of bemusement. City were 3-1 down and rattled. Pep Guardiola threw Kevin De Bruyne on to get a goal back and the Belgian almost created an equaliser in the dying minutes as City threw everything at stubborn Palace. It was not enough, though. A further slip at Leicester left City trailing Liverpool by seven points. They simply had to win to keep pace with an unbeaten side looking for their 10th league win in a row. The game throbbed with nervous energy, both sides giving each other no quarter. Then Sadio Mané hit a post in the 17th minute and John Stones saved City from going 1-0 down by clearing with all but 11mm of the ball over the line. Fine margins. City grew into the game and then up popped Sergio Agüero, doing what he does better than anyone, scoring when there appears no space to do so. The Etihad was as noisy as it has ever been. But from here on in Liverpool appeared the slicker, more composed team, Roberto Firmino capping a beautiful, flowing move with an equaliser on 64 minutes before Leroy Sané lashed home the winner six minutes later. City closed the game out under siege and slashing clearances out of play. There were wild accusations after the game that Guardiola had grown the grass long to slow Liverpool down. He’d certainly put the brakes on their title charge. Nuno Espírito Santo was sent off for charging on the pitch to join a pile-on after Diogo Jota’s injury-time goal sealed his hat-trick and the game in a mid-season thriller between two sides hoping to be crowned the best of the rest by finishing seventh. “It’s difficult to contain your emotions … it is a tremendous happiness to finish like that for everybody at Molineux,” he beamed after a match that had a wonderful ebb and flow. With Rúben Neves purring in midfield, Wolves raced into a 2-0 lead against a side whose manager looked to be a dead man walking after a series of flat performances, including an FA Cup defeat by Newport. They showed signs of life in the second half, with Demarai Gray scoring a supreme solo goal as they battled back to 2-2, only to lose Jota a few minutes later and find themselves trailing again. Wes Morgan looked to have secured a point as he soared highest to nod home in the 87th minute. But then up popped Jota to fire home Raul Jiménez’s centre and send his manager romping across the pitch like a latterday David Pleat. Wins? They all matter, you know.