Notts County’s 131-year stay in the Football League is over after they were beaten 3-1 at Swindon. Goals from Kaiyne Woolery and two from Theo Robinson helped Swindon leave County fans in despair. County needed to win and hope rivals Macclesfield lost to Cambridge to stand any chance – and Kane Hemmings gave the 2,248 travelling County fans hope in the 53rd minute when he scored from the spot. However, Woolery equalised in the 69th minute and as County frantically pushed men forward they were punished twice on the counterattack. Relegation means County, who have won nine league matches this season, lose their status as the oldest Football League club, having been formed in 1862. That mantle now passes across the River Trent to Nottingham Forest, who were founded in 1865. County’s misery meant elation for Sol Campbell’s Macclesfield as they survived thanks to a 1-1 draw with Cambridge, who led through Paul Lewis’s 44th-minute strike. Elliott Durrell equalised in the second half. At the other end of the table, MK Dons were victorious in the winner-takes-all shootout at home to automatic promotion rivals Mansfield. The Stags went into the game at Stadium MK behind the Dons only on goal difference, but David Wheeler’s second-minute header gave the hosts a 1-0 win. It put Mansfield into the play-offs, where they will be joined by Newport after Jamille Matt’s 87th-minute equaliser at Morecambe saw County cement seventh spot. That was at the expense of Colchester, who missed out despite a 3-0 win at champions Lincoln. Tranmere will be in the play-offs but they lost 3-1 at Crawley, who led at half-time through goals from Ashley Nathaniel-George and Filipe Morais. James Norwood’ penalty reduced Rovers deficit but Panutche Camara completed the scoring late on. Joe Martin and Jordan Gibson scored in Stevenage’s 2-0 home win against Cheltenham while Grimsby were also 2-0 winners against Crewe, with Harry Davis and Joe Grayson on the scoresheet. Northampton rounded off their season in style with a 5-2 success at Oldham, who led through Johan Branger’s strike. However, Sam Hoskins, Aaron Pierre and a Andy Williams double turned the game in the Cobblers’ favour. Callum Lang hit another for Oldham before substitute Junior Morias struck late on. Promoted Bury drew 1-1 at home against Port Vale as Jordan Rossiter cancelled out Tom Pope’s opening goal, while it finished goalless between Forest Green and Exeter and Yeovil against Carlisle.