The Bundesliga leaders, Bayern Munich, stuttered to a 3-1 win over bottom club Hannover on Saturdayand are now one victory away from sealing a seventh consecutive Bundesliga title. The win took Bayern four points clear of Borussia Dortmund, who led 2-0 at Werder Bremen with 20 minutes to go but conceded two late goals in a 2-2 draw, with both teams having two games left to play. Robert Lewandowski and Leon Goretzka put Bayern 2-0 ahead at half-time but what appeared to be a routine win took a different turn after Jonathas pulled one back from a contentious penalty, awarded for handball by Jérôme Boateng, in the 51st minute. Following his goal from the spot, the Brazilian was booked for tussling with the goalkeeper, Sven Ulreich, as they tried to fetch the ball out of the net. Jonathas was then dismissed after clashing with Joshua Kimmich in the 55th minute. Bayern finally wrapped up the game with a goal by substitute Franck Ribéry in the 84th minute. Dortmund faced a tricky trip to Bremen in the late kick-off and Christian Pulisic looked to have eased any nerves by opening the scoring with six minutes gone. Paco Alcácer added a second just before half-time but second-half goals from Kevin Mohwald and Claudio Pizarro gave Bremen a draw and put Bayern in pole position in the title race Nuremberg moved closer to an immediate return to the second division when they were beaten 2-0 at VfL Wolfsburg. The defeat left Nuremberg, who are one place off the bottom of the table, five points adrift of Stuttgart who are in the relegation play-off spot above them. They lost 3-1 at Hertha Berlin to spare Nuremberg the drop for at least one more week. Atlético Madrid fell to their heaviest La Liga defeat of the season as they were crushed 3-0 by Espanyol on Saturday, missing the chance to guarantee second place ahead of Real Madrid. Espanyol took the lead just before half-time when the Atlético captain, Diego Godín, slid the ball into his own net. Borja Iglesias doubled the home side’s lead early in the second half and then deepened Atletico’s humiliation from the penalty spot in the 89th minute. In Ligue 1, Neymar’s second-half penalty rescued Paris St Germain from another defeat as they were held 1-1 at Parc des Princes by Nice. Ignatius Ganago fired Nice ahead but Neymar hauled PSG level from the penalty spot. PSG squandered a chance to snatch victory in stoppage time when Edinson Cavani’s penalty was saved by Walter Benítez. Thomas Tuchel’s side, who secured the title two weeks ago, had lost three of their past four league games and were beaten in the French Cup final on penalties by Rennes.