Australia are set to name a new-look squad for the netball World Cup with Diamonds vice-captain Gabi Simpson and midcourt star Kim Ravaillion shock casualties. The 12-strong squad for the July tournament in England will be officially announced on Thursday morning, however it is believed to have leaked after players were told their fate by coach Lisa Alexander on Monday. The likely team includes only three players from the triumphant 2015 campaign in Caitlin Bassett, Caitlin Thwaites and Paige Hadley. NSW Swifts centre Hadley, who missed last year’s Commonwealth Games, is believed to have forced her way back in to the Australian line-up after not even being included in the training squad at the start of the year. She is set to join reigning Diamonds player of the year Liz Watson in the midcourt as well as recent debutantes Kelsey Browne and Jamie-Lee Price. That means no room for Tests regulars Simpson and Ravaillion. Wing defence Simpson has struggled with a groin injury this year while she hasn’t been helped by the form of her winless Queensland Firebirds. Ravaillion was part of Australia’s 2015 World Cup title and has played 60 Tests but withdrew from the team last September citing exhaustion and hasn’t found a way back amongst the hotly contested midcourt selection. Captain Caitlin Bassett will lead the shooting end, joined by Gretel Tippett and Steph Wood while Caitlin Thwaites, who has been a rock for her Melbourne Vixens, is also set for a call-up ahead of young Giant Keira Austin. In the defensive end, NSW Swifts’ Sarah Klau is believed to have edged incumbent Vixen Emily Mannix after squaring off last round in the Super Netball. Courtney Bruce, Jo Weston and April Brandley are the other selections. Star goal-keeper Bruce proved her fitness last Saturday, returning from three weeks out with an elbow injury to lead West Coast to a win over Collingwood. Likely Australian team: Caitlin Bassett (Giants), April Brandley (Magpies), Kelsey Browne (Magpies), Courtney Bruce (Fever), Paige Hadley (Swifts), Sarah Klau (Swifts), Caitlin Thwaites (Vixens), Gretel Tippett (Firebirds), Jamie-Lee Price (Giants), Liz Watson (Vixens), Jo Weston (Vixens), Steph Wood (Lightning).