The fast-footed Argentinian will be missed when he swaps Devon for Bordeaux this summer: no other player in the league has beaten more defenders or skipped his way out of more potential trouble. Honourable mentions for the classy (and impressive full-kit celebrant) Alex Goode, perhaps the best No 10 England never had, and Newcastle’s Simon Hammersley. Plenty of competition on the right wing – Tom Collins of Northampton was extremely close, as was Bath’s Ruaridh McConnochie – but Morahan consistently makes things happen. The 29-year-old Australian scored a couple fewer tries than Collins but beat more defenders and his positive running sums up a Bristol side who gave it a real go from start to finish. Most England regulars play insufficient games to make a Premiership XV but Slade has had an impressive season for club and country. Northampton’s Rory Hutchinson, Harlequins’ Joe Marchant and Gloucester’s Billy Twelvetrees have also been influential for their clubs but, when Slade is in full flight, there are few better sights in British rugby. The Premiership is full of players who, if the chance to play international rugby ever came, would not look out of place. There is no smoother midfield distributor in the land than Mills, who captained Worcester several times, and he generally makes life easier for those inside and outside him. Gloucester’s Mark Atkinson and Exeter’s Ollie Devoto were strong contenders. Naiyaravoro is the size of a house and not always lightning quick on the turn but going forward he is an absolute nightmare. Only Cordero has beaten more defenders this season – many of them were flattened in the Australia international’s case – and the 27-year-old is finishing the season strongly. The fleet-footed trio of Ollie Thorley, Jonny May and Josh Adams were not far behind. The best signing of the season? Cipriani must be up there and the respective league positions of Gloucester and his former side, Wasps, tell their own story. In terms of manipulating defences there is no one better in the English game and one or two of the passes he threw this season would not look out of place in an art gallery. Could there yet be a twist in the tale of his England exile? It is a sign of the times when the league’s two best scrum-halves are South Africans. Faf de Klerk has been at the heart of Sale’s continuing improvement but Reinach has been just as vital for Saints. He has scored 11 tries and helped set up almost as many, breathing fresh life into Northampton and underlining just how much Springbok talent is now operating in the northern hemisphere. If ever there was an advert for retiring from Test rugby it is Marler. Quins have been the undoubted beneficiaries of his decision to step aside from England consideration and he has missed three league games all season. Tough, defensively strong and quick-witted, his loud complaint to Exeter’s box-kicking scrum-half Nic White — “You’re boring me, hurry up” – was another point in his favour. Leicester’s decision to release the all-action Thacker will go down among several odd personnel decisions in recent times. Invited to play the kind of fast-paced game that suits him perfectly, the hooker has been outstanding for Bristol and his stats in open play make some of his bigger, heavier rivals look a touch one-dimensional. Has missed one league game. Afoa has gone one better than Thacker, featuring in every one of Bristol’s games in their feelgood first season back in the Premiership. For a 35-year-old that is no small feat and his contribution has also included more passes and offloads than some old-school props manage in their entire careers. In terms of pure set‑piece influence, few are finishing the season more strongly than Saracens’ Vincent Koch. Another former Springbok enjoying life in the English shires. Gloucester have not finished as high in the league for eight years and Mostert’s lineout prowess has been among the main reasons why. The 28-year‑old’s teammate Ed Slater has been another consistent performer while the difference Joe Launchbury makes to Wasps’ forward pack when he plays is a tell-tale sign of his ability. This has been a ripper of a year for big Australians and there are none bigger than the 6ft 8in Skelton, despite the fact he has lost around 21kg since arriving at Saracens. If the Wallabies have any sense they should find a way to include him in their World Cup squad; at times the 27-year-old has looked unstoppable. When you are voted players’ player of the year at Saracens you must be doing plenty right. Harlequins’ barnstorming Alex Dombrandt is extremely unlucky to miss out but anyone who has watched Bristol this season will know just how influential Luatua has been to the Bears. From the remarkable first-night win over Bath at Ashton Gate onwards, the former All Black has constantly put his body on the line and, along with George Smith, has been a shining example to youngsters. This is what unselfish leadership and professionalism looks like. Big things were expected of Curry at the start of the season and the openside flanker has not remotely disappointed. Still only 20, he actively relishes the physical stuff and, assuming he stays fit, a massive future awaits him. Dan Thomas at Bristol has also been excellent but Curry, despite his intense international commitments with England, never missed a beat. It took a while for Kvesic to break into Exeter’s back row but his value is now fully apparent. Encouraged to play with a little more of the ball-playing freedom that was a feature of his game earlier in his career he has been a Trojan for the Chiefs at No 8 in the absence of Sam Simmonds, who is now fit again. Bath’s Zach Mercer and Gloucester’s Ben Morgan also deserve a mention.