Ederson: 9/10 Has been as flawless as last season, the tight control and passing required to play out from the back as impressive as his goalkeeping. Kyle Walker: 8/10 Dropped for a period by Guardiola and, while yet to become a consistent attacking threat, his form impressed in the latter half of the season. Danilo: 7/10 An excellent utility option who briefly became first-choice right-back instead of Walker. Also operates at centre- and left-back and defensive midfield. John Stones: 7/10 Preferred by Guardiola when the opponent allows more space. The manager is less trustful of him when the contest is more muck-and-nettles. Vincent Kompany: 8/10 The 33-year-old’s 30-yard screamer that beat Leicester City in the penultimate game will be shown down the generations. May leave for greater game time. Aymeric Laporte: 9/10 Has enjoyed an imperious season in which he is now the senior defender and an on-field Guardiola lieutenant. Nicolás Otamendi: 6/10 No longer an automatic selection, falling behind Stones – 14 starts to 20 – and remains suspect under the high ball. Oleksandr Zinchenko: 8/10 Became more important as the season went on, filling in at left-back as Mendy was, again, not always fit. Benjamin Mendy: 5/10 Only 10 starts tells the story of another injury-blighted campaign for the Frenchman. Is a threat when in the side but does not play enough. Fabian Delph: 6/10 Guardiola does not trust the England midfielder to operate centrally, often fielding him at left-back. Fernandinho: 10/10 Has just turned 34 yet seemed even better this season. A lean, mean midfield threshing machine who also brings vision and a pass. Ilkay Gündogan: 9/10 Silky smooth, the German glides through contests. Not quite in the Kevin De Bruyne class but only just short. Kevin De Bruyne: 7/10 Endured a nightmare season spent mainly in the treatment room, limiting the classy Belgian to 11 starts and two goals. Bernardo Silva: 10/10 A revelation: can dribble, pass, scheme and score. The Portuguese is the present as well as the future of this City team. David Silva: 9/10 The Spaniard’s particular brand of magic is a delight to watch but he was not always at his absolute finest. Phil Foden: 7/10 Scored the winner on his first league start against Tottenham after City were knocked out of the Champions League. Could and should be a star of next season. Raheem Sterling: 10/10 Ranks alongside Bernardo Silva, Fernandinho and Sergio Agüero as City’s best player this season. Has 17 Premier League goals, one behind last season’s tally. Leroy Sané: 7/10 Ten goals in 21 starts is a fine return for a wide-man who is yet to convince his manager comprehensively. Riyad Mahrez: 6/10 A disappointing first season at City but his final-day goal was outstanding and Guardiola continues to rate him. Sergio Agüero: 10/10 Majestic, again. Reached 20 league goals for a fifth successive season; only Thierry Henry has managed this. Gabriel Jesus: 6/10 Eight starts and 21 substitute appearances show how he has fallen from being a first-choice when joining City.