After five seasons at Arsenal Danny Welbeck will leave the club when his contract expires this summer. The announcement was made following his side’s 1-1 draw with Brighton, after which the striker, who cost £16m from Manchester United, was presented with a memento on the pitch. Unai Emery said: “I’ve talked to the club and the decision is he’s leaving.” The manager has little opportunity to deploy Welbeck in his first, and what turns out to be the player’s last, season at the club, as injuries restricted the forward to only 14 games this season. Welbeck became a popular player after joining from Manchester United for £16m in 2014. In his first season at the north London club he scored a memorable winning goal against United in an FA Cup quarter-final at Old Trafford. He lifted the trophy with Arsenal in 2017. However misfortune with injuries became a recurring problem for him and were part of the reason why he could not secure a regular starting spot. Emery evidently reasoned that the 28-year-old was dispensable as the Spaniard tries to build a squad capable of returning to the Premier League’s top four. Petr Cech and Aaron Ramsey also said farewell to supporters after the game. The Welshman was moved to tears as the crowd chanted his name in tribute to his service for the club he joined in 2008 and with whom he could not agree a new contract. He will play for Juventus next season. “It’s been a hell of a journey,” said Ramsey, who won three FA Cups with the club, twice scoring winning goals in the final. “Eleven years of my life, so much has happened in that, when I look back. You can tell by my voice how much it means to me. I’m just grateful for the opportunity to play for this great club and spend so many years here. I spent 11 years here, I came here at 17 years old a boy, and I’m leaving a man. I’ve got a family, my wife, my kids, so much has happened, I’m just grateful for the opportunity here. “Obviously I’m really excited for the new challenge and new chapter in my life, but today it’s all about this. This is where I grew up, I just want to take this in today and let it settle in for a few more days before I can really look forward and concentrate on that.” Cech, meanwhile, has decided to call time on his career at the age of 36. “Petr Cech is a big player and also a big person, and he has had an amazing career,” said Emery.