‘Spursy’ is a relatively recent addition to football’s lexicon, an adjective used to describe a particular club’s uncanny ability to swagger to within touching distance of glory, only to trip up and bash their heads against the podium, leaving them a bloody, ridiculous laughing stock. Yep, usually by around late March or early April, Spurs are in bandages and have everyone else in stitches. But not this year, no siree and indeed, no Spursy. Soon that word could be banished for ever from football chat and be replaced by some term that encapsulates that exact opposite, denoting a club that becomes European champions at the end of a season in which they have signed no players and lost to Internazionale, Chelsea, Watford, Crystal Palace, Southampton, West Ham, Bournemouth, Burnley and – wait for it – Arsenal! What single word could possibly do justice to such a scenario? Spurs as Big Cup winners?! And in those circumstances!? Spurs! Big Cup winners!? Pochtastic! Only one team can stop that absurdist fiction from becoming reality. OK, only one team other than Spurs themselves. And that is Liverpool, who are five-times European champions and have beaten Spurs twice already this season. As if to offset those portents, they are managed by a man who has lost six finals in a row. That includes last year’s Big Cup jamboree in which Liverpool’s challenge faded after, according to red-clad eyewitnesses, Sergio Ramos drove a Leopard 2E tank into Mohamed Salah. Reflecting on all that, Jürgen Klopp takes inspiration from one of his compatriots and reckons that whatever didn’t kill his team has made them stronger, especially after he ditched Loris Karius. “Each team who lost a final will think about putting it right,” spake Klopp. “We have the chance to do that. That was the kickstart for the development of this team … We are a completely different team to last year, it’s the best team I’ve ever had. I have never been part of a final with a better team than this.” And he has never encountered Big Cup finalists with less pedigree than Spurs. A thrilling Liverpool season, then, is set to end in glory. Or the mother of all anti-climaxes. Something’s got to give. It’s on! “After our last game, we sailed fans and staff on a large passenger ship from Mannheim, back down the Rhine to Mainz. It was a huge party. Jürgen and I sat together with a box of beer on the nose of the ship. Neither of us could quite grasp what had happened” – Christian Heidel tells a very on-brand tale from Jürgen Klopp’s halcyon days at Mainz. Test your Big Cup knowledge! How many of these missing players can you identify from major European finals? No Mesut Özil jokes, please. “You very kindly mentioned my Charity World Cup Wallchart last summer, which raised £12,646 for The Luton and Dunstable Hospital’s neonatal unit. I’m back this year with another charity wallchart for the Women’s World Cup, again raising money for the L&D NICU. I’d love it if you could share with your readers” – Elliott Quince. “I want to congratulate The Fiver on it’s ability to completely stay away from the subject that the FA has launched an actually serious campaign named “Don’t be that idiot” [Thursday’s bits and bobs]. An open goal if there ever was one” – Thomas Krantz. “Uefa are to be commended for their noble mitigation of fan attendance at last night’s Europa League final. Who’d have thought that the lion’s share of the 2,800 mile journey would be due to the pitch being roughly 2,400 miles away from the stand? A rare win for the armchair pundits on this occasion, provided you managed to avoid the vertigo brought on by the funny camera angles” – Johnny Connelly. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Elliott Quince. Six days after being offered the gig, Neil Lennon has finally been confirmed as the new permanent manager of the Queen’s Celtic on a 12-month rolling contract. “I am absolutely delighted to once again be part of one of the biggest and best clubs in the world,” Lennon cheered. Chelsea ‘goalkeeper’ Robert Green has promptly retired after ticking Azerbaijan off his bucket list. “Following an incredible evening in Baku on Wednesday and after a 23-year career, I’ve decided that now is the right time,” he gushed. As predicted by yesterday’s Fiver (and 1,057 other outlets), Antonio Conte is the new boss of Inter. “I was struck by the club’s transparency,” he yelped, placing the bar nice and low." Hats off to Erling Braut Håland, son of Alfe-Inge, who bagged 9 (nine) goals for Norway in the Under-20 World Cup against Honduras on Thursday. Roy Keane’s reaction not known. Spurs’ Jan Vertonghen reckons this year’s Big Cup has been the most unpredictable yet. “It’s been the craziest [Big Cup] ever and being at the end of that crazy campaign now is something unbelievable,” the Belgian defender hooted. Man City have scoffed at a £70.7m bid from Bayern Munich for Leroy Sané, while pantomime villainy’s Sergio Ramos has pledged to stay at Real Madrid, despite apparent lucrative interest from China. Phil Neville is itching to get on the ferry and start England’s Women’s World Cup campaign. “We’ve prepared for so long now that the talking is over. Let’s just get out to France,” he mithered. And Taxpayers FC have made their first summer signing, replacing 32-year-old Spanish keeper Adrián with 33-year-old Spanish keeper Roberto. “I think everyone who follows football knows the importance of this club,” he chortled. Big Cup: Big Content, including Pochettino by those who know him best back in Argentina, and Andy Robertson on his determination not to spend Sunday in Homebase. There’s also a look back to Spurs’ last European trophy – their Old Big Vase triumph in 1984; Eni Aluko on why Liverpool’s midfield gives them the edge, and then there’s floating footballing brain in a jar Jonathan Wilson on why full-backs matter so much. Chuckle at the Spurs fan who got on a plane thinking Man City had beaten them 5-3 and drink in Sid Lowe’s guide to the Wanda Metropolitano - you might want to take your own sandwiches. Our latest Women’s World Cup team guides spotlight Italy and Australia. And the Rumour Mill reckons Spurs are the latest big club poised to swoop for Wilfried Zaha, but what does it know? Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!