We really are good at talking up our treasures. Britain’s Tutankhamun? There are lots of reasons why the remnants of a Saxon princely burial, discovered under a verge near an Aldi in Southend, can’t match up to the ancient Egyptian boy king’s treasures. After a 16-year excavation, the artefacts are now going on display – but for one thing, wet British mud just doesn’t have the preserving power of dry Egyptian sand, even if Anglo-Saxon Essex really could have produced an ancient civilisation as glorious as that of Egypt. Yet archaeology began in Britain in the 18th century, when the antiquarian William Stukely studied Stonehenge and Avebury. And over the past 250 years, some stunning objects – and remarkable human remains – have emerged from the fields, caves and silt to give that intimate thrill of direct contact with the past, which is what makes archaeology magical. Some lovely shiny things, too. Here is my top 10 of British archaeological finds – ranked. The imprint of a rotted lyre in the soil is not the most spectacular of sights but this find, revealed this week, is rightly capturing imaginations as it shows the mental as well physical world of the Anglo-Saxons. Crosses placed over the royal eyes prove Christianity was winning court converts before the official conversion of Britain. Gems from Asia show how plugged into a wider world we were – there’s even a Byzantine spoon. This is the grave of a soulful, peaceful prince who broke with tradition by not holding his sword in death. There’s something incredibly atmospheric about this wealthy Roman house that lay under fields for about 1,500 years before being excavated. Children’s graves, pets, games, even shoes have been preserved yet the most captivating thing about Lullingstone is its art. Mosaics of mythological scenes, including Europa and the Bull, survive in its dining area. Frescoes reveal both pagan and Christian imagery, with a painted Chi-Ro symbol showing early Christian belief. Britain’s most impressive prehistoric remains are stone circles and barrow graves that were always visible in the landscape but it wasn’t until the early 18th century that curious antiquarians started poking about to find out more about them. Luckily they didn’t do too much damage and in more recent times archaeologists recognised and excavated the site of Woodhenge, a mysterious monument near Stonehenge that may have been inhabited. This was the place of the living, says one theory, while its grey mirror Stonehenge was the home of the dead. William Buckland was one of early 19th century Britain’s most prolific diggers. Not only did he help to discover dinosaurs but, in a cave in Wales in 1823, he found a skeleton that also happens to be Britain’s greatest paleolithic artwork. Buckland got a few things wrong. He thought the skeleton was Roman and female. In fact it is a stone age man who died about 33 to 34,000 years ago right at the beginning of the age of cave art. The bones were carefully covered in red ochre, the pigment used by cave painters, making this a unique treasure of human evolution. “Alfred ordered me to be made,” says the inscription on this tiny but stupendously wrought object made of brightly coloured enamel and glittering rock crystal, all set in a dragon head spun from gold. It’s a direct connection with King Alfred, the great king who made a stand against the Vikings. It’s probably the head of a book pointer that came as a free gift with one of his literary works. The piece, now at the Ashmolean in Oxford, was brought up by a plough in 1693, in Somerset field near his stronghold, Athelney, making it one of Britain’s first – as well as most beautiful – archaeological finds. One of Roald Dahl’s first publications was a sensational report about this amazing discovery during the second world war. In 1942, a farmer near Mildenhall in Suffolk, where there was a busy wartime airbase, found silver glinting in a ploughed field. Digging revealed a dazzling array of ancient Roman dinnerware buried as the empire crumbled. Most astonishing of all is a great silver dish, rimmed with images of pagan gods including Bacchus, god of wine. It’s a haunting reminder that before Christ was worshipped in Britain, the ancient Greco-Roman pantheon ruled. These captivating game pieces were left by a Scandinavian trader on the Outer Hebridean island of Lewis in the 13th century and found there in the early 19th century. They were probably buried in a sand dune near Uig, but the find was not properly recorded. Their authenticity, however, has never been doubted. Amazing details – such as the spears held by the mounted knights, the mighty bishops and a queen sadly resting her face on her hand – take you into a medieval world that is game of thrones for real – on a chessboard. The discovery of the remains of the most reviled of all English kings, under a car park in Leicester in 2012, was one of British archaeology’s most thrilling finds. It offered the chance to test Shakespeare’s portrayal of him as a hunchbacked villain against actual physical evidence. The bones revealed that Richard had scoliosis but was not a hunchback – yet the way this man died, beaten and hacked by footsoldiers after presumably losing his horse, seems like pure Shakespeare. The fascinating find at Southend can’t match the savage splendour of Britain’s greatest Saxon burial. The excavation of this ship burial in 1939 opened a new window on the Saxon world just as JRR Tolkien’s Middle Earth was helping to popularise its archaic mystery. The sinister empty eyes of the Sutton Hoo helmet glare back at you from an age of cruel gods, mighty warriors and dragons. A huge cauldron, splendid drinking vessels and a lyre evoke the banquets where the story of Beowulf was told. Dark beauty from a dark age. For once, the hype comparing British finds to global marvels was justified when Henry VIII’s battleship the Mary Rose was raised from the sea bed off Portsmouth in 1982. This truly is a Tudor Pompeii – a miraculously preserved time capsule of a complete community. Intimate finds include crude sculptures carved by sailors in their spare time, as well as clothing, relics of drinking and eating, and weapons. The structure of the ship itself gives them a spookily real context. Like Pompeii, this is a monument to death as well as a mirror of life – for hundreds on board died when Henry’s mighty ship suddenly sank in the Battle of the Solent in 1545. A wonder of the world. 