Harry Winks has said his lifelong connection to Tottenham has made his involvement in Saturday’s Champions League final against Liverpool much more special. The midfielder, who is fit and ready to start after groin surgery on 29 April, joined the club as a five-year-old. His father, Gary, is a fanatical Spurs supporter and Winks attended matches with him at White Hart Lane from the age of six or seven. Winks has never been on loan and he has become an integral part of Mauricio Pochettino’s best XI this season. “It’s my club, I’ve known it since I was five years old and it’s the only club I’ve ever played for,” Winks said. “To be part of a Champions League final with Tottenham – it feels crazy to say it. Honestly, I would never have dreamed of doing this. To have played as many games as I have in the Champions League, to be part of this amazing side and this incredible era for Tottenham – it’s a true privilege. I am humbled. “I’ve watched the team from the stands at White Hart Lane when I was a kid so I know exactly how the growth of Spurs has been. Since the gaffer has come in, he’s made us a solid top-four side and one to be taken very seriously in Europe. What he has done and how far he has taken everyone – not only as players but as people – has been incredible to see. We’re only going in one direction and that’s even higher.” Winks’s Champions League dream looked over when he had his operation the day before the first leg of the semi‑final against Ajax, and Spurs then lost 1-0 at home. He says he had been playing in pain since the Premier League defeat at Chelsea on 27 February and, in the end, it became too much. But Winks always hoped he would be available for the final, which Spurs reached after their incredible comeback in Amsterdam, and he was able to return to full training on Monday of last week. “I was playing with a lot of pain for a couple of months,” he said. “We spoke with the physios and medical staff and we couldn’t quite get to the bottom of what it was. Having the surgery when I did gave me the best chance to be fit for the final. I’m feeling really good.” Winks referred to the never-say-die spirit that Pochettino has instilled in the squad as a reason for optimism against Liverpool. They have won nine matches this season with goals in or after the 80th minute. He added: “We’re not coming here to play a final, we are coming here to win. Whoever can manage the emotion and stress of it the best, who can really fight the most, will come out on top.” Uefa has allowed both teams’ full matchday squads to pose for the traditional pre-match photographs, at Pochettino’s request.