All three main protagonists will die. Jon in battle, Daenerys in childbirth and Cersei at the hand of Arya wearing the face of Jaime. Daenerys and Jon’s daughter will inherit the throne with Tyrion as regent, and Varys and Bran on the small council. Sansa will be Queen of the North. The final scene will be an elderly Samwell Tarly, years later with George RR Martin in cameo, writing A Song of Ice and Fire – a history comprising the events of a Game of Thrones. Andrew Hadand, 29, audit associate, Birmingham The only ending I can see happening is Gendry taking the throne with Arya by his side, and Sam as their Hand. We’ve already seen the conception of their child, who will likely fulfil the Azor Ahai prophecy. The final scene will be Arya giving birth: “Azor Ahai shall be born again amidst smoke and salt to wake dragons out of stone.” King’s Landing is full of dragon skulls. As the baby comes out screaming, these “stone” dragons will begin to breathe new life. As for the rest, Sansa will rule the North, while Jon and Daenerys will kill themselves/each other in the style of Romeo and Juliet. Anne Brooking, 32, music promotor, Glasgow After seeing Ghost’s very brief cameos in episodes two and three, I’m convinced the writers have brought him back for a specific reason. If he’s survived the kamikaze run into the long night, I’m backing him to be the last man (… dire wolf) sitting on that pointy throne. Nick, 30, teacher, London The Hound kills the Mountain, but is mortally wounded, then confesses his love for Arya. Gendry and Arya fall for each other. Jamie and Brienne fall for each other. They go on a double date. Samwell advises a siege and King’s Landing is cut off. Cersei is forced into exile in a deal brokered by Lord Varys and Tyrion. Jon Snow and Dany take the Iron Throne uncontested. Tyrion starts his own vineyard. Sansa is declared Queen of the North and has her choice of suitors. She becomes very high maintenance. Bronn steals a castle – a big one. Nobody can work out how to take it back. Steve, 47, Cayman Islands The Night King is not dead; he entered Bran before he was killed. Bran will destroy everyone because of what man has done to the Children of the Forest and to the environment. Arya will kill Cersei as was told by Melisandre. Bran, the Night King who is a Targaryen, will take the Iron Throne. The world will become all ice again. Patricia, 69, Montreal I keep thinking about Dany’s motivations. She may have grown up destined to take the Iron Throne, but her story so far doesn’t really support that. Whether it be changing Dothraki rules, ending slavery or abandoning her quest to help Jon, she has shown that she plays the counter card and breaks rules and tradition. Sitting on the Iron Throne doesn’t seem like her destiny. Breaking it, melting it to scrap, destroying the great houses and giving power to the people seems more her style. Gareth, 37, part-time civil servant, full-time gamer, London Since the end of the last season, I thought Jaime Lannister would be the one to end up on the Iron Throne after deserting his sister to join the battle in the North. I still think this could be the case. The character has done a full U-turn from bad guy to good guy, plus he’s once again proved himself in battle. Now that the battle of Winterfell is over, I think he’ll prove his loyalties to Daenerys by helping her defeat his sister in King’s Landing. I think he’ll be given the Throne by either Jon Snow or Daenerys as he’ll have proven himself as a commendable leader of men, who many characters would vouch for. Whereas Daenerys may learn that there’s more to life than ruling a kingdom and settle down with Jon Snow to rule in the North. Jonathan Garnett, 30, Sheffield Digital Marketing Manager and keen runner. I think Littlefinger faked his death and is a Faceless Man of Bravos like Arya. He has ancestry from Bravos. He was also seen to exchange an iron coin with an unnamed woman in Winterfell a few episodes before his “death”, who warned him that his “time was up”. I believe she was also a Faceless Man, who stood in for Littlefinger and was killed by Arya, while the real Littlefinger fled in the night. I believe he will reemerge in the final episodes and, true to his maxim about chaos being “a ladder”, he will rise above the ruins left by the warring main characters and take over Westeros. However, I don’t think there will be an Iron Throne for anyone to sit on. I believe some kind of republic will emerge and that a bourgeois revolution will sweep away the crumbling feudal order, led by Littlefinger himself. Danny, 30, writer, Bristol Cersei will have Tyrion at her mercy (after his betrayal by Bronn) but Jaime will step in to protect him and kill Cersei with Widow’s Wail. He will be killed by The Mountain, who will in turn be killed by The Hound. Dany will turn on Jon, they will both be killed as a result and the dragons will flee. Gendry will be King and take the Iron Throne with Arya by his side and Sansa will rule as Queen of the North. It will be revealed that Bran is both Brandon the Wall Builder and the Night King by some time travel Three-Eyed Raven hocus pocus. Tormund and Lady Brienne will get together and have giant babies. Yara Greyjoy will kill Euron and will rescue Ellaria Sand and they’ll sail away together. Sam will definitely survive and will be Hand to the King. Lord Varys will be assassinated. Davos will retire and visit Grey Worm and Missandei at their beach resort in Naath. Simon Thompson, management consultant, 48, Grange-Over-Sands Gendry becomes King but insists upon shifting to a constitutional monarchy with Tyrion as a prime ministerial Hand chosen by surviving nobles. Gendry and Arya move to Winterfell as Sansa and Tyrion settle to a more symbolic role based in King’s Landing. In an ending that divides viewers, Littlefinger is shown to be still alive having paid off a Faceless one to take his place before his execution at Winterfell. He succeeds in murdering Gendry and Arya, but their newborn child is taken to safety across the sea by Davos and Yara. And so the struggle for the Iron Throne will continue into the next generation. David, Stockholm Varys has been quiet so far, but I expect him to be pivotal in the end game. Losing the Dothraki and Jorah will push Daenerys closer to the edge, and Varys may well decide that she’s no longer a safe bet for the Iron Throne. Especially if/when he finds out about Jon’s true lineage. For all of Tyrion’s jokes, Varys will turn out to have the biggest balls, and will end up the real power behind Jon on the throne. Rupert Stubbs, 59, marketing consultant, Bath We’ll see many of the supporting cast die. At risk are Tormund (probably a brutal unexpected death), Ser Brienne (her story arc has been fulfilled) and Grey Worm/Missandei (no way are they getting their happy end on a tropical island). The Hound will kill and be killed by The Mountain, Varys will fall to his converted little birds. But after a lot of bloodshed and death in a struggle versus the Mad Queen, Jon and Dany will be ready to take the throne. Here’s where things get interesting. Now wary of Jon’s heritage, and without Ser Jorah to reign her in, Daenerys might become just a bit too Targaryen in her victory. I can see Samwell Tarly become Sam the Queenslayer, perhaps with support of the Starks and/or Tyrion, killing Dany in revenge and to make his best friend king. Naturally, the honourable Jon Snow will not accept such an act, will execute Sam in a scene reminiscent of Ned Stark’s beheading. He’ll head for the North, leaving the throne to whomever wishes to sit on it. Cue the rise of king Tyrion, first of his name. Gerben van de Werken, 34, civil servant, Utrecht Daenerys will find out about Gendry’s heritage as the last surviving Baratheon, and that he has a claim to the Iron Throne as the son of the previous King – currently we believe he is a bastard, however it is possible that he is the first-born son of Cersei and Robert who was discarded in the early years of their marriage. With Jon already holding a substantial claim to the throne, threatening Dany’s authority, she will not risk more competition and kill Gendry to secure her place in King’s Landing. This will get her a place on Arya’s list and the series will end with an assassination attempt from Arya to kill Dany. Arya will fail and Jon will kill Dany to save Arya before she is executed for treason. Harvey Jones, 23, electrical engineer, Cardiff I don’t think one person will end up as the single ruler of the Seven Kingdoms. There will be some sort of triumvirate and/or senate that would be chosen between the most prominent houses. After the bloodshed between Cersei and the rest of the world, the winners would most likely decide that the Throne is too big a temptation and that if only one house occupies it, there will never be peace. Milica Madzgaljevic, 55, marketing communication consultant, Belgrade