Chaffey Bros Wine Co Pax Aeterna Old Vine Barossa Nouveau, Australia 2017 (£17.95, Great Western Wine) I’m not always one for choosing wine by grape variety on its own. More usually it’s the region and producer that come first in my decision-making hierarchy. But one variety I do keep coming back to at the moment is grenache. That might be because I’m making up for lost time: I wasn’t always in love with grenache, made as a single-variety (it was different when it was blended, as it often is in southern France, with syrah and others). It could be a little bit too liberal with its natural assets, those great gushing geysers of soft-tannined, dark ripe berry fruit and alcohol. These days, however, you’re as likely to find grenache in more gentle mode: still soft, but pale, refreshing – even, on occasion elegant, and certainly, in the case of Chaffey Bros’s supple, spicy, young vine from old vines, refreshing. Viña Zorzal Garnacha, Navarra, Spain 2017 (£7.25, The Wine Society) Barossa Valley, and south Australia in general, is proving to be a real hotspot for modern-style lighter grenache – literally, since this is a sun-loving variety that is capable of offering up plump grape bunches in the dustiest, driest heat, all the more so once the vines are older. You can see the effects in another Barossan, Magpie Estate’s The Songlines Grenache, Barossa Valley, Australia 2017 (£10.95, Cheers Wine Merchants), which has an easy, thirst-quenching style. In similar conditions in Europe, meanwhile, Spain’s winemakers have really got to grips with their own stock of old grenache (aka garnacha) vines in the past decade, and the results can be supremely good value, as in the effortlessly lithe juiciness of Zorzal’s unoaked beauty from the northwestern region of Navarra. Cantina Mesa Primo Scuro Cannonau di Sardegna, Italy 2017 (£12.95, Eton Vintners) A tour of the Med from northwest Spain to the French border with Italy takes you through a panoply of grenache styles. Recent highlights start in Catalonia with the dark plum and paprika-scented Brisas Verano Garnacha Tinta, Costers del Segre 2017 (£8.49, All About Wine); then to the Roussillon for a bigger, craggier take on grenache (blended with some carignan) from the seaside vineyards of Collioure in Domaine La Tour Vieille La Pinède 2017 (£16.95, Yapp Brothers). On the eastern side, in the Rhône Valley’s Gigondas appellation, St Cosme Little James Basket Press Grenache NV (from £9.99, All About Wine) is full of garrigue herbs and cherries. Finally to Sardinia, where grenache is cannonau and where Cantina Mesa’s example is gorgeously, evocatively aromatic, succulent and bright. Follow David on Twitter @Daveydaibach