Alabama’s Republican-controlled state senate passed a bill Tuesday to outlaw abortion, making it a crime to perform the procedure at any stage of pregnancy. The strictest-in-the-nation abortion ban allows an exception only when the woman’s health is at serious risk, and sets up a legal battle that supporters hope will lead to the supreme court overturning its landmark ruling that legalized abortion nationwide. The measure contains no exception for rape and incest, after lawmakers voted down an amendment Tuesday that would have added such an exception. The legislation makes it a class A felony for a doctor to perform an abortion, punishable by ten to 99 years in prison. Women would not face criminal penalties for getting an abortion. It goes further than any other state has to restrict abortion. Other states, including neighboring Georgia, have instituted bans on abortion after about six weeks into pregnancy. The vote came after a battle broke out over whether to allow legal abortions for women who become pregnant due to rape or incest, an issue that divided Republicans who otherwise supported outlawing abortion. Last week, chaos erupted on the floor when Republican leaders stripped out the rape exception without a roll call vote, leading the final vote to be postponed. It got a full vote on Tuesday, but ultimately failed. Lawmakers approved the measure after an hours-long debate, where minority Democrats introduced a slew of amendments in an attempt to block it. “You don’t have to raise that child. You don’t have to carry that child. You don’t have to provide for that child. You don’t have to do anything for that child, but yet you want to make the decision for that woman,” the state senator Vivian Davis Figures told the bill’s proponents. She introduced amendments that would require the state to expand Medicaid, force legislators who vote for the measure to pay the state’s legal bills, or make it a crime for men to get vasectomies. All failed. Figures questioned the backers’ resistance to adding an exception for rape and incest. “Do you know what it’s like to be raped?” she said. “Why would you not want a woman to at least have that exception for such a horrific act?” The bill has already passed the House. It must now be signed by Governor Kay Ivey. The legislation is expected to spark an immediate legal challenge and to be overturned at least by the lower courts. The ACLU has said it will sue to stop it. Backers of the ban are hoping the fight will go all the way to the supreme court, which ruled in the 1973 Roe v Wade case that women must be allowed to get abortions up to the point where the fetus can survive outside the womb. “Human life has rights, and when someone takes those rights, that’s when we as government have to step in,” said the state senator Clyde Chambliss. “When God creates that life, that miracle of life inside the woman’s womb, it’s not our place as humans to extinguish that life. That’s what I believe.” The bill is part of a trend across the US in which Republican-controlled states are attempting to put new restrictions on abortion, gambling that they will fare better in the courts following the confirmation of new federal judges and supreme court justices picked by the Trump administration. Opponents predict the legislation will drive doctors to leave Alabama, which already has some of the highest rates of infant mortality and cervical cancer.