TSB is expected to cull at least 100 head office jobs as the bank attempts to move on from last year’s IT debacle. The Guardian understands that the challenger bank began last month to notify affected staff that they were at risk of redundancy in a wave of cuts expected to be completed by early June. The jobs cuts were expected to take place after last year’s IT migration that was meant to finally separate the bank from Lloyds Banking Group and move it on to a bespoke platform built by its Spanish owner, Sabadell. But a subsequent IT meltdown, which locked millions of customers out of their accounts and led to the departure of the then chief executive, Paul Pester, postponed those plans. The cuts have now been revived, after Sabadell announced it had resolved “100% of complaints” linked to the IT problems, with the bank now needing fewer staff to assist in the aftermath of the migration project. While only a handful of staff have so far been put on alert for job losses, it is believed cost-cutting plans could result in about 100 redundancies among a 1,000-strong workforce at head office over the next six to nine months, according to sources with knowledge of the plans. The Guardian understands the next round of job cuts is being prepared for September. The bank said: “One of the key objectives in 2019 is to ensure that we are properly organised so that we can compete effectively in what is a rapidly evolving marketplace. As part of this, we continually look to improve and simplify ways of working across our head office functions, so they can support delivering the best customer experience. “When we make changes, we consult fully with our recognised unions and will work extremely closely with any partners who might be impacted. As always, our partners will be the first to know about any changes which might impact their teams or their roles.” Ged Nichols, the general secretary for the Accord union, said his team was part of recent negotiations that resulted in a “small number of job losses”. He added: “We are not currently in consultation on any future change programmes and do not comment on speculation.” The news comes just weeks after TSB confirmed it was closing four branches in Scotland and cutting opening hours for 94 branches across the UK, with changes slated for July. The bank said there would be “no job losses as a result of these changes”, with all affected staff offered roles at nearby branches. The changes will be executed under the supervision of TSB’s new chief executive, Debbie Crosbie, who formally joined the bank last week. The former CYBG executive took over just as TSB reported a pre-tax profit of €14.6m (£12.6m) for the first quarter, compared with a €56.8m loss during the same period in 2018.