Your report that the transport select committee has at last concluded that a national strategy for bus services is urgently needed is indeed welcome and long overdue (Report, 22 May). The freedom for metro mayors to re-establish regulation is equally welcome and may bring much-needed progress in the development of the bus services so vital for access to jobs, education and healthcare, as well as a reduction in congestion and improved air quality. What is disappointing is that this should be suggested only for metropolitan areas, where provision is already far better than in most of the rest of the country, whether in smaller conurbations or in rural areas, where increasingly bus services have disappeared completely (as your report says, 3,000 bus routes in England have been axed or reduced since 2010). Just as serious, however, is the problem that the committee’s report focuses only on bus transport. A major reason for the success of Transport for London (TfL) is that its work encompasses all modes of public transport: buses, underground and overground trains, trams, and river services. Beyond London, there is no truly integrated strategy for public transport. It is extraordinary that the Department for Transport has never put forward a national strategy for integrated public transport, when figures for 2017 reveal that 24% of households in the UK have no car, a considerable proportion of the electorate. Until all modes of public transport are considered as a whole and seen as vital for communities and for the environment, all services will remain fragmented, often unfit for purpose and a constant hindrance to development in areas where it is sorely needed. TfL led the way. Can we now work towards TfB (Transport for Britain)?Pamela ThompsonBideford, Devon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition