When was it, maybe two weeks ago? I was just about clinging on to sanity’s rigging amid the daily tempest of trauma that has become my family’s morning routine. My 11-year-old was fuming loudly because I hadn’t bought her any croissants (what have we become?!), the dog was expressing his fear-anxiety about the postman, my husband was losing his shit at the toast he had just burned, my 10-year-old was punting a rugby ball through the kitchen air (the tinny hi-hats of the latest indistinguishable mumble-rap track playing on his portable speakers) and John Humphrys had the hump about something. On this occasion, it was the air quality in inner-city classrooms, which, to be fair, is a legitimate thing to grump on about, even if it was with that tone of pantomime incredulity he employs. (NB: what follows is a very vague estimation of a memory that is most likely wrong in the first place.) “Surely there’s something we can do to improve the air our children are breathing,” harrumphs Humph. “Plants?” I suggest to the radio. “Well, yes, there are things we can do,” says the air-quality expert. “Plants,” I say again (I’m certain she’s going to say “plants”). “We can fit classrooms with air purifiers that mechanically remove more than 99.97% of air contaminants.” And plants, surely? “Very interesting,” says Humph, content no further investigation is required. And that’s that. Am I wrong? Is this not completely missing the chance to cram our spaces with green stuff? Wouldn’t this have huge subsidiary benefits, beyond that of increased oxygen (or what we have come to know in my house as “plant farts”)? I’ve become uncommonly zealous when it comes to my house plants, so much so that I now exclusively get plant-sloganned gifts for my birthday. People recognise it as my “thing”. Could my bias towards the vegetable world be blinding me to certain cold hard facts? Turns out that when it comes to the cleanliness of air, I hadn’t even begun to get a handle on the issue. The high court this month ordered a fresh inquest into the death of nine-year-old Ella Kissi-Debrah after an asthma attack in 2013. Some experts have since claimed unlawful levels of air pollution were to blame. She lived 25 metres from the South Circular in London, consistently criticised as one of the most polluted roads in the UK. Ella would hardly be the first victim of air pollution, which is thought to play a part in 40,000 deaths a year in the UK. But the response has been shamefully slow. In London, for example, it was announced last December that five nurseries would trial new air-quality filtration systems. That, along with the Ultra-Low Emission Zone, both beneath the banner of Breathe London, suggests that Sadiq Khan (unlike that vaulting armpit he succeeded) is at least taking the matter seriously. But woeful is the tempo at which we change our ways in this country. Apart from fatal illnesses, poor air quality could be causing our kids all sorts of problems. Academic studies suggest that in lots of classrooms the CO2 levels are so high, and the subsequent effects on children’s concentration so extreme, as to negate the purpose of going to school. Kids sitting in a classroom with bad ventilation could raise the CO2 level to between 2,000 and 5,000 parts per million within an hour, causing sleepiness, headaches, nausea, irritation and loss of attention. Perhaps all manner of behavioural and mental health issues could be solved by simply letting plenty of clean air into our classrooms. If they can stop children suffering from painful respiratory problems and heart disease, if they can improve their concentration, then let’s put air-filtration systems in every classroom in the country. Clearly, I had been thinking about this the wrong way. I had started from a binary position (mechanical filtration bad, plants good) and failed to recognise the real desperation within the human element. I dropped the needle on Mort Garson’s album Mother Earth’s Plantasia, and set about watering my areca palms and orchids and my string-of-pearls and lipstick plants. But then, as I took a duster to my mother-in-law’s tongue (Milt), lamenting how the dust was itself a reminder of the limitations of my compadres in green, I recalled something I had read when I got it: Milts produce a huge amount of plant farts at night. It is why they are really good to have in the bedroom. Also, didn’t a Nasa study in the 1980s prove houseplants could reduce pollutants in the air? And what is the expense of a few plants compared with a filtration system? If this country, with its “didn’t-realise” racism and human rights infringements, can’t get its shit together to make the air safe for kids, then FFS let’s get it done ourselves. A Milt costs about £12, and removes benzene, formaldehyde, trichloroethylene and ozone from the air. There are other plants that do similar. A decent air purifier costs hundreds of pounds. Plants have to be cared for (unlike air purifiers) – but that’s a good thing, no? Plant husbandry is a great skill and it should be taught in schools. It’s therapeutic biology, baby. The Journal of Physiological Anthropology published a study that found indoor plants and even potting soil can chemically reduce stress and anxiety. There are all sorts of currently unexplainable advantages to plant proximity, too: they increase memory retention, improve creative performance, even speed up healing. Is there anything these crazy green beauties can’t do? So, of course let’s stop leaving our engines running outside the school gates (how dumb would you have to be to do that in the first place?). And of course let’s get brilliant filtration systems into our classrooms as soon as possible. But for long-term physical and mental health, you can’t beat the wild and exotic aesthetics of a pot plant. • Charlotte Church is a singer-songwriter and political activist