Cyclone Fani, the most severe storm to hit the Indian subcontinent in two decades, has made landfall on the coast of the eastern state of Odisha, where officials were trying to evacuate the homes of 1 million people in its path. The “extremely severe” storm bearing winds of up to 185km/h barrelled into the small city of Puri, home to about 200,000 people, at aabout 8am local time on Friday, according to Indian meteorological officials. It lost speed as it approached the coast and was expected to slow further as it migrated north through West Bengal state and into Bangladesh by Sunday, but could still be disastrous for the densely populated, low-lying communities who live along the Bay of Bengal, one of the most vulnerable regions to flooding in the world. “Until now there are no confirmed casualties,” said Bishnupad Sethi, the state’s special relief commissioner at around 2.30pm local time. The storm raged in the area kicking up winds of around 175km/h for about three hours but calmed around noon, local time, as it moved north. Parts of the city were flooded including the Puri-Konark Marine Drive, a major road, which was submerged by about 1.5m of seawater. Rescue workers have ventured out onto the streets of the city to begin clearing uprooted trees and other debris. “People have suffered a lot because the roofs of many houses are not concrete,” said Sanjukta Pannda from Kakatpur, a village in the Puri district. “Those roofs have been wiped out and because of the rain there is lots of problems. The wind is slow right now but the rain is continuing. A powerful storm in Odisha, one of India’s most poorest states, flooded hundreds of villages and killed more 10,000 people in 1999. There was heavy rain and strong winds along India’s eastern coast overnight on Thursday as local authorities worked to move at least 1.1 million people, including more than 1,000 pregnant women. Video posted on Friday morning by government communication channels from Bhubaneswar, the Odisha capital, showed saturated palm trees flailing in deafening winds. “There is no one on the roads and there cannot be,” said Bimal Pandia, an officer with the charity Oxfam, which is based in Bhubaneswar. “It is quite serious now; the wind is blowing at between 120 and 150km/h. Many trees have been uprooted outside our house, but since we are not able to venture outside it’s difficult to tell the damage.” The Kolkata office of India’s meteorological department said the storm could lead to “total destruction of thatched houses”, flooding of escape routes and large pieces of debris being flung in the air. The sound and the fury : here's what the landfall at Puri by #CycloneFani actually looked like..Video by @PIBBhubaneswar pic.twitter.com/4GpvKFkRQ3 All flights out of Bhubaneswar were cancelled on Friday and Kolkata airport was closed from 9.30pm on Friday evening until 6pm on Saturday. Tourists were evacuated on three special trains on Thursday but nearly 150 other railway services have been suspended. Hundreds of disaster management personnel have been deployed across the state, which has closed its schools and colleges and suspended leave for doctors and health officials for the next fortnight. The Indian army, navy and air force were on alert to assist with rescues. Nearly 5,000 shelters were set up in Odisha for the evacuees. Police in the state posted pictures on social media showing officers folding their hands in a mark of respect to persuade reluctant people to cooperate and move to safer ground. Pandia said Oxfam was among the civil society groups working with the government and had prepared enough material to quickly reconstruct 5,000 houses. The cyclone’s name, Fani, is Bengali for the hood of a snake. The word cyclone itself is said to be derived from the Greek word meaning “coiling of a snake”, and was coined by the British administrator Henry Piddington while he was stationed in Kolkata, then Calcutta, during colonial rule. Fifteen of the 20 deadliest-ever storms have formed in the Bay of Bengal, where the combination of poor quality housing, dense populations and flash flooding frequently lead to high casualties. The Bhola cyclone that hit Bangladesh in 1970 killed more than half a million people. FANI impact in Puri pic.twitter.com/s88pqKhLbR But the Indian and Bangladesh governments have vastly improved their responses to such disasters, routinely evacuating communities, predicting calamitous weather in advance, communicating the danger to residents and establishing effective shelters. More than a million people were evacuated from Odisha during a 2013 storm in a move that is thought to have saved thousands of lives.