Theresa May has no intention of setting out a fresh timetable for her departure, Downing Street has signalled, with a spokesman insisting she is determined to “get Brexit done”. The spokesman dismissed calls from Conservative backbenchers for the prime minister to step down, saying she had already “made a very generous and bold offer” to the 1922 Committee of resigning if her Brexit deal is passed. The 1922 Committee is the shorthand name for the parliamentary group of backbench Conservative MPs that meets weekly while parliament is in session. The group has an executive body of 18 backbench MPs who oversee the organisation of Conservative party leadership elections. The name derives from it being formed originally by a small group of MPs who were elected for the first time in the 1922 general election, before expanding to become the main representative group of Conservative MPs who are not part of the government itself.  “She is here to deliver Brexit in phase one, and then she will leave and make way for new leadership in phase two,” the spokesman said. “That is the timetable she is working for: she wants to get Brexit done.” Earlier, May signalled her intention to fight on in No 10, using prime minister’s questions to compare herself to Liverpool football club making a remarkable comeback to win the Champions League semi-final. When the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, suggested May could learn how to do well in Europe from the Liverpool manager, Jürgen Klopp, May replied with what appeared to be a scripted gag. “I actually think that when we look at the Liverpool win over Barcelona last night, what it shows is that when everyone says it’s all over, that your European opposition have got you beat, the clock is ticking down, it’s time to concede defeat, actually we can still secure success if everyone comes together.” Her refusal to budge comes before a crucial meeting of the 1922 Committee of Tory backbenchers, where they will decide whether to change party rules to allow another no-confidence vote on May’s future. The current rules say a prime minister cannot face another challenge within 12 months, and May won the last confidence vote in December. Brexiter sources on the committee have said they are increasingly confident they may have enough support to remove the time limit, after a previous ballot went narrowly against changing the rules. However, it is not yet sure to pass, nor is it certain that Tory MPs would vote by a majority to remove May; many soft Brexit supporters would rather she had passed a deal in order to prevent her successor campaigning for a no-deal departure from the EU. Theresa May becomes the UK's second female prime minister. In her first cabinet, Boris Johnson is foreign secretary, David Davis is Brexit secretary, and Liam Fox’s career is revived as international trade secretary. Michael Gove, George Osborne, Oliver Letwin and Nicky Morgan are all removed from their posts. May gives her Lancaster House speech outlining Britain's approach to negotiating Brexit. It sets out the red lines that will continue to cause difficulties with her own party two years later. Formal notice is given to the EU under article 50 of the Lisbon treaty that the UK intends to leave. Despite having previously ruled it out, May calls a snap general election, accusing opposition parties of trying to jeopardise Brexit preparations. With the Conservatives 21 points ahead of Jeremy Corbyn's Labour, projections suggest she could secure a majority of 140. After a disastrous campaign performance, May loses her majority in the Commons. Within days of the election she is forced to do a deal with the DUP to get a working majority. May's set-piece speech at the Conservative conference lurches from disaster to disaster, as a cough marrs her delivery, a protestor manages to hand her a P45, and letters start falling off the backdrop behind her. After a summit at Chequers, Davis resigns as Brexit secretary over the direction of the withdrawal agreement with the EU. Johnson follows Davis out the door, claiming the UK was headed 'for the status of a colony'. The text of the withdrawal agreement is published. It is approved by the EU two weeks later. May loses a second Brexit secretary as Dominic Raab resigns, saying he 'cannot in good conscience' support the deal he and the prime minister had negotiated. Esther McVey resigns on the same day. In an unprecedented move May's government is found to be in contempt of parliament after failing to publish the full legal advice it has received over Brexit. Although more than a third of her MPs vote against her, May survives a Tory confidence vote. Under party rules she cannot be challenged for another 12 months. May suffers the heaviest parliamentary defeat of a British prime minister in the democratic era, losing a 'meaningful vote' on her deal by a majority of 230. The next day she succeeds in winning a vote of no confidence in the government proposed by Jeremy Corbyn. May's deal is again voted down by parliament, this time by a majority of 149. On the day that parliament voted against eight different alternative Brexit options, Theresa May told her backbench MPs that she would stand down as soon as her deal passed. In a sign of growing frustration among Tory MPs, the backbencher Andrea Jenkyns directly called on May to quit her post at prime minister’s questions. “She’s tried her best, nobody could fault or doubt her commitment and sense of duty, but she has failed,” the Brexit-supporting MP said. “The public no longer trust her to run Brexit negotiations. Isn’t it time to step aside and let someone else lead our country, our party and the Brexit negotiations?” However, May rebuffed the suggestion, blaming the MPs who failed to back her Brexit deal. “This is not an issue about me and it’s not an issue about her. If it were an issue about me and the way I vote, we would already have left the European Union.” The prime minister is still trying to strike a deal with Labour to pass her withdrawal agreement before MEPs have to take their seats in the European parliament on 2 July, after abandoning their target of getting it done by the time of the elections on 23 May. The Downing Street spokesman confirmed the Conservatives were preparing to campaign in the European parliamentary elections, saying the party was “up and running, and our message is that, there’s only one party that can deliver Brexit”. He said May would be taking part in some campaign events. The government formally announced on Tuesday that it will not have a Brexit deal agreed in time to take part in the EU-wide poll on 23 May. “Our aim is that these MEPs never take up their seats,” the spokesman said. Asked why the Conservatives were taking part in elections they did not want to take place, the spokesman said: “Because it’s democracy.”