As someone closely involved in parliamentary campaigning to secure the infected blood inquiry for the Labour MP Diana Johnson, I read Kieran Walshe’s article with interest (“The infected blood inquiry reminds us we need a less painful way to deal with health failures”, Comment). I agree with his concerns and would like to offer my thoughts on some further reforms: whenever inquiries are set up, they fall under the sponsorship of implicated parties. In the case of infected blood, this was the Department of Health. It took campaigners 18-plus months to get responsibility transferred to the Cabinet Office. Future inquires need to be sponsored and funded independently. The 2005 Inquiries Act does not even give victims a statutory right to be consulted during the phase of drawing up terms of reference. This must surely change. New rules must give those affected the flexibility to hear and give evidence in more compassionate ways. Current inquiry laws create a false dichotomy between legalistic and dispassionate statutory inquiries, which can compel the provision of evidence on the one hand (eg Grenfell) and non-statutory, more “human” inquiries that have no power to compel on the other (eg Hillsborough and Gosport). It is a system that catches victims between a rock and hard place. I am confident that the infected blood inquiry will be one of the exceptions that proves the rule (Mid Staffs was another), but in too many recent inquires, the rule nonetheless still starkly stands. Victims of scandals in healthcare surely have the right to both compassion and justice, yet far too often, these two things are mutually exclusive. We need a new Inquiries Act to put this right. Thomas StephensFormer parliamentary researcher for Diana Johnson MP and Labour councillor in BrentLondon NW2 Kieran Walshe is right in his criticism of the inadequacy and cost of public inquiries in relation to public services. Their ineffectiveness has long been evident. However, he misses the fundamental point: such devices are a useful distraction from the underlying failings for which governments themselves are frequently responsible. They are convenient, as Professor Rudolf Klein described it, for the “devolution of blame and the centralisation of credit”.David Hands, retired visiting professor Welsh Institute for Health and Social CareDeganwy, Conwy David Olusoga is right to point out that some Cambridge academics played a role in the creation and dissemination of racial theories, especially in the 19th and early 20th centuries (“Why are so many afraid to confront our historical links with the slave trade?”, Comment). However, as a student in the 1960s, I want to acknowledge the lead given then by many teaching archaeology and anthropology in debunking such theories with inspirational teaching. I have no doubt that they would have welcomed the research project but would have wanted it extended to the role of the colleges, including even their own.Professor Colin RichardsSpark BridgeCumbria The Airbnb scheme is fundamentally unfair to many commercial and individual groups, a feature it shares with other innovative internet giants (“How Airbnb took over the world”, Special report). Those who let out rooms, or entire houses, in this way are subject to none of the safety and regulatory restrictions that apply to hotels or bed-and-breakfast accommodation. Even if they were, it would be impossible to police such a large number of premises and regulatory costs would be prohibitive. It is unfair competition, however cheap and convenient, and could pose serious safety risks for tourists, apart from its detrimental effect on local rental markets and disruption to neighbours. Governments seem confused and incompetent when it comes to some aspects of planning and housing, never getting to grips with the real problems or foreseeing unexpected consequences from their ill-judged measures.Jennifer ReesCardiff Vince Cable overstates his case in claiming that Lib Dem MEPs (plural) have a strong record of campaigning on the environment in “We’re back – and we are the only real hope for remainers”, News.) There is only one Lib-Dem MEP! It is the Green party, with three highly effective members of the European parliament, that has the greater impact and represents the best hope for remainers. It is to their flag that environmentalists should rally, and with increased confidence after the party’s spectacular results in the local elections.Chris MillmanBristol  Any reforms that tackle the problem of state schools “playing” the examination system and “end the incentive for schools to rid themselves of pupils who could depress their overall exam results” are to be welcomed, but also raise an obvious question (“Schools told to stop using exclusions to boost their results”, News). Why are there no measures to prevent schools in the private sector “playing” the system? They enter pupils for Cambridge Assessment’s IGCSE exams, which have not been subject to the changes that have made GCSE examinations, compulsory in state schools, more rigorous. These exams are clearly employed to “boost results”, just like the Pre-U exams, where coursework still figures prominently in the final assessment, which are being used by most independent schools instead of regulated and reformed A-levels.Bernie EvansLiverpool The sidelining of female country artists is nothing new (“One of many unsung heroes”, Rebecca Nicholson, Comment). Gail Davies began her career in the early 1970s and was the first female record producer in country music, yet most people have never heard of her.Graham LarkbeyLondon E17 As one daily entranced by the sound of birdsong (my favourites are blackbirds, surely the avian Pavarottis of the woodland), I was heartened to read of the similar enjoyment and potential mental health benefits experienced by others, described by Stephen Moss (“Natural high: why birdsong is the best antidote to our stressful lives”, Focus), but saddened that birdlife in Britain is now endangered. It reminded me of accounts I read of the experiences of officers in the trenches in the First World War. John Lewis-Stempel’s book, Six Weeks (the title referring to the rumoured life expectancy of a subaltern on the Western Front) is peppered with descriptions in letters home from the front of the joy, comfort and peace that such men felt during lulls in the fighting and shelling, when the clear sounds of birdsong, particularly that of larks, could be heard. Knowing what joy such sounds bring to peaceful spring days, it is easy to imagine what it also meant to those young men, so far from home, and in daily fear for their lives.Melvin HurstVentnor, Isle of Wight