Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from last week. The death of beloved children’s author Judith Kerr prompted many fond tributes last week. Cardellina wrote: It’s heartbreaking. Are there any books that stay with us like the books you read as a very young child? I can remember the illustrations and the rhythm of the words so clearly all these years later. I remember vividly the front cover of my sister’s copy of When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit, which I was always too terrified to read because I believed cuddly toys were real and it frightened me to think of one left behind (what a spoilt and sheltered child I was). I grew up with two cats, one of whom was grey and stripey, so I took Mog as a compliment. I love how Kerr understands cats and the joy of living with cats. In my old flat before I moved back to the UK I had a photo of Judith Kerr on my wall, grey haired and beaming and clutching a far cat in her arms in front of a plate or biscuits and a teapot. “That’s happiness!” I thought, so I pinned it on my bedroom wall for those days when you just don’t feel like anything. Lovely. Some of the best moments of my own life have been spent reading The Tiger Who Came To Tea. Ave atque vale. Elsewhere, Rick2016 has enjoyed The Siege by Helen Dunmore: She’s one of those authors that I’ve intended to read for a while but never got around to it until now. I’ll definitely be reading more of her novels, because The Siege was superb. It’s set during the siege of Leningrad and is a remarkable portrayal of the city and its population, haunted by the suspicion and bloodshed of Stalin’s reign, now besieged by the Nazis and starving. Dunmore is excellent at writing about romance without being sentimental and at portraying people’s resilience and courage without lessening the fear, horror and suffering. The Spy Who Came in from the Cold by John Le Carré has grabbed mnndesai: If there was even a slight doubt in my mind whether I want read all his work, then it’s gone after reading this one. Graham Greene called it: “The greatest spy story I ever read”. This one truly is amazing. Mind you, this is not for those who like fast paced action. In fact, there is hardly any action in the novel. It’s a slow burning spy story which turns the whole plot on itself towards the last two dozen pages. The plot twist on the very last page takes your breath away in a homage to the short story master O. Henry. “I’ve never really been all that into either sci-fi or outright thrillers, says Tom Mooney. “So I’m as surprised as anyone that the author I have become obsessed by is Blake Crouch”: The guy is just brilliant. Having already read Dark Matter and his forthcoming Recursion in recent weeks, I’ve now just devoured the first in his Wayward Pines trilogy and loved that too. His books are so gripping and just relentlessly pacy. As with all his books, it’s hard to say too much about Pines without ruining it. But imagine if some genius/nutcase mashed together Twin Peaks, Stranger Things, The X Files, The Purge, The Village, Stepford Wives and Men in Black. DanielSilva enjoyed The Luminaries by Eleanor Catton: The book is massive – weighing in at a mighty 832 pages. But every sentence of this intriguing tale set on the wild west coast of southern New Zealand during the time of its gold rush is expertly written, every cliffhanger chapter-ending making us beg for the next to begin. The Luminaries has been perfectly constructed as the consummate literary page-turner. Genghis Khan and the Making of the Modern World by Jack Weatherford has impressed Jembo Jembo: The Mongol hordes, they rode horses, smelled bad and they conquered vast areas of the world. That’s about all I’d heard of Genghis before reading this. Turns out they had a massive impact on the spread of technology, trade and knowledge despite being relatively unsophisticated and few in number. The author spent years travelling in the back of beyond tracing the path followed by Genghis and his successors, tracked down and translated the Mongols secret history and generally sunk himself deep in the history. The result is a cracking story with plenty of information and analysis of the long term results of what was a short lived empire. Finally, interwar, recommends The Citadel by AJ Cronin, a novel that made history: Largely based on the author’s own medical experience, the story of Andrew Manson, an idealistic young doctor whose career climbs from a low-paid practice in a Welsh mining village to the rarefied heights of society London, takes in the fads and frauds, the greed, extortion and downright corruption of interwar medicine. Written in a popular realist style, well paced, it is said to have played a part in the establishment of the NHS. Sounds something that everyone should read. “My metric of success is not, ‘What did everyone think of the prose?’” The New York Times has bravely penetrated the shadowy world of book clubs. Germany has handed over to Israel 5,000 personal documents owned by Franz Kafka’s confidant, Max Brod. “Seamus’s feet never left the ground… and you could nearly say he never left Bellaghy.” On Seamus Heaney at home. Matthew Sweet politely corrects a huge mistake in Naomi Woolf’s latest book. The art of doodling. If you’re on Instagram, now you can share your reads with us: simply tag your posts with the hashtag #GuardianBooks, and we’ll include a selection in this blog. Happy reading!