Following the suicide of 63-year-old Stephen Dymond, a week after appearing on The Jeremy Kyle Show, reality TV has come under attack. ITV has been condemned, The Jeremy Kyle Show has been cancelled and the digital, culture, media and sports committee has launched an investigation into production companies’ duty of care to participants on their shows. Yet popular culture has always thrived on the exposure of troubled and vulnerable individuals. Back in 1835, the so-called “Greatest Showman” PT Barnum found fame by displaying an elderly and paralysed slave named Joice Heth. She was probably suffering from dementia. She was billed as the “161-year-old nurse of George Washington” and lugged across the US as punters poked and prodded her ailing body, which Barnum exhibited in taverns and pleasure gardens. He once claimed to have starved her and forcibly removed her teeth to make her appear more credible. When she died, aged about 80, her body was publicly dissected in front of a paying crowd, and Barnum was on his way to stardom. On both sides of the Atlantic, freak shows prospered from the 1840s to 1914. Inside them, a showman introduced the “freak” with ballyhoo: the remarkable Siamese Twins, the amazing Man in Miniature, the incredible Chinese Giant. Onstage, the “freak” would perform: they’d sing, dance, or dazzle with acrobatic skill; answer questions from the audience, be fondled and handled by the curious and, at the end of a show, souvenirs were available. As an institution, the freak show was all but dead by the 1950s, yet its monstrous offspring was delivered into postwar culture. Cue tabloid talk shows, which originated in the 1960s, thrived in the 1980s and remain hugely popular today. In both the US and UK, shows like Jeremy Kyle’s parade the bewildered, the unfortunate and the transgressive to the delight of an ever-growing audience. They rely on the same dynamics as the seemingly extinct Victorian freak show, albeit with a shift from physiological to psychological freakishness (although unusual bodies still get a good showing – on Channel 4’s Embarrassing Bodies, for instance). Kyle is the Victorian showman par excellence, introducing the “guests”, who display their difference in a titillating spectacle of the bizarre: “Prove I’m the dad and I’ll prove I haven’t slept with my mum!”; “My boyfriend is a woman and my baby is a doll!” The guests are predominantly poor, emerging from the shadows of “broken Britain” for a moment in the spotlight. Like the freak show’s claim to educate, talk shows are often peddled as informative and entertaining, yet titillation, voyeurism, exposure, ridicule and theatre define the spectacle. Us versus them: a freak show in all but name. The chair of the DCMS committee, Damian Collins, has warned that shows such as Jeremy Kyle, or the reality dating series Love Island, “risk putting people who might be vulnerable on to a public stage at a point in their lives when they are unable to foresee the consequences”. It was a danger that was equally present in the Victorian freak show. Barnum’s next “prodigy” was a four-year-old boy, 25in (65cm) tall, named Charles Stratton. He became General Tom Thumb, an international celebrity who went on to perform for the likes of Queen Victoria and Abraham Lincoln. When he married another short person, Lavinia Warren, their private lives were exposed to satisfy public curiosity: a wedding ceremony was conducted by Barnum for the sake of ticket sales, and even a baby was rented and passed off as the couple’s own. Reality TV contains similar human tragedies matched with commercial triumphs. Last year, 3.6 million viewers watched the finale of Love Island. Jeremy Kyle ran for 16 years. The genre has permeated the wider culture. The national debate about gaslighting was prompted by a Love Island contestant. The man who occupies the White House moved seamlessly from The Apprentice to the presidency, while voyeurism, transgression and spectacle fill our gossip magazines, seep into medical documentaries, and fuel our obsession with the private lives of celebrities. Similarly, the Victorian freak show was never a self-contained affair. It was given the royal seal of approval by Queen Victoria; scientists, clergymen and ordinary folk all came to stare at “freaks” paraded at circuses, zoos, museums, theatres and carnivals. These in turn influenced what people understood about race, sex, the body, identity and class. Today we might pour scorn on the Victorian obsession with “freaks”. But we evidently have our own. We continue to lust after difference; we continue to make spectacles of the unfortunate. And while the Jeremy Kyle Show has been taken off air, Love Island is set to hit our screens again next month. The show, it seems, must go on. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org. • John Woolf is the author of The Wonders: Lifting the Curtain on the Freak Show, Circus and Victorian Age