The facts are incontrovertible: Johanna Konta goes into the first round of the French Open tomorrow on Monday against the world No 149 Antonia Lottner aware that she has failed to reach the second round here four times in a row. But, as Britain’s sole representative in the women’s draw pointed out, the game is about more than just facts. It is about feelings. “You guys will always have an opinion, or ask questions to get an opinion,” the world No 26 told reporters. “That’s just part of our relationship, isn’t it? And you were also basing [opinions] on fact. Factually I didn’t have successful periods on clay in the last couple of years. So, you can only really base things on facts – and I can only speak on how I’ve felt on the surface and how I feel on the surface now. Actually I don’t feel much different. “Winning matches on any surface will definitely give you a much larger element of trust in what you’re doing. I definitely feel I’m trusting myself right now in the things I’m doing, because I’ve been fortunate enough to have had good wins and great matches to back that up.” And those facts are that she has played the best clay-court tennis of her career this summer, reaching finals in Rabat last month, when the emerging Greek talent, Maria Sakkari, beat her in three sets, and in Rome, where she gave the in-form world No 4 Kiki Bertens a semi-final lesson before losing to Karolina Pliskova, who has risen to world No 2. More immediately, she has to beat Lottner, who had the best win of her career last month in Lugano when she got the better of her friend Belinda Bencic, one of three top-20 names on her CV. Konta said, “I know who she is, but I don’t know her, I haven’t spoken to Dimitri [Zavialoff, her French coach] about the match. I don’t think I have ever practised with her or seen her play.” Beyond Lottner – if it is not tempting fate – Konta and Bertens could meet in round three, with Sloane Stephens and Elina Svitolina potentially lurking in that quarter-finals of the draw. Either Pliskova or Angelique Kerber might then be waiting in the semi-finals. If her French memories are grim, Konta can dip into her recent heroics in the Fed Cup for confirmation that her game is in excellent shape, even if a run of 11 straight singles wins in the competition occurred on hardcourts. “What we did as a team, both in February and April, was a tremendous achievement,” she said. “It can only lend itself for me to feel like I can come through tough situations, because those Fed Cup matches were tough for a number of different reasons.” The player she beat for Great Britain in London a month ago was Yulia Putintseva, who upset her here in two sets last year, when ranked 98 in the world. On Saturday, the fiery 24-year-old Kazak (booed off court for refusing to shake her opponent’s hand in the quarter-finals) won her first WTA title, on the clay of Nuremberg. When she arrives in Paris, she goes into the draw worryingly close to Konta: they could meet in the fourth round. Konta might have had British company in the draw had Katie Boulter’s back not given up on her, and she was reluctant to join the criticism of her Fed Cup teammate for pulling out at the last minute and accepting half the first-round prize money – which is her right, even though she had indicated at least three weeks ago she would not be fit enough to play. Konta’s view had a ring of diplomacy about it. “What she did was perfectly within the rules, as far as I understand,” Konta said. “That’s why we have rule changes: for players to still be able to get rewarded for where there are ranking places in the main draw here, and for the tournament to still get good quality first-round matches, [also] for the players that are hurt to have the freedom to be able to pull out, and still feel they are not losing income.”