Ed Woodward reflected on a “turbulent season” for Manchester United but the executive vice-chairman gave his unequivocal backing to Ole Gunnar Solskjær. Woodward recognised the upheaval at Old Trafford, where José Mourinho was replaced by Solskjær in December. His appointment as permanent manager coincided with United’s season running out of steam and they missed out on qualifying for the Champions League. Woodward said the club’s strong financial position would enable them to “provide a solid foundation for the manager” for what is expected to be a busy summer. Speaking on the day of United’s third-quarter financial results, Woodward said: “After a turbulent season everyone at Manchester United is focused on building towards the success that this great club expects and our fans deserve. “Preparations for the new season are under way and the underlying strength of our business will allow us to support the manager and his team as we look to the future.” Woodward added: “The season that has just ended clearly didn’t end the way we hoped, finishing in sixth place and with a disruptive managerial change part way through. “However, Ole and the squad battled back from mid-December to put us in contention to qualify for the Champions League next season but ultimately we came up short. “While the last few weeks were disappointing we are delighted to have confirmed the appointment of Ole as our manager on a three-year contract and to have recently confirmed the key members of the coaching team. “Mick Phelan, Michael Carrick, Kieran McKenna and Mark Dempsey will all be remaining at the club. Everyone at the club – the board, the manager, the squad and all the staff are resolute in our desire to get United back to the top of English football. We continually look to improve staff on and off the pitch to achieve this. “The strength of our business means we have the financial resources to continue to provide a solid foundation for backing the manager and creating success on the pitch. This, as ever, remains our No 1 goal.” United posted revenues of £152.1m for the quarter, up 3.4% from the corresponding period last year, meaning their total income to the end of March is £495.7m. Net debt increased by £400,000 to £301.7m.