I am really confused by Ikea’s returns policy, which states I have to return a whole order of several items in order to qualify for a free return. I wanted to return a £15 rug from a £65 order. However, Ikea told me I would need to pay £25 to have it collected. I spent most of my day being advised by Ikea that I could only return to store or use CollectPlus – actually my item was too big – and I was finally told that my whole order could be collected and refunded for free. Paying £25 to return a £15 rug didn’t seem reasonable so I opted to return my whole order. After my refund I will then re-order all the items I wanted to keep. This makes Ikea’s sustainable credentials questionable. If it was coming to collect it all, could not it just collect one item? Can it explain this nonsensical policy? HM, Dover, Kent This did seem a bit odd, but Ikea insists there was method behind its apparent madness. It says: “It’s important to us that our customers are happy with their Ikea purchases. If a customer is not totally satisfied, they can return items to any store or collection point within 365 days. If purchased online, provided they cancel their total order within 14 days of receiving it, we will refund the delivery charge and arrange for collection. However, if only part of the order is cancelled or a refund is requested after 14 days, the customer is responsible for the cost of returning the product(s) unless faulty or not as described. This is partly to ensure that we are limiting the environmental impact of smaller deliveries and collections.” It insists it has the future of the planet at heart, adding: “We are committed to having a positive impact on people and the planet and it is our commitment that by 2025 all customer deliveries in the UK will be carried out by electric vehicles, powered by renewable energy.” The company has apologised for its customer support centre giving you incorrect information and, as a goodwill gesture, is sending an Ikea gift card for £30 which you can use both online and in store. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to terms and conditions