Domino’s Pizza has reported a fall in UK orders and warned its international arm would remain loss-making this year. The pizza chain said its international business was no longer expected to break even this year , and sales across Germany, Norway, Sweden, Iceland, Switzerland and Liechtenstein down 2% to £25m in the 13 weeks to the end of March. Shares in the FTSE 250-listed company fell more than 7% in early trading, before recovering some of the losses to be down 3% in afternoon trading. The UK and Ireland, which accounts for 90% of sales, posted 4.8% sales growth to nearly £300m over the first quarter. In the UK alone, like-for-like sales grew 3.1% – but order volumes fell 2.7%. David Wild, the chief executive, said the fall in orders was down to high sales a year ago when it gave away a lot of pizzas on promotion. Excluding this effect, orders were flat. While pizza remains the most popular takeaway food, the UK market has slowed and is now growing by 4% to 5% a year, compared with 8% four years ago, he said. Domino’s also said that new store openings in the UK continued to be impacted by its ongoing discussions with franchisees, who are seeking a bigger share of the pizza chain’s profits. The company faces mounting competition from food delivery firms such as Just Eat, Deliveroo and Uber Eats, which allow rival pizza restaurants to offer home delivery. But Domino’s insists its brand and record of profitability will defend its 50% plus market share against newer rivals, many of which are loss-making. The company has installed new management in Norway, Sweden and Switzerland, tasked with focusing on performance at store level. Wild pointed to problems in Norway which he described as “pains of growth”, adding that new stores opened since 2016 have not been well integrated. “There is nothing wrong with the pizza market in Norway, and the competition is beatable,” he said, noting that the UK business had been loss-making for 10 years before turning a profit. Domino’s, originally an American brand, opened its first UK outlet in 1985, and bought the British and Irish franchise in 1993. Domino’s has sold 1.62m pizzas with a Cheeseburger topping in the UK and Ireland since late November – the best pizza launch it has had for years. In January it launched a new range of “Delight” pizzas with chicken and veg toppings, which have fewer than 650 calories per small-sized pizza. Domino’s is working on creating a vegan pizza, although it has struggled to make its base vegan.