British 18-year-olds can apply for a free rail pass awarded by the European Union despite the looming Brexit deadline. The European commission announced on Thursday that 18-year-olds in the EU could apply for 20,000 “DiscoverEU” passes that allow travel to one or more countries, a repeat of the oversubscribed ticket giveaway launched last year. Successful applicants will have to take their trip, of up to 30 days, between 1 August 2019 and 31 January 2020. British 18-year-olds can apply for tickets, although the UK is scheduled to quit the EU on 31 October. The latest competition is open to people born between 2 July 2000 and 1 July 2001. Applicants have until 12 noon central European summer time (11am BST) on 16 May to complete the online application, which includes a short quiz. An EU selection panel will rule on applications, which can be made by individuals or groups of up to five people. In 2018, nearly 30,000 young people were awarded tickets, including 3,726 British teenagers. Successful applicants are expected to become “ambassadors” for the scheme and post about their travels on Instagram, Twitter and Facebook. Participants are also encouraged to write a travel journal. While the EU pays for transport, it does not cover the cost of accommodation or travel insurance. Nor does it make bookings or arrange itineraries. People with reduced mobility or special needs may be awarded extra financial help, which will be assessed on a case-by-case basis. Unsuccessful applicants will have another chance to apply for tickets in a second round later in 2019. The latest ticket giveaway comes weeks before European elections that traditionally struggle to attract voters to the ballot box. Noting the timing, Tibor Navracsics, the European commissioner for education, culture, youth and sports, said he hoped that becoming part of DiscoverEU would “inspire young people to become engaged in their communities and become ambassadors for Europe. Whether it’s voting in the European parliament elections, encouraging their peers to do the same, or working with us to build lively societies”. The EU executive wants to make the scheme permanent and is lobbying for €700m to be carved out of the next EU budget to pay for tickets for 1.5 million young people over seven years. The final decision will be made by EU leaders, with input from the European parliament. Once the UK leaves the EU, British nationals will no longer be automatically eligible to take part in European programmes, such as the Erasmus student exchange. Commission sources declined to speculate about what could happen to British eligibility for free train passes after Brexit.