Guardian Money has helped persuade the banks to collectively refund a record £290,000 so far after we took up more than a dozen readers’ cases. All of them had fallen victim to one of the most sophisticated bank frauds ever reported on by this paper. In recent weeks Money has been inundated with calls from people who were contacted by fraudsters posing as bank staff. In each case the call showed up on the handset as having come from the bank’s known call centre number. The fraudsters had changed their call ID to help them convince the victim they were calling from the bank and, having gained their confidence – in some cases they even played the same hold music as used by the bank – they were ultimately able to gain access to people’s accounts, and to empty them. After we took up these cases, the banks have – for the most part – had a rethink. The victims were typically initially told they would not be refunded because they had been “grossly negligent”. Metro Bank has done the biggest about-turn. It has now agreed to refund six customers £220,000 in total. NatWest, which has seen the second-largest number of fraud complaints into the Guardian, has now refunded a total of £60,000. Barclays has refunded two customers, though in these cases the sums were much smaller. Overall the cases have mostly followed the same pattern as Jane Holden’s – the first case we featured bank in March. She lost £90,000 after she took a call on her mobile that appeared to be from Metro’s call centre. She was told the bank was concerned her account had been fraudulently used – in her case on the hotel website Booking.com. To convince her they were calling from the bank, the fraudsters quoted much of her personal account information, and even sent her a fake Booking.com text that “confirmed” the story. I think I’m going to sleep well tonight for the first time in two weeks To cancel the bookings, they said, they would send her a “payee code”. She was required to read the codes back, which enabled the scammers to set up “new” payments and take £90,000 from her business accounts. Since then, other Metro customers have come forward to say “me too”. Jane Brown had £12,000 taken from her Metro Bank business account, after fraudsters used what she says was the exact same scam on her. Marcus Rutherford lost £40,000and Steven Baylis £15,000. “I think I’m going to sleep well tonight for the first time in two weeks,” Brown told Money this week, when we confirmed her life savings were being returned. “I can’t thank you enough – thank you for your great work,” said Baylis. Metro told Money: “We have taken the opportunity to undertake a further review of these cases, as we always want to do the right thing for our customers. As a result of these cases being reviewed and revisiting the facts available to us, we will be offering a full refund to the customers. We take our customers’ security extremely seriously and we have a range of safeguards in place to help defend them against fraud.” NatWest has, in the main, adopted the same approach after being contacted by Money. It has refunded all the cases we sent it bar one, in which £90,000 was taken from a 90-year-old. This is the subject of an ongoing legal action. NatWest says: “Keeping our customers secure is of paramount importance to us. Customers should never make a payment, divulge full security credentials or provide access to their computer at the request of someone over the phone. However, it has not been universally good news on the refund front. Valerie Small lost a “life-changing” £29,000 after she was called up at home by a male who said he was on Santander’s fraud team. “He told me the call would be recorded for monitoring and training purposes as per the FCA [Financial Conduct Authority] code, and a copy would be available for my protection. He told me that it appeared there may have been some fraudulent activity and someone had tried to make a purchase of £1,100 to John Lewis – did I recognise the sum?” She was told the best way to protect her money was to move the funds into another account. “Santander has refused to refund me and insisted that basically I should have been more aware of the way these crimes are committed. I said I was not aware that anyone could replicate a bank’s phone number,” she says. Santander told Money: “We are sympathetic to her situation and to all who suffer distress at the hands of criminals who carry out scams. Despite clear warnings not to, she transferred money to the fraudsters. We would remind all customers that their bank would never ask them to move money out of their account.” Annie Bell, who lives in the Scottish Highlands and banks with Nationwide, is in the same boat after it denied her £9,766 claim. She was at home with her parents when she took a call on a Friday night from someone claiming to be calling from Nationwide’s fraud department. “He informed me that unusual activity had been detected on my account with someone trying to spend £420 online. He wanted to ensure that my money in my account was safe. It was a Friday night and obviously the branches were closed. To convince me, he phoned me back from the helpline number on the back of my Nationwide card. I made three different transactions into what I thought was an account operated by the manager of my local branch in Inverness. This has been truly heartbreaking and life-changing,” she says. Nationwide declined to refund her on the basis that she had sent the money to a fraudster. “We place prominent warnings when customers log into the internet bank and on the payments page where she made these transfers but, as she authorised the payment, we are not liable for her loss,” it says. All names have been changed