Serpent asks the solver to start their day with some unpleasant imagery … 13ac Trump’s behind walls close to Gulf (5)[ wordplay: US term for (‘Trump’s) ‘behind’, containing synonym for ‘close to’ ][ ASS containing BY ][ definition: gulf ] … happily, Trump’s ass was only in the wordplay en route to ABYSS. Meanwhile, from a Telegraph setter, an image that many simply refuse to find poignant … 4d What Prime Minister does – begs quietly to leave (5)[ wordplay: synonym for ‘begs’ removing musical abbrev. for piano (‘quietly’) ][ PLEADS – P ][ definition: what prime minister does ] … in a clue for LEADS. Remaining topical, there is rarely more timely material packed into 225 squares than there is in this puzzle from Wanderer. I’ll spoil only one clue, by noting that I can’t think it’s coincidence that there’s a cameo … 10ac High-value startup company: a French one with my name (7)[ wordplay: French for ‘a’ + synonym for ‘one’ + synonym for exclamation ‘My!’ + abbrev. for ‘name’ ][ UN + I + COR + N ][ definition: investors’ jargon for high-value startup ] … for a UNICORN. It uses a definition that, unusually for the Financial Times, is very Financial Times, and not the one that fits the rest of the puzzle. Would it be fair, though, to clue UNICORN using the more topical sense? And what is that more topical sense? Per Hannah Jane Parkinson’s “guide to Brexit lingo”, a Brexit unicorn is a promise that seems unlikely to be met. I’ve seen it range from specific mooted policies and deals to a certainty that whatever happens, everything ought to work out after a while. The earliest use I’ve found is from the month before the referendum: a piece in this paper by former Glasgow vice-chancellor Anton Muscatelli, though I don’t know whether it’s his coinage. After the vote, UNICORN picked up and has been used in Parliament at least 37 times so far this year, usually by remainers, from Emily Thornberry in January … the Cabinet is not waiting for unicorns to come riding over the hill; it is just waiting for Lassie … through Stephen Gethins in March … I do not know where I would be without the unicorn emoji … to Stephen Gethins in April … May I wish everybody, not just the Brexiteers, a very happy National Unicorn Day? … the word is increasingly used with less explanation and more confidence that everyone will understand it. That’s in Westminster, though; I’ve considered using the Brexit sense of UNICORN in quizzing contexts over the past year or so, but have always decided that it hasn’t quite broken through enough to be fair fodder. You may disagree? The subject of our next challenge is, oddly, probably fairer than the Brexit sense of UNICORN even though most people might struggle to explain what it is. Reader, how would you clue CANADA PLUS? If you solved Brendan’s recent prize puzzle and didn’t spot the bonus feature, the annotated solution is now available; if you missed it, do solve first. Thanks for your clues to OUT, which predictably produced a bumper crop of surfaces, ranging from Peshwari’s “Found in disco, utterly drained” to Catarella’s “Books plugged by university unavailable at the library”. There’s an audacity award for Wellywearer2’s “( )3?” (sic). The three terse runners-up are Croquem’s “Not in public?”, JollySwagman’s “Blooming senseless” and Seandmcc’s “Caught cold”; the winner is Thebrasselephant’s wonderfully misleading “Single-finger gesture given by lout with shaven head”. Kludos to Thebrasselephant; please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics below. Sometimes I wonder whether setters save a favourite clue so that it can take a lead in their debut national puzzle. For instance, I did so when solving this one across by Whynot … 1ac What a barrister does is obvious (6,2,6)[ wordplay: cryptic definition in ‘what a barrister does’ ][ definition: is obvious ] … who, it turns out, is very much of this parish. We all look forward to more puzzles by Tony Collman, or, as we now also know him – and it STANDS TO REASON when you squint at his surname – Whynot.