The gallery of the Lords chamber offers a bird’s-eye view over the red benches and their occupants, and an insight into the anachronisms of the UK’s second chamber. There is no John Bercow to bring order or to select a member’s turn to speak during oral questions. Instead, peers who wish to participate in a debate must stand and shout: “My Lords! My Lords!” until they are acknowledged by their contemporaries. Members are unelected, gaining their seats either by virtue of prime ministerial nomination or by having inherited their seat through lineage, although numbers in the latter category have shrunk considerably in recent years due to reforms, and the practice could soon be abolished altogether. The principal role of the House of Lords is to conduct line-by-line examinations of proposed legislation, to prevent errors from creeping into law, or ministers granting themselves sweeping powers unnoticed. But as Brexit leads the UK deeper into political crisis, all the normal business of parliament has dried up, leaving the Lords largely bereft of legislation to examine. “It’s chaos, really,” said the former Lord speaker Frances D’Souza. “Everything’s on hold because of the B-thing, and nobody knows what to do. The businesspeople don’t know how to put business forward, and whether they should start or stop, or when the state opening is going to be.” Dianne Hayter, a former chair of the Labour party, points to the dozens of reports published by the Lords’ EU committee as an example of the best of the upper chamber’s work. Like much of what goes on there, it can be painstaking and tedious. “You’ll never get it in your paper, because no one’s interested,” Lady Hayter said. “They looked very early on at what would happen if we left without a deal, they looked at very detailed stuff: what it meant for agriculture, what it meant for consumers, what it meant for competition policy.” Sir Patrick Cormack, a Conservative MP of 40 years, appointed to the Lords by David Cameron, agreed: “Our scrutiny does tend to be much more thorough than the House of Commons, where a bill is timetabled … our scrutiny does have the benefit of peers having a vast range of experience.” Because peers are appointed for life and in proportion broadly reflect the composition of the Commons, the chamber tends to continually increase in size and can be unrepresentative. Currently, one in eight peers is a Liberal Democrat, far exceeding their representation in the Commons. While there is widespread recognition that some of the 92 current hereditary peers are work hard, Lady D’Souza said the practice of inherited seats should end. “The principle that someone should come to this house by virtue of the fact of who they were born to is unacceptable in the 21st century,” she said. When a hereditary peer retires or dies, the remainder elect a replacement from a pool of eligible aristocrats in a byelection. A private member’s bill that would end the practice is currently making its way through the house. Lord Cormack, who describes hereditary byelections as “ludicrous”, is supporting the bill. “The last time we had a Liberal Democrat [hereditary byelection], there were more candidates than voters,” he said. There have previously been concerns that some peers were appointed because they made large donations to political parties. Twelve years ago, the so-called cash-for-honours scandal resulted in Tony Blair being interviewed by police after it was alleged that some Labour donors had been nominated for peerages. The chamber continues to be under tremendous pressure to reform, with Nigel Farage last week threatening to abolish it entirely. All major political parties have promised reform in successive manifestos, but the issue has never gathered momentum. D’Souza suggests that ultimately the strain of the political crisis enveloping the UK could end up being the catalyst for overdue reform. “With any luck, what this might mean is that things get so bad that they have to get better.”