On the cover of Jacob Rees-Mogg’s cymbal-clashing account of 12 Victorian “Titans who forged Britain” is a statue of a lion. At least I think it’s a lion. The animal’s musculature is so wildly exaggerated that it appears to have put on body armour for the occasion. It has also spiked its hair into a coronet and arranged its face into the sort of warning snarl that suggests that it is not planning to lie down with a lamb any time soon. Neither entirely real nor exactly symbolic, here is an animal that has been assembled not from close observation or deep contemplation, but from feverish memory and desperate desire. This unlocated quality is entirely fitting for Rees-Mogg’s collection of biographical essays of eminent Victorians. All the usual suspects are here: Peel, Gladstone, Palmerston and Disraeli. Except they are present in name only: there are no photographs in the book to remind us of their physical reality and they remain essentially textual ciphers. Just like the lion, these Titans have been assembled from memory (certainly not from primary sources) and corralled into an origin myth for Rees-Mogg’s particular rightwing vision of Britain. “None of our figures was a socialist, aiming to cut back prosperity for all in a hopeless quest for a phoney equality,” the Honourable Member for North East Somerset assures us in his lumpy introduction. Instead his Victorians bubble over with “sincerity”, “tremendous energy” and “moral purpose”, all qualities he suggests are sadly lacking today. The Victorians had “confidence in their civilising effort ... How favourably this compares with the contemporary nervousness about the country where moral relativism accepts an equivalence between good and bad and with a tangible feeling that all we can do is manage decline.” Rees-Mogg appears not to notice any change in Britain’s global status between then and now: what matters is that you would never have caught Disraeli, General Gordon or even WG Grace “chillaxing” when there was important duty to be done. This, then, is biography as manifesto, although even that is to dignify The Victorians with a coherence it doesn’t possess. In the space of a few paragraphs Rees-Mogg tells us that the Victorian age was strong and stable, except for those times when it was trembling on the brink of revolution. The royal family was a beloved rallying point for the nation, as long as you don’t count that time in 1855 when Albert and Victoria were so unpopular that they were rumoured to have been arrested and locked up in the Tower. Rees-Mogg’s Victorians are all really principled and won’t compromise for anyone, until they remember that pragmatism is actually what makes Britain great. “Playing by the rules” is a non-negotiable part of who they are until “in that inevitable, truly Victorian way”, someone decides to break those rules. Reading this book is like living inside a scary version of Lewis Carroll’s Wonderland. Rees-Mogg’s problem is that you can’t just set your own present day concerns over the past and expect things to line up The first fantasy forebear who Rees-Mogg sets before us is Robert Peel, the politician credited with creating the modern Conservative party during the first decade of Victoria’s reign. Rees-Mogg’s account is based heavily on Norman Gash’s classic biography, which came out half a century ago, when young Jacob was still having his nappies changed by Nanny. But, really, who needs up-to-date information when all you have to do is rearrange the old stuff until you get the story you want? So Rees-Mogg rewrites Robert Peel, the Harrow and Oxford-educated son of a wealthy Lancastrian industrialist into “essentially a self-made man”, who set out “to better himself in the true Victorian style”. From such humble beginnings, and entirely undeterred by the fact that his father was actually a baronet, Peel grafted and grafted until he reached the very top of the Tory party. Once there he set about convincing the red-faced squires over whom he presided that protecting the landed interest through high tariffs on agricultural produce at the expense of the urban working-class poor was untenable. In one bound Peel cut the Corn Laws and realigned the Tories as the party of the free market, one in which goods and people could circulate without interference from do-gooders. Here are the beginnings of the Conservative party Rees-Mogg believes in today – committed to low tax and a tiny state, with humanitarian needs taken care of by private philanthropy. It all feels like a gloriously Titanic triumph, until Rees-Mogg is obliged to admit that the impact of Peel’s actions over the Corn Laws was to tear the party in two for decades. The real purpose, then, of The Victorians is to reflect Rees-Mogg back to himself at twice his natural size. This must account for some of his more unexpected inclusions. He names as one of his Titans Albert Dicey, a man whom you might generally consider as belonging to the Victorian second 11. Not so, Rees-Mogg tells us sternly. Dicey was a great legal brain, the Vinerian professor of English law at Oxford, who in the 1890s dared to champion the practice of holding referendums to avoid the great questions of the day being held up endlessly at Westminster. He called it “the People’s Veto”. Always anxious that we might not pick up on the modern parallels, Rees-Mogg finishes his portrait with a ringing “thank heavens for Albert Dicey” since it is his “understanding of referendums that provides the constitutional authority for the United Kingdom to leave the European Union”. Rees-Mogg’s problem is that you really can’t just set your own present day concerns over the historical past and expect things to line up neatly. As part of the 1980s vogue for Victorian values the education secretary Keith Joseph came up with the similar, crazy idea of distributing to all school children a copy of Samuel Smiles’s Self-Help. In this classic text from 1859, Smiles throws together potted biographies of great men who have risen in the world by their own strenuous efforts, as a way of giving the state-educated children of Britain something to aspire to. The climax of Smiles’s show-and-tell concerns the potter Josiah Wedgwood, who is praised for opting to have his gammy leg amputated without any kind of anaesthetic, including alcohol. He was never one, explains Smiles admiringly, to waste time and energy by making a fuss. Smiles meant well. His model biographies came out of a series of night lectures given to working men in an attempt to encourage them to transcend the cruel limitations of their lives. Rees-Mogg is less clear-sighted. For him, the sovereign individual really is able to master their own destiny. Nothing – poverty, ill-health, institutional racism – can stand in the way of someone with the right attitude and work ethic. Most people grow out of this fantasy of omnipotence by the age of five, about the same time they realise that Superman isn’t real. For those who never manage to make that cognitive leap, adult life can be excruciating. In parliament, Rees-Mogg is often referred to as “the honourable member for the 18th century”, a nod to those funny clothes he wears, along with pretending not to know the name of any modern pop songs. What a shame, then, that he has not absorbed any of the intellectual and creative elegance that flourished during that period. The Augustan age was a time of scalpel-sharp prose, cutting wit and stylish fancy. Yet far from emulating Swift or Voltaire, Rees-Mogg gives us the “slipshod style” and “tedious panegyric” that Lytton Strachey famously identified as the key characteristic of Victorian biographical writing. Rees-Mogg could surely manage something more sprightly than “it is important to note that British workers had genuine grievances”. In other places he just gets thing wrong, mixing up “idolisation” and “idealisation”. Mostly, though, he descends into incoherence. Take this sentence describing young Victoria’s unhappy childhood: “a swirl of bitter enmity fringed the edges of her cloistered palace life”. Or what about the architect Pugin, who was “absorbing, sponge-like, the swirling currents of his cultural context”. At least we know The Victorians isn’t ghost written, since no self-respecting freelancer would dare ask for payment for such rotten prose. Finally, you do have to wonder at the lack of women among Rees-Mogg’s pantheon. In mythology, six of the 12 Titans, the children of Uranus and Gaea, were female; not here. The only female who appears in the book is Queen Victoria herself who, Rees-Mogg assures us, “became no less of a woman when she learned to rely upon Albert as a partner and to trust him”. I’m pretty sure this is offensive, although the contorted construction makes it hard to be certain. Actually, there is one other female Titan in these pages. She is tucked away in the thank yous at the end of the book, along with the female secretaries in Rees-Mogg’s private office “who can always decipher my scribbles”, and his wife Helena who “kindly looked after” his six children while he was working. That Titan is “nanny” (she doesn’t even get a capital letter) without whom young Jacob, now nearly 50, could not have managed to write the book. Are we supposed to find this charming? • The Victorians is published by WH Allen (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.