Marks & Spencer has set the British alt-reactionary – in ascending order of Reddit-style neo-hate they are: Piers Morgan, Julia Hartley-Brewer and Katie Hopkins – ablaze. The chain changed the recipe of its Percy Pigs range, removing the gelatine to make them entirely vegetarian. (The company has been selling an alternative veggie version since 2011, coloured green, maybe to confuse customers into thinking it is actually made of vegetables.) For the benefit of the younger reader: Percy Pigs were introduced in 1992 and, by the late 90s, were the sweet du choix of the chatterati. We wrote a lot about Percy and how he had captured the national palate in those days. Just putting this out there: it was never cool to put pork gelatine in Percy Pigs. Not because it is not vegetarian, but because it comes from pigs. When you butcher real pigs to make fake pigs, that is actually worse than feeding a cow to a cow, and the universe will one day have a mightier punishment than mad cow disease. But let’s park the morals. How is the new taste? Customers have complained of strong topnotes of washing-up liquid and a spongy texture. I found the soap accusations to be false, as you might expect – there is no reason why the absence of gelatine could sully the purity of sugar, which is all Percy Pigs have ever tasted of (they contain some fruit concentrate, but sure as hell never tasted of fruit). The texture, however, is worse. The particular mouthfeel of the jelly-sweet experience is that bewitching interplay: is it yielding, or is it chewy? Jelly sweets run a gamut, from the classic fruit jelly (yielding) to the fruit pastille (chewy). Any notion of the perfect balance will always be subjective. But without any trace of gelatine – think of vegan Haribos, which are completely horrible; no letters, thank you – the chew is just boring. Percy Pigs now have the bite of the spongy white bits of a Starmix. In other words – and this hurts me more than it does you – I agree with Morgan, who spat them out on air. But then I was always more of a Colin Caterpillar woman myself. I only went along with the pigs because it was the 90s, when everyone agreed.