Paula Rego, one of the world’s most celebrated living artists, has said the anti-abortion movement “criminalises women” and believes recent legislation banning the procedure in some US states is dangerously regressive and will force women into finding potentially deadly “backstreet solutions”. The artist, who was born in Portugal but moved to London and exhibited with the London Group in the 1960s alongside David Hockney, has spent her career focusing on women’s rights and abortion in particular, and thinks the recent spate of restrictive reproductive legislation in the US is “grotesque”. “It seems unbelievable that these battles have to be fought all over again. It’s grotesque,” says Rego, who famously created a series documenting illegal abortions in response to Portugal’s referendum on the matter in 1998 and was credited with helping sway public opinion. Rego has released a limited print in association with  MK Gallery in Milton Keynes, which is hosting a retrospective of the artist in June, and she hopes the etching Untitled Abortion (2000) will help draw attention to the dangers of making abortion illegal. “It highlights the fear and pain and danger of an illegal abortion, which is what desperate women have always resorted to,” she said. “It’s very wrong to criminalise women on top of everything else. Making abortions illegal is forcing women to the backstreet solution. “I’m doing what I can with my work but both men and women need to stand up to this. It affects men too. You don’t get pregnant on your own do you?” Rego, who has spoken about her own abortions in the past and studied at the Slade School of Art, remembers the young women there who would often have to seek illegal abortions and the struggles of women in Portugal, where abortion only became legal in 2007. “At the Slade, in the women’s cloakroom, girls would often be talking about where to go to get abortions. We were always falling pregnant,” she said. “Later, in the late 50s and early 60s when we were living in Ericeira, women would come to our gate to beg for alms and we would give them money. It was almost always for abortions. I twice had to take women from the village to see my gynaecologist in Lisbon because they were suffering the consequences of backstreet abortions. “It affected the poor disproportionately. If you were rich it was easier to find a safe way to have an abortion, usually by travelling to another country. Poor women were butchered.” Rego’s comments come after a several conservative states in the US installed restrictive new abortion legislation, including in Alabama, which has in effect outlawed the procedure without exceptions for victims of rape or incest. The shift has been accredited to a politicisation of the issue by the Republican party ahead of the 2020 presidential race, with suggestions the moves could be a precursor to a challenge to Roe v Wade, the 1973 supreme court ruling that legalised abortion in the US. Donald Trump tweeted shortly after the Alabama ban, suggesting it may have gone too far: “I am strongly pro-life, with the three exceptions – rape, incest and protecting the life of the mother – the same position taken by Ronald Reagan.” But others have said the Trump agenda inspired the recent abortion legislation. Amanda Thayer, the deputy national communications director of Naral Pro-Choice America, said: “This anti-choice movement is Trump’s anti-choice movement, and it’s clear that the radical fringe is winning any internal argument about how far to push.” Paula Rego: Obedience and Defiance opens on 15 June at MK Gallery, Milton Keynes.