You can always rely on snooker’s grand supremo, Barry Hearn, to set the tone on days as significant as these. “On the day the royal prince is born, we’re about to crown the new king of snooker,” Hearn told the assembled media in Sheffield at around 3:30pm on Monday afternoon. Premature? Perhaps, given how Judd Trump still needed four more frames at that stage to clinch his maiden world championship. But deep down, Hearn knew. We all knew. Most importantly of all, Trump himself knew. The debate will probably rage for some time over whether this was actually the most complete performance in the Crucible’s long and illustrious history – but irrespective of that, it is surely impossible to argue that snooker had just witnessed one of the most emphatic coming-of-age displays in the sport’s history. Those who have followed Trump’s career closely believe this, his first world title at the age of 29, has been an inevitability ever since he was tipped for greatness as a teenager growing up in Bristol. But as he left countless records in his wake on the way to producing the most one-sided final scoreline in a decade, it was difficult for everyone to appreciate the significance of this performance on the grandest stage of them all: Trump included. “It will be hard to top that, if I ever can,” the champion replied when asked to sum up the level of his performance. “It is going to take a while for that to sink in, I think.” Seven centuries – nobody has made more in a world final – was the headline statistic, and added to Higgins’ four, the all-time record in the Crucible climax underlined how brilliant a finale this was. That Higgins managed to split Monday’sy afternoon session 4-4 underlined how he himself played a part in perhaps the highest-quality final in history. However, that outcome meant Trump needed just two more when they returned for the evening session: and any fears of nerves with the winning line looming were ill-founded. Within half-an-hour, Trump had got the job done with two more ruthless single-visit frame-clinchers. Of course, the final was won on Sunday in truth, when Trump claimed the evening session 8-1 to move 12-5 ahead at the halfway stage. But just as impressive as the resplendent brand of snooker Trump unleashed on Higgins on day one was the way he handled both the occasion and the fact he was the overwhelming favourite on Monday with ease. The Trump of eight years ago, who lost to Higgins in his previous visit to the final, may not have been so cocksure. “The concentration that hasn’t been there in the past was there,” Trump said. “From a young age, people have been touting me as a future world champion and it’s nice to get that out of the way.” While this was the culmination of Trump’s childhood dream, there was a lingering feeling this could only be the start. “It’ll be nice to not have people asking when I’m going to win it now,” he smiled. His opponent here was equally complimentary. “There’s not one shot he can’t play,” Higgins said. “It was just sustained brilliance and he’s got such confidence about him now.” For Higgins, the emotion surrounding a third straight defeat in the final will be difficult to take – but on this occasion, the Scot can take comfort from the fact that simply nobody would have beaten Trump in this mood. “He was just unstoppable. He really was,” Higgins said. “He just blew me away – pure and simple. It was unbelievable to watch.” Higgins had started the afternoon session with a break of 113, and at one stage looked on for a maximum break before missing the 15th and final black from the spot. It was fitting that Trump did something similar in the closing frame of the session though, moving to within two of the line with his seventh century break after 13 reds and 13 blacks. From there, the final had an air of inevitability about it: though some would argue that was lingering as early as Sunday night. Trump’s first press conference as champion finished with a query about how he planned to spend the £500,000 winner’s cheque. “Not yet,” he said, “But when it hits my bank account, I think I’ll go a bit wild.” Few will begrudge him that: and worryingly for everyone else in the sport, you wonder if this could be only the beginning of a Trump reign of dominance after such a majestic display.