The latest gaffe by the Conservative education minister Theodore Agnew once again shows how tone-deaf the privileged are to the reality of those who face a bumpier ride. His attack on the policy of widening participation at universities (It’s lunacy to let students into universities with E grades, says minister, 4 May) effectively amounts to a writing off of millions of people at 18. There is plenty of evidence about how well students from state schools do at university compared to their privately educated peers: last month it was revealed that a quarter of students with A-level grades below three Ds achieved a first at university. This should be celebrated, not denigrated. We should be encouraging students to aspire to university and taking their individual circumstances into account, not running down their achievements or turning away those who potentially could benefit most from higher education.Matt WaddupHead of policy and campaigns, University and College Union • As someone who achieved a D and an E at A-level and is now a university lecturer, I must take issue with Theodore Agnew’s comments to the private schools’ conference. I went to one of the private schools Agnew praises. It was educationally poor, many of the teachers were not qualified, and it was rife with snobbery and bullying. I stopped trying academically because hardly anyone was encouraging me. I scraped into what was then Christchurch College Canterbury and emerged after three happy years with a 2:1. My passion for teaching has been driven in part by my experience of the demoralising effects of bad teaching. Many of my students have not done well at school; many have returned to education in their 20s. They are often the best students, motivated and keen to contribute to society in useful ways – not to become bankers or to work in the City like many who emerge from private schools.Dr Hugh DunkerleyBrighton • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition