When the doctor sat Danny Baker down to break the news of his cancer, the broadcaster’s first instinct was to defuse things with a joke. Realising how much the doctor was dreading it, he writes in his autobiography that he deliberately “derailed the moment”. It may not have been that funny, but it was kindly meant. There is much black humour on cancer wards, as there is anywhere people deal routinely with things nobody wants to think too hard about. There should be room for jokes that are inappropriate, jokes that come from places so dark they make you gasp – although, as with all high-wire acts, that doesn’t excuse comedians from the consequences of a mistake. But the licence to offend still matters in comedy, at least so long as you’re punching up, not down. And if it was this sort of near-the-knuckle joke that ultimately ended Baker’s career at the BBC, then sympathy for him might be justified. But it wasn’t. Baker was sacked not for daringly pushing the boundaries but for cheerfully blundering through them without even noticing they existed, and that’s just not funny. Let’s assume for the sake of argument that, as he says, Baker genuinely didn’t realise when tweeting a picture of a chimp captioned “royal baby leaves hospital” that depicting a mixed-race baby as a monkey has hideously racist connotations. Let’s assume that even after a lifetime immersed in football, a sport where black players have been routinely taunted with monkey noises down the years, he still didn’t make the connection; that, as he says, he was only trying to make some point about “royals v circus animals”. Perhaps it was just the sort of mistake anyone could make, if they somehow hadn’t clocked in all these years of blanket coverage that Meghan Markle was mixed race. But Baker isn’t just any old man wrongfooted by popular culture. As a radio presenter he’s handsomely paid to be part of that popular culture, and when your job is to keep up, then ignorance is no defence. At best, Baker made a tired gag that wasn’t funny about something where, for once, cynicism felt misplaced. Plenty of hardboiled royal sceptics will have found something indisputably moving about that image of baby Archie’s African-American grandmother beside his great-grandmother the Queen, looking unusually cosy and relaxed in her cardie. What’s not to like about a beautifully celebratory picture of a mixed-race family, especially at a time when white supremacism feels worryingly resurgent? There’s a grim irony, admittedly, in Baker being sacked for one dodgy joke when the political climate rewards others for far worse. Carl Benjamin also defends the misogyny that secured him a YouTube following, and then the chance to stand for Ukip in this month’s European parliament elections, on the grounds that “comedy” can’t be censored. But when seizing the moral high ground over a joke, it helps if that joke is actually funny – and that’s where his attempt to pass off an old tweet saying he “wouldn’t even rape” the Labour MP Jess Phillips, and a subsequent crack that he might if pushed hard enough, both fall down. What’s funny, clever, or subversive about debating the sexual assault of a woman in public, and putting the video out there for her children to see? Nonetheless, if Baker’s joke ended his career, Benjamin’s arguably has been the making of his, for along with the outrage comes the sort of publicity that fringe parties just can’t buy. It may be the political equivalent of mooning at passing traffic for attention, but as Phillips points out, the fact that he’s now standing on the same platforms as she does lends him a dangerous legitimacy. If rape “jokes” are no longer an obstacle to standing for high public office, then the gloves are arguably off for everyone. Let this stuff go, and bit by bit you don’t just degrade public debate; you risk the poison trickling down, encouraging and legitimising something worse as it does. The argument that people in public life should lead by example may sound hopelessly stuffy and old-fashioned, but we are beginning to see some very contemporary reasons for it. Last month the footballer Danny Rose, one of several black players to face racial abuse when England played Montenegro in March, gave a sad and striking interview in which he said he couldn’t wait to “see the back of” his sport, given its failure to protect black players. All too often, Rose argued, the fines levied on clubs were less than he’d spend on a night out in London. Things may have changed since the days when racist chants on the terraces were treated as part of the rough and tumble, the sort of banter players had to learn to shrug off just as women were told to get a sense of humour about rape jokes. But still, the penalties don’t seem to match the rhetoric, and frustration with the gap between them is bubbling up. It’s hard to see how Radio 5 Live could possibly cover stories like this without charges of hypocrisy if it didn’t take a deep breath and put its own house in order. And yes, some will wonder whether liberals are unwittingly adding grist to populist mills by pouncing on any slip, allowing themselves to be caricatured as thought police who can’t accept anyone making an honest mistake. But the point is that it’s not about anyone. It’s about a presenter, paid by the taxpayer to be the face of a national institution, being held to admittedly tougher standards than ordinary mortals precisely because there can be graver consequences when someone in his very public position gets it wrong. And that’s no laughing matter. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist