A leak from a secret meeting of the National Security Council regarding the Chinese tech firm Huawei “did not contain information that would breach the Official Secrets Act” and did not amount to a criminal offence, a senior police officer has said. This week the defence secretary, Gavin Williamson, was sacked over the leak about Huawei’s involvement in the UK’s 5G network. There have been calls for a police investigation into the leak. On Saturday Neil Basu, the head of the Metropolitan police’s specialist operations, said: “I have spoken to the Cabinet Office regarding the nature of the material that was discussed in the National Security Council. This material was used to inform a discussion, the outcome of which was subsequently disclosed to the media. I am satisfied that what was disclosed did not contain information that would breach the Official Secrets Act. “I have considered all the information available to me and I have taken legal advice. I am satisfied that the disclosure did not amount to a criminal offence either under the Official Secrets Act or Misconduct in a Public Office. No crime has been committed and this is not a matter for the police.” He added: “Any organisation has the right to conduct an internal investigation into conduct in the workplace. It is not a matter for the police unless a crime is alleged. At no time have the police been provided with evidence by the Cabinet Office that a crime has been committed nor has it been suggested that a gateway process would be required to enable that determination to be made. “No crime has been alleged by the owner of the material and I am clear that the leak did not cause damage to the public interest at a level at which it would be necessary to engage Misconduct in a Public Office. It would be inappropriate to carry out a police investigation in these circumstances.” The Met’s counter-terrorism command, SO15, is responsible for investigating allegations of criminal breaches of the Official Secrets Act. More details soon …