There were no fracking worries for Dave Brailsford as he unveiled Team Ineos’s youth policy for the 2019 Giro d’Italia in Bologna on Thursday, personified by 24-year-old Tao Geoghegan Hart from Hackney and 21-year-old Pavel Sivakov, the recent winner of the Tour of the Alps. “This takes me back 10 years to where Geraint [Thomas], Chris [Froome] and Brad [Wiggins] were then,” Brailsford said. “There’s a buzz about Tao and Pavel. It’s all right having an established team but it’s also nice to feed off young guys and to give them an opportunity.” This Giro d’Italia represents a changing of the guard at what was until very recently Team Sky. In the wake of Chris Lawless’s overall win at the Tour de Yorkshire and with 30-somethings Thomas and Froome focusing on the Tour de France in July, there have been backroom changes too, with Brailsford confirming that the long-term coach and confidant Rod Ellingworth had already left his staff. “We worked a long time together,” Brailsford said of Ellingworth, due to soon begin working with the Bahrain-Merida team of the two-time Giro champion Vincenzo Nibali. “But it’s a bit like assistant managers in football. They come, they go. We’ve adopted a slightly different structure but you move on.” The pre-race favourite, Egan Bernal, had been expected to pick up where he left off in March, after winning Paris-Nice, but a fractured collarbone put paid to Team Ineos’s best-laid leadership plans. Brailsford, who met the Colombian rider’s coach during the afternoon, confirmed that Bernal was back on a bike and should be fit for July’s Tour. But as the Colombian plotted his comeback, another big name in Grand Tour racing was calling time out. Marcel Kittel, a winner of 19 stages in Europe’s Grand Tours, pulled out of racing indefinitely, announcing that “Team Katusha-Alpecin and I have mutually decided to an early termination of my current contract”. Less than two years ago the blond German sprinter was blasting past the opposition in the Tour de France, winning five stages in July 2017. But rumours over his health accelerated after a calamitous start to his 2019 season, with a series of aborted comeback attempts culminating in Thursday’s announcement. Earlier this spring Kittel took to social media to angrily refute suggestions from the former pro turned commentator Jurgen Van den Broeck that he was “not busy with his profession” and was “drinking too much beer and wine”. During last year’s Tour, his relations with Katusha-Alpecin seemed frayed after the team director, Dimitri Konyshev, said: “We pay him a lot of money but he is only interested in himself.” The announcement was hardly a surprise. Referring to a long decision process that “raised a lot of questions about how and where I want to go as a person,” Kittel said he needed “time to think about my goals and make a plan for my future”. A packed calendar now includes 185 days of World Tour racing and with former Team Sky riders such as Peter Kennaugh abandoning their careers due to stress and burn out, Brailsford said that cycling needed to develop a greater sense of duty of care. “The endurance component of this sport is off the scale,” Brailsford said. “But there’s also a mental health issue which may be triggered by the demands of the sport. “Some sports are moving faster than others but the whole area of duty of care is maybe something that collectively we could be moving on.”