Fans travelling to the finals of Europe’s two major club competitions have been warned about touts who are willing to exploit their eagerness to get to the matches. Tout websites are listing tickets for as much as £10,000 each for the Champions League final in Madrid between Liverpool and Tottenham on 1 June. The feverish rush for tickets to the game has prompted concerns that some fans may put themselves at risk of being ripped off by bogus sellers. “With football fans on the lookout for tickets to witness a piece of history, scammers are waiting on the sidelines, ready to take advantage. Fans should look out for warning signs and be aware of the risks when purchasing tickets, especially through a third-party site or social media,” said Ross Martin, head of digital safety at Barclays bank. European football history was made last week when all four spots were taken by English teams in two competitions – the Champions League final, and the Europa League final, when Arsenal face Chelsea. Liverpool and Tottenham fans travelling to Madrid already face spiralling costs for flights and accommodation for the game, while fans going to the Europa League final on 29 May will have to travel almost 2,500 miles to Baku in Azerbaijan. The independent tout website footballticketnet.com, based in Madrid, is listing tickets for the Champions League match starting at just under £2,600 for a single but rising to almost £8,000 for a VIP ticket. The Malta-based Football Ticket Pad has single tickets for £3,650, while fans who want to sit together will have to pay at least £4,400 each, but can spend up to £10,000. Fans have been told to ensure they are buying their tickets from a reputable source and be wary of scammers. “If their targets appear willing to go to extreme lengths, including paying more than the original price, they will take advantage of this,” said Barclays. Consumers are also advised to pay via credit card as sellers can disappear after bank transfers. Meanwhile, Chelsea and Arsenal fans face an expensive journey: there are few direct flights to Baku, and the cost of the journey alone is around £1,400. In addition, the two clubs have only been allocated 6,000 tickets each for the 68,700 capacity game.