North Korea has fired a number of short-range projectiles into the sea from the east coast city of Wonsan, South Korea’s military said. South Korea initially described it as a missile launch, but subsequently gave a vaguer description using the word “projectiles”. If Saturday’s missile launch is confirmed as a firing of a banned ballistic missile, it would be the first such launch since the North’s test in November 2017 of an intercontinental ballistic missile. South Korea’s Office of the joint chiefs of staff said the North fired several unidentified short-range projectiles from north of the coastal city of Wonsan around 9am (midnight GMT). They flew about 70 kms to 200 kms. In an earlier message, South Korea’s military command had said the North fired an “unidentified short-range missile”. The South Korean military said it was conducting joint analysis with the United States of the latest launches. White House press secretary Sarah Sanders said: “We are aware of North Korea’s actions tonight. We will continue to monitor as necessary.” A Pentagon press officer said the testing could not be confirmed but “we are looking in to it”. The test-firing comes amid a diplomatic breakdown following the failed summit earlier this year between president Donald Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong-un in Vietnam over the North’s pursuit of a nuclear arsenal that can target the US mainland. That year saw a string of increasingly powerful weapons tests from the North, and a belligerent response from Trump that had many in the region fearing war. Experts believe that the North has viable shorter-range nuclear-armed missiles but still needs more tests to perfect its longer-range weapons. During the diplomacy that followed the tensions in 2017, Kim said that the North would not test nuclear devices or ICBMs. This short-range missile would not violate that self-imposed moratorium. But it could be seen as the North’s attempt to register displeasure with Washington and the state of talks meant to provide sanctions relief for disarmament without having the diplomacy collapse. Analysts said that no matter what type of projectile was fired, the timing of North Korea’s action would send a message to the United States. “It is an expression of the North’s frustration over stalled talks with the United States. It is a message that it could return to the previous confrontational mode if there is no breakthrough in the stalemate,” said Yang Uk, a senior research fellow at the Korea Defence and Security Forum. “It also seems clear that North Korea is angry over what appears to be a lack of flexibility in the Trump administration’s position on relieving sanctions, sticking to a policy of ‘maximum pressure’,” said Harry Kazianis at the Center for the National Interest, a think-tank. It follows a meeting 10 days ago between Kim and Vladimir Putin after which the Russian president offered to break the deadlock between the US and North Korea. Reuters and Associated Press contributed to this report.