A video in which a leading German YouTuber delivers an almost hour-long blistering attack on the government and says it’s time to destroy the mainstream parties has been viewed more than 3.3m times. Rezo, a 26-year-old music producer whose YouTube channel Rezo Ja Lol Ey has about 600,000 followers, said the 55-minute mix of analysis and polemics was meant as a “destruction video”. In it, he accused Angela Merkel’s conservative alliance as well as its coalition partner, the Social Democrats, of pursuing an unsustainable form of politics which he said “is destroying our lives and our future”. Media analysts have expressed their astonishment that a video on politics has gone viral, a status usually reserved for music, mishaps, fashion or pets. Sitting at a mixing desk wearing a top emblazoned with ‘Architects’, the post-metalcore band from Brighton, Rezo said his video – which he referred to as a “personal rant” – resulted from several weeks spent analysing the Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) and its sister party the Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU), and claimed he was now in a position to reveal the truth about them to his viewers, including how they allegedly lied, and in his opinion actively pursued politics that were against young people. The conservative alliance, he said, had created an ever deeper divide between the super-rich and the majority of Germans with “the 45 richest households in Germany owning so much as the poorest 50%”. He then delivered a passionate lecture with statistics and video inserts focused mainly on climate change but also the lack of equal opportunities, foreign and security policy and the recent EU copyright row. Towards the end of his tirade, delivered extremely fast, he addressed the politicians themselves, saying: “You always say that young people should be political, in which case you have to get to grips with it when they think your politics are shit.” He said even though EU politics was “fucking boring”, Germans should participate on Sunday, when the country will vote in the EU parliamentary elections, because the outcome of the vote will have a knock-on effect on the parties’ national standing. He said the Greens and left-wing Die Linke were parties that possibly did deserve support, but even they had “a long way to go”. But he explicitly warned against voting for the rightwing populist Alternative for Germany (AfD), claiming they would “only make the world worse”. Released on Saturday afternoon, the video had close to 3.4m views by Wednesday. It is being heatedly commented on by media and political analysts on social media. Writing in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper, Fridtjof Küchemann said across Germany the video had had the unusual effect of opening the bedroom doors of many teenagers who had emerged from their computers to deliver “urgent recommendations to their parents ahead of the upcoming European elections”, for which the parents should be grateful, he added. It was roundly condemned by CDU supporters, one of whom, Philipp Graefe, tweeted: “This young man is spreading an endless stream of fake news and is populist down to the tips of his blue hair.” Rezo was better known until this week for his music and comedy videos. He has dyed blue hair, which has become his trademark. His real name is not known and he is believed to live in Aachen. A CDU spokesman said the party was working on its own response, adding that “politics is more complicated than Rezo would have it”.