Khaled Hosseini’s bestselling book The Kite Runner is about fathers, sons and friendship between boys in Afghanistan. Its 2007 follow-up, A Thousand Splendid Suns, might be a companion piece to that novel, mirroring themes but focusing on mothers, daughters and the friendships that save women from despair. Both stories are unapologetically melodramatic and both been adapted for the stage. In Ursula Rani Sarma’s version of A Thousand Splendid Suns, first staged in the US, the chronology diverges from Hosseini’s. We meet Mariam (Amina Zia) in middle age, beaten down in her marriage to violent bigamist Rasheed (Pal Aron). The focus is on Rasheed’s new, young wife, Laila (Sujaya Dasgupta), and her backstory, which takes her from an enlightened family life to Rasheed’s possessive clutches after her previous existence is blown away by a bomb. Mariam’s childhood story emerges in the gaps in Laila’s, from her mother’s shocking death and her father’s betrayal to the unwelcome marriage. In the early scenes, Mariam feels like an ancillary character rather than the play’s joint lead. Zia plays the part with clownish flourishes as she skulks and scowls at Laila for beguiling Rasheed. The flecks of comic caricature confuse the tone of an otherwise dark and dramatic story. The characterisation lacks depth and nuance. When calamities hit Laila, Dasgupta holds her chest and cries out theatrically, but her anguish is not explored any further. Mariam remains a remote, unreachable character whose suffering, however great, fails to move us. Even in fraught moments – for instance when Rasheed threatens Mariam with a spade – the play retains incongruously comic undertones. Scenes switch from flashbacks to present day, Taliban-era Kabul in lightning changes that seem too quick for the actors. As a result, the gut-wrenching plot lines are drained of their power. Elements of the staging jar: Ana Inés Jabares-Pita’s set is a desert with mood-shifting lighting – which is clean and spare – but a corps of dancing women in ornate Afghan dress who come on in interludes appear awkwardly orientalised, as does the tabla music cranked up between scenes. This is a story that should have immense resonance: it is about the enduring strength of women who are caught in a misogynistic culture that enslaves them while claiming to protect them. This point is made clearly enough but it lacks the heart and fluidity for which Hosseini’s novels are best known. At Birmingham Rep until 18 May.