A comfortable bonus-point victory for Saracens and the perfect way to prepare for next Saturday’s Champions Cup showdown with Leinster but what could have been a dress rehearsal for the Premiership final can be considered little more than light sparring. Two tries for Alex Lewington, two for Dominic Morris and one for Nick Tompkins ensured Saracens’ winning run here extended to 21 matches but even if they and Exeter do return to Twickenham in a few weeks’ time they will both be unrecognisable. As understandable as it may be for both sides to rest so many players, their places in the play-offs already secure and Saracens facing Leinster next weekend, it did not make for much of a spectacle. We may reflect on this match as the first emergence of youngsters such as Morris, a first Premiership sighting of the 18-year-old Manu Vunipola, cousin of Mako and Billy, or another demonstration of Max Malins’ burgeoning talent, but a fixture between the Premiership’s top two sides really should deliver more. Indeed, Exeter made 13 changes, Saracens 11, and as commendable as it is that 23 of the players on show across the two squads are homegrown academy products, the opening half had the feel of an A League match. Mark McCall acknowledged this victory would have no bearing on a potential final against Exeter but believes it was a glimpse into a longer-term future, admitting his rested players will have to produce their best performance of the season to overcome Leinster in the short-term. “It is good to have a good buzz around the club but we all understand the quality of our opponent next week,” said McCall. “Those games take a long time to win, they normally turn on small things so we’ve got to get everything right.” Against Exeter, the first moment of note came midway through the half when Will Skelton was shown a yellow card for taking Phil Dollman out in the air. It was deliberate, and with force, but he avoided a red card because Dollman landed on his back. The Exeter full-back’s head did bounce against the artificial surface, however, and though he passed his head injury assessment, he was at fault for Saracens’ opening try and made way again before the interval, clearly still feeling the effects. That try was scored by Lewington and owed as much to the elements as it did Dollman. During a hailstorm, Richard Wigglesworth’s box-kick hung in the air, Dollman could not deal with it and the Saracens scrum-half was on hand to hack across the pitch. His kick again hung in the wind, bouncing perfectly for Lewington to score. It had been a frustrating half for Exeter, unable to capitalise on their numerical advantage and outgunned at the set piece and Saracens made them pay after the interval with Malins coming to the fore. The 22-year-old teed up Lewington for his second try down the right and was a constant menace thereafter. It was Skelton’s burst up the middle – during which he thundered Gareth Steenson into next week – that provided Tompkins with the third score but it was Malins pulling the strings. The Chiefs did eventually get on the board with Richard Capstick’s close-range score but the replacement scrum-half Tom Whiteley kicked a straightforward penalty to keep Saracens comfortably in front before Morris’s quickfire double late on. Saracens are four points behind Exeter and in with an outside chance of leapfrogging them into first place on the final day of the season. “We took some important things out of this and it has given us a view on some players and we’ve rested and hopefully cleared up a few niggles,” said Exeter’s director of rugby, Rob Baxter. “But I’d have liked us to have performed better.”