The booming online fashion retailer Boohoo is refusing to allow trade union officials to discuss recognition for employees months after its founder told MPs she was open to union representation. The fast fashion company, which has 5 million customers, last month posted record profits of £59.9m. But the 2,500 workers at its Burnley packaging and distribution centre and the thousands of textile workers in Leicester who produce many of its clothes are not represented by trade unions. In a damning report this year, MPs on the environmental audit committee, condemned fast fashion for its failure to act sustainably or to protect workers from illegal levels of pay and poor conditions. In evidence, the founder of Boohoo Carol Kane told MPs she would allow union recognition at her distribution offices in Burnley if workers wanted it. But the Usdaw union said Boohoo had rebuffed six months of repeated attempts to start recognition discussions. Last month Boohoo again declined a request from Mike Aylward, north-west divisional officer for Usdaw, to meet employee representatives to discuss union representation. Kane told MPs that Boohoo, which she co-founded in 2006, had not signed up to the Ethical Trading Initiative and its workers were not unionised. Kane said: “On unions, we do not currently have a union in our Burnley warehouse.” She said the company had an employee forum, and it would recognise a union “if the workers would like it, yes, of course”, but added that there did not appear to be a demand. Boohoo also said in written evidence it was not aware of the existence of unions within its supply chain of 94 factories and 76 smaller production units in Leicester. The Boohoo distribution centre in Burnley employs up to 3,000 workers at peak times, and is one of the biggest employers in the town. Aylward said the company was continuing to refuse to allow the union to engage with employee representatives to discuss union recognition, months after Kane had said she was open to union rights. “These are cordial conversations but in essence they are refusing to allow me to come and talk to employee representatives,” he said. “They are certainly don’t seem to be taking the recommendations of the committee [of MPs] seriously,” he said. Boohoo sells dresses from as little as £5 a piece, which it buys from suppliers for between £2.50 and £3. Fifty percent of its products are manufactured in the UK. Kane said three compliance staff made unannounced visits to suppliers in Leicester to check on pay and conditions. In a statement, Boohoo said: “Listening to the views and opinions of our team has always been a core part of our philosophy, which is why we have our employee engagement forum, Your Voice, which has been running for five years. “As we have previously stated to Usdaw, we are consulting with our team with regards to their interest in meeting with a union and these conversations are ongoing.” The company said it had submitted an application to join the Ethical Trading Initiative. Mary Creagh, the Labour MP who chairs the environmental audit committee, said: “Our inquiry into the fashion industry uncovered widespread labour exploitation in the UK garment industry with workers being systematically underpaid and working long hours in unsafe factories. “We are very disappointed to hear that Ms Kane is not engaging with Usdaw, despite our recommendation that she and others do so as a priority. We will be writing to her to ask why this dialogue has not progressed since she appeared in front of us.”