Welcome to this week’s blogpost. Here’s our roundup of your comments and photos from last week. Let’s start big. “I recently finished The Rise and Fall of the Dinosaurs by Steve Brusatte,” says EsIstGeschlossen: It would serve both as a general introduction to dinosaurs, and as a primer on more recent developments in palaeontology for ex-dino nerds like me who’ve lost track of this fast-moving field. We follow their evolutionary history, from the pre-Triassic reptiles that gave rise to them, to the moments and months that followed the meteor strike that was their downfall, with lots and lots of interesting anecdotes and discussion of how palaeontologists actually go about learning the things they do, from analysing statistics to digging up bits of bone in scorching deserts (and how Chinese farmers have an increasing influence on the field). Plenty here to keep everyone entertained, and T-rex gets its own fact-filled chapter (we now believe it hunted in packs, for instance). Reading has been therapeutic for granitadicaffe: I have been rereading Alexander McCall Smith’s The Colours of the Cattle in order to calm myself down. Despite my having read it before and not even very long ago, it still makes me laugh out loud in places. One of his best books I think. His Botswana is a wonderful place. “I’m marvelling at John Cheever’s Collected Stories,” says MarisadeAzevedoMonte: Any budding author will learn how it’s done in terms of drawing the reader in, writing with concision, and, quite simply, how to write beautifully. If you’re not yet acquainted with Cheever, you have a treat in store. Tom Mooney recommends Feebleminded by Ariana Harwicz: A disturbing, highly sexualised story told in short chapters that make it feel like something between poetry and a novel. It tells the story of a young woman in a relationship with a married man who, along with her mother, plots revenge when the guy dumps her. It’s punchy, violent and quite dense. Very literary but still a real page-turner. “I’ve just read a book by an author with the shortest name of all,” says safereturndoubtful, “A Yi’s A Perfect Crime (translated from Chinese by Anna Holmwood)”: It’s highly original crime writing, the sort of book I always attracted to, and it lived up to expectation. With a clever title, it is an unsettling melange of adolescent rage, escapism and the consequent shocking media reaction. The author has used his own background in law enforcement to delve into the troubled mind of young man barely out of boyhood. If we can’t see the evil in him straight away, Yi’s narrator soon earns it from us with his apathetic and disturbing attitude to small acts of violence, and his prods at the homeless, even before he embarks on his mission of murder. Yet the skill in the writing is that by now the reader is compelled to the story, which in the prologue seemed far from possible. (Just in case you were wondering, there’s apparently also a Burmese politician and author called U Nu, sometimes shortened to just Nu. ) Finally, DataPortal has been reading Robert Graves’s Goodbye To All That: Before we get to the Somme and the writing he casually describes when he was out rock-climbing on Snowden with Mallory. At that point I had to concede he’d probably led a more interesting life than me. Really enjoying it so far, having his Greek mythology books as bedside companions for years and at least attempted The White Goddess; feels like having a drink with an old friend by the fire on a stormy night and him finally telling me his story. What a splendid image. Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein on BBC Radio 4’s In Our Time. “I like to fuck with people,” he said. “Why mince words?” Another excellent James Ellroy interview. What did Flannery O’Connor love most? Mayonnaise and her mother. Your latest instalment in the ongoing series about how having books in the house makes you smarter. “Livestock, suicides and a clock. It doesn’t feature strongly in those tourism ads.” Paul Ewen on Ashburton, New Zealand. “Just a few hours earlier he had ingested LSD for the first time and was in the process of undergoing what he saw as “one of the most important experiences” of his life.” Turns out Michel Foucault was a psychonaut. Book culture in Las Vegas. If you’re on Instagram, now you can share your reads with us: simply tag your posts with the hashtag #GuardianBooks, and we’ll include a selection in this blog. Happy reading!