Jan Vertonghen is confident he will be fit for the Champions League final against Liverpool. The Tottenham defender injured an ankle against Ajax in the second leg of the semi-final and left the Amsterdam Arena on crutches and his right foot in a protective boot. There has been the suggestion Vertonghen suffered the injury during the wild celebrations sparked by Lucas Moura’s 96th-minute winner. Vertonghen did not play in Spurs’ final league game of the season on Sunday – the 2-2 home draw against Everton, when the club confirmed a fourth consecutive top-four finish and re-entry into next season’s Champions League. Mauricio Pochettino was noncommittal after the match when asked about Vertonghen’s chances of being available for the Madrid meeting with Liverpool on 1 June. “Today he was very down, which is normal,” the manager said. “It’s the last league game of the season but there’s a lot of time for him to come back. I hope to have all the squad available but if someone is not available then it’s about the team.” It is understood that although Vertonghen cannot be 100% sure at present, he does feel confident about his prospects for the final. He was seen walking freely on Sunday – without crutches, a boot or any apparent discomfort. Pochettino has given his players a two-day break but they will be back to work on Wednesday, when the push to prepare them for Liverpool will begin. “We need to be natural, to apply common sense,” Pochettino said. “It is not a pre-season but it is not going to be a holiday. We are going to assess each individual and give more individual work than collective.” Pochettino believes the long break until the final will benefit his team, because it gives players the chance to recover. Harry Kane (ankle ligaments) and Harry Winks (groin) are expected to be available. The situation regarding Davinson Sánchez (thigh) is unclear. Hugo Lloris, the Tottenham goalkeeper, said: “You could see how tired the team was in the second half against Everton. We finished the game on our knees. It’s been a very difficult season.”