Judd Trump set up a world championship final rematch against John Higgins after completing a 17-11 victory over the Wallsend qualifier Gary Wilson at the Crucible. Trump was 21 when he lost his only previous final to Higgins in 2011 but the experienced Scot, who earlier edged David Gilbert in a final‑frame thriller, acknowledged he will be facing a different challenge this time. Higgins, a four-times winner, said: “Judd is an unbelievable all-round player now, while when I played him in 2011 he was just crash, bang, wallop and normally they were going in. “I’ll be playing a different Judd Trump. The way he dismantled [Ronnie] O’Sullivan in the Masters has given him the confidence to come here as one of the favourites.” Resuming the evening session with a four-frame advantage, Trump wrapped up victory in style with breaks of 97 and 88 to end the colourful run of the former taxi driver and factory worker. Along the way Trump wrote a new piece of Crucible history as his 114 break in the 20th frame represented the 87th century of the Championship, eclipsing the previous mark set in both 2015 and 2016. Earlier, Higgins had continued a remarkable career revival by squeezing past Gilbert 17-16 just six months after threatening to quit the sport when he crashed out of the UK Championships. The 43-year-old Scot hit a 139 total clearance to set up the one‑frame shootout, then capitalised on a missed black by Gilbert to build what would prove to be a match-winning 55 break. Higgins, who had started the final session 13-11 down, admitted: “I was at a low ebb around Christmas – probably the lowest ebb I’ve ever been in playing the game. I can’t really explain to be honest. I apologised to Dave; I told him I brought him down to my level in the first three sessions. “I was really poor and I think Dave really let me off the hook. I was over the moon to be only 13-11 [behind, on Friday night]. I was feeling good but nothing was happening.” A tearful Gilbert, who had arrived at the tournament with few expectations but twice blew a five‑frame advantage in the match, broke down in tears in the post‑match press conference. Gilbert said: “I’m absolutely gutted to lose. I could have got to a world final but I’ve got nothing to feel sad about. I came here with no expectations and to end up on the one table against a legend like John, it was an honour.”