The Scottish secretary, David Mundell, has demanded a meeting with Theresa May on Wednesday afternoon, amid concerns that cabinet support for her “new Brexit deal” is falling away. Mundell, who does not have a reputation as a cabinet rebel, was said by allies to have been irked by the prime minister’s promise of a vote on a second referendum. May repeated on Wednesday in the House of Commons that she was not supporting a referendum, merely allowing MPs to vote on one during the passage of the Brexit bill. But with the SNP pushing for another Scottish independence vote, Mundell is said to feel that any hint that the Conservatives are open to another Brexit referendum will make it harder to win the argument in Scotland. “The way that it’s been presented allows it to be exploited by the nationalists,” said an ally of Mundell. However, he insisted the Scottish secretary was not going to call for the prime minister’s resignation. The SNP leader, Nicola Sturgeon, tweeted on Monday night that by edging towards a referendum, May had put the Scottish conservatives “on something of a sticky wicket”. The PM might not have guaranteed a second EU referendum, but her promise of a vote on one puts the Scottish Tories ‘vote for us for no more referendums on anything ever’ pitch on something of a sticky wicket. Just an amusing aside. Another cabinet source said it was unlikely Mundell would make a decisive move against the prime minister but his visit might give momentum to other cabinet ministers trying to drum up support to get her out. Mundell is one of several cabinet ministers who have expressed concerns about the concessions made in May’s speech. Several Brexit-backing ministers from the so-called “pizza club” met to discuss their doubts before prime minister’s questions. Brexit supporter and potential leadership contender Penny Mordaunt is understood to have expressed her concerns to the prime minister about the speech and withdrawal bill, amid fears that it went further than what was agreed in cabinet. The Brexit secretary, Steve Barclay, is also believed to be unhappy, though he did not attend the gathering. May has insisted she will press ahead with bringing her Brexit bill before parliament, despite widespread scepticism at Westminster that it can pass. Since May announced her 10-point plan in a speech on Tuesday, dozens of her own MPs who supported her deal in March have said they cannot support it. 1 The government will seek to conclude alternative arrangements to replace the backstop by December 2020. 2 Should the backstop come into force, the government will ensure that Great Britain will stay aligned with Northern Ireland. 3 The negotiating objectives and final treaties for our future relationship with the EU will have to be approved by MPs. 4 A new workers’ rights bill that guarantees workers’ rights will be no less favourable than in the EU. 5 No change in the level of environmental protection. 6 The UK will seek as close to frictionless trade in goods with the EU as possible while outside the single market and ending free movement. 7 We will keep up to date with EU rules for goods and agri-food products that are relevant to checks at border protecting the thousands of jobs that depend on just-in-time supply chains. 8 The government will bring forward a customs compromise for MPs to decide on to break the deadlock. 9 There will be a vote for MPs on whether the deal should be subject to a referendum. 10 There will be a legal duty to secure changes to the political declaration to reflect this new deal. Campaigners for a people’s vote have also insisted they cannot back the legislation, despite May’s promise that MPs will be given a vote on whether to hold a referendum, as the bill is passing through parliament. The environment secretary, Michael Gove, appeared to hint on Wednesday morning that the government could delay the second reading of the bill – the first opportunity for MPs to vote on it – which Downing Street has said will happen in the week beginning 3 June. Gove said there was time to “reflect” and consider the options, raising the prospect that the prime minister would have to pull the vote. But in response to a question from the former Tory leader Iain Duncan Smith, May said, “We’ve already made the government’s position clear in relation to this: the second reading of the withdrawal agreement bill will be brought to the house after the Whitsun recess.” The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, robustly rejected May’s 10-point plan, and called for a general election to resolve the deadlock. He said: “Our country needs leadership to bring us together. However, this prime minister is not the person to do this,” he said, responding to her statement in the House of Commons.”Throughout the last three years, she has made no attempt to unite the country. She has been focused only on keeping her divided party together. It hasn’t worked. And now her time has now run out.”She no longer has the authority to offer a compromise and cannot deliver. That is why it is time for a general election to break the Brexit deadlock and give the country a say.” May’s spokesman insisted she would not bow to pressure to resign immediately, saying she knew there was a “job of work to do” to persuade MPs to back her deal. Asked whether the prime minister would quit if the Conservative vote fell below 10% in the European elections, he said: “We expect a very challenging night when the result comes through but no, the PM is focused on the task at hand.” In the Commons, May urged MPs to support the legislation, which will be published on Friday, saying that by doing so, “we can bring an end to the months – years – of increasingly bitter argument and division that have both polarised and paralysed our politics. “We can move on, move forwards, and get on with the jobs we were sent here to do, what we got into politics to do.” However, Gove’s comments appeared to reflect concerns that cabinet sources said were shared by several colleagues. Senior backbenchers, including the former education secretary Nicky Morgan, urged the prime minister not to rush in bringing forward the bill. “This house is in a recess which is very nice for us, but which is not needed, given the seriousness of the situation. I will probably vote for the bill when it comes back, but please can I ask the PM to reflect very seriously about whether it should be put to parliament?” she said. Morgan called on May to allow “more time, and more compromises to be made”. If a piece of legislation falls at second reading, government cannot reintroduce it in the same session of parliament. The executive of the Tory backbench 1922 Committee will meet on Wednesday afternoon amid fresh speculation that it could change the rules to allow a no-confidence vote in May’s leadership. Many Tory MPs were infuriated by the prime minister’s offer of a vote on a referendum, with some even calling for her to resign. But with a string of candidates already jostling for the premiership, including several in the cabinet, May warned MPs that putting another leader in place would not change the arithmetic in parliament. “In time, another prime minister will be standing at this dispatch box. But while I am here, I have a duty to be clear with the house about the facts,” she said. “If we are going to deliver Brexit in this parliament we are going to have to pass a withdrawal agreement bill. And we will not do so without holding votes on the issues that have divided us the most – that includes votes on customs arrangements and on a second referendum.