England have dodged a meeting with Dale Steyn in the World Cup opener at the Oval on Thursday after the South Africa fast bowler was ruled out with a shoulder injury. Steyn was always touch and go to be ready, having withdrawn from the Indian Premier League last month with inflammation in the problem area that required surgery in 2016 and has since dogged his career. The 35-year-old’s absence is nevertheless a blow to Faf du Plessis’s team and places more responsibility on the shoulders of Kagiso Rabada, who also left the IPL early with a back problem and has sent down only seven overs during warmup fixtures. “Steyn is not quite ready yet, not far away but not ready,” said the South Africa coach, Otis Gibson. “With a six-week tournament there’s no real need to force the issue. He won’t be available for the first game. We’ve still got 14 others.” Rabada will have support from Lungi Ngidi, another strong, fast bowler whose relatively recent arrival in ODI cricket has returned 34 wickets in 18 matches, and the all-rounders Chris Morris and Andile Phehlukwayo; against England, trailblazers with the bat in recent times, they face a stiff challenge. Gibson believes meeting such well‑fancied hosts early works in South Africa’s favour, with the former England bowling coach citing some recent hype from his old charges Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad as an example of the pressure on Eoin Morgan’s side this summer. “My two very good friends, Broad and Anderson, have said England will have to do something really bad not to win this World Cup. As far as they are concerned England have won it already,” he said. Gibson is himself among the names for the England coach role that becomes vacant this autumn after Trevor Bayliss moves on. The former West Indies and Durham fast bowler spent 20 years in the UK and, having left his previous role with England in 2017, told BBC Sport: “My contract is up in September. I’m happy to be linked with any job, because after that I might not have a job.” England’s final selection for the opening game will likely be down to the third seamer’s spot, with Liam Plunkett, Mark Wood and Tom Curran jostling for position to slot in behind the expected new-ball pairing of Chris Woakes and Jofra Archer. With Wood passed fit after a recent scare – the fast bowler was seen doing additional bowling on Tuesday, while the squad rested – and Morgan on the mend after a minor fracture to his left index finger, the chief fitness headache is Adil Rashid. Rashid has been managing a muscle impingement in his bowling shoulder – something that tipped the balance for Liam Dawson’s World Cup call-up – but is confident he will be ready. “Hopefully I’m fully fit, or verging on fully fit, and coming into the game I’ll be ready to go,” Rashid said. “I’ve had a bit of wear and tear over the years. It does affect me if I’ve got that impingement or pain, the rotation can be a bit difficult and you may not get the revs you want. The drift, the dip, the googly is a bit harder to come by. But it’s just about managing it, getting the right treatment from the physio. “I’m sure I’ll get through with a few pills and a few stretches. I’m ready to go for the whole tournament.”