Assorted Spanish media outlets the Rumour Mill pretends to take an interest in but doesn’t really say Atlético Madrid want to sign a certain Leicester City left-back. AS and Cadena Sur identify Ben Chilwell as a possible £70m replacement for Lucas Hernandez, who has left the Spanish capital for pastures new at Bayern Munich. With Manchester City also interested, the Premier League champions will almost certainly sign the England international. Declan Rice has dismissed rumours linking him with a move to Manchester United, telling reporters his “focus is fully on playing for West Ham”. The England international, whose focus used to be fully on playing for the Republic of Ireland, pointed out his “great connection” with the fans at the London Stadium. “I love them, they love me,” he said. “That’s the way it is at the moment. I’m not thinking about anything else.” Never change, Declan. Reports from Spain say Lyon’s Nabil Fekir, who came this close to joining Liverpool last summer, could be the subject of a bidding war between Chelsea and Manchester City . Heading for the City exit door, Fabian Delph, could find a new home at West Ham, who will have to pay up to £15m to secure the midfielder’s services. Harry Maguire remains a wanted man at City, but Leicester are reluctant to sell their talismanic defender before they’ve enlisted a replacement. They want Lewis Dunk, but Brighton are not keen on selling their talismanic defender before they’ve enlisted a replacement. According to the Manchester Evening News, Portsmouth central defender Matt Clarke is the key to this very complex equation. Antonio Conte hasn’t yet been named Inter manager, but is already gyrating suggestively in the direction of Manchester United striker Romelu Lukaku, who is unloved at Old Trafford but also wanted by Juventus. In the very unlikely event United are reluctant to let the Belgian international go, Conte will turn his attention to Roma hitman Edin Dzeko. Back at Leicester, James Maddison has caught the eye of Tottenham Hotspur manager Mauricio Pochettino and could be the subject of a bid once they’ve got the small matter of Saturday’s Champions League final out of the way. And finally, Aston Villa manager Dean Smith is ready to return to his old stomping ground of Griffin Park to sign Brentford striker Neal Maupay. Burnley, Sheffield United, Brighton and Norwich City are also interested in the 22-year-old Frenchman, who could go for as much as £20m.