England’s greatest opening pair in this format made a mockery of what used to be regarded as a monumental target, as they went two up with two to play of this five-match series. Jonny Bairstow, who finished with 128 from 93 balls, and Jason Roy (76 from 55 balls) added a blistering 159 before they were parted in the 18th over, which meant the rest of the chase was no more than a canter. Needing 359 for victory England knocked off the runs with six wickets and 31 balls to spare. This was the second-highest successful run chase by an England side, the highest having taken place just three months ago against West Indies in Barbados. While blasting the ball to every corner of this shrunken ground, Roy and Bairstow – in just their 26th innings together at the top of the order – became England’s most productive opening pair in ODI cricket with considerable scope to add many more runs in the next few years. More immediately the analysts of the world will be searching for frailties. On this type of surface – another belter – they can intimidate the best. Bairstow explained afterwards that the secret was playing “strong shots”. He said: “It’s not like we are slogging and playing ramp shots but genuine cricket shots.” He also feels he benefited from his experiences in the IPL. “I loved it there and learned different things from different coaches and players [including his teammate David Warner].” England's six-wicket win over Pakistan on Tuesday is their second-highest successful ODI run chase – and the fifth best of all time. 1. South Africa 438-9 v Australia, 20062. South Africa 372-6 v Australia, 20163. England 364-4 v West Indies, 20194. India 362-1 v Australia, 20135. England 359-4 (44.5ov) v Pakistan, 20196. Australia 359-6 (47.5ov) v India, 2019 They required one favour from Pakistan. On 21 Roy slapped the first delivery from Hasan Ali gently to mid-off. There Shaheen Afridi dropped the simplest of catches and soon Roy was pummelling the boundaries at will with the crack of the ball meeting bat resounding around the ground. Initially Roy played the most eyecatching shots with straight-driven sixes peppering the spectators but Bairstow advanced just as quickly and one of his sixes over midwicket went even further – over the temporary stand towards a burger bar. Once Roy was caught at cover, trying something extravagant, Bairstow took centre stage, tormenting the left-arm spinners in particular. This was brutal, carefree batting, while Joe Root looked on in quiet admiration as the two Yorkshiremen added 75 together. Both departed before the end but even this was convenient for England since it allowed Ben Stokes and Moeen Ali some much-needed time at the crease. Neither were quite so fluent – and Moeen benefited from two dropped catches – but before long they started to middle the ball. Stokes was run out for 37 after a deflection at the non-striker’s end but Moeen finished with a flurry on yet another day when bowlers had to look forlornly at some ugly figures once they returned to the haven of the dressing room. Earlier the England bowlers had suffered as well, mostly at the hands of Imam-ul-Haq. He is the nephew of the great Inzamam and he hit the highest score ever for Pakistan in an ODI against England. It was a polished innings by the 23-year-old left-hander and by modern standards it was not particularly violent. His 151 occupied just 131 balls yet for most of the time he was content to stroke the ball away, missing nothing off his legs. Imam bats in glasses, which is unusual, and they never steamed up. There is still scope in this format for a measured player around whom there can be pyrotechnics from the other batsmen. However it is hard to gauge what a good total is at Bristol (or anywhere else, in fact) with the boundaries reduced, the pitch true and the white ball showing very little inclination to swing. Pakistan had to recover from the loss of two early wickets to Chris Woakes, who found some movement early on when dismissing two obvious dangermen. In the first over Fakhar Zaman, after his heroics at the Ageas Bowl, edged to Root, who juggled before coolly taking possession of the ball at second slip. Then Woakes nipped a ball between the bat and pad of Babar Azam. Thereafter the bat was seldom beaten; Haris Sohail batted smoothly until he was carelessly run out as Tom Curran’s right boot, not renowned for its accuracy in the pre-match football games, kicked the ball into the stumps. Sarfraz Ahmed consolidated for a while along with Imam and Asif Ali once again provided some muscle. The tail wagged eagerly as Pakistan mustered 94 runs from the final 10 overs. England, who had omitted Jos Buttler and Adil Rashid from the side in Southampton, were not quite at their sharpest in the field. Woakes, who ended with four wickets, had a better day but this time David Willey yielded runs at a mildly alarming rate – his 10 overs cost 86 runs. In this side, with Mark Wood and Jofra Archer omitted, the bowlers were of uniform pace and, in the absence of Rashid, there was no mystery from the spinners. Joe Denly was given a solitary over again. Unlike at Cardiff in the T20 international there were no long-hops but there were two full-tosses and Morgan did not trust him to continue. He can bat but it is wishful thinking to believe he can have a significant impact with the ball against the best players in the world.