Sajid Javid has become the latest Conservative to declare he is standing for the party leadership, telling party members: “First and foremost, we must deliver Brexit.” The home secretary made his announcement on Monday in a video posted on Twitter. He said: “As last night’s results made all too clear, we must get on and deliver Brexit,” adding it was important to “restore trust, bring unity, and create new opportunities across the UK”. Javid is the latest entrant in a crowded field. His announcement came after another candidate, Dominic Raab, challenged his rivals to take part in a televised debate amid concerns it could further expose gaping divisions across the party. In a statement issued after dramatic electoral losses to the Brexit party, the bookmakers’ second favourite to become the next prime minister has also called on the party to leave the EU by 31 October “at the very latest”. One rival, Andrea Leadsom, welcomed the proposal for a TV debate. Boris Johnson, the favourite to succeed Theresa May, has been asked for a response. Raab officially joined the party’s leadership race on Sunday, but has been signing up MPs as supporters for several weeks. He joined the foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, the international development secretary, Rory Stewart, the health secretary, Matt Hancock, the environment secretary, Michael Gove, and former work and pensions secretary Esther McVey, who are all vying for the leadership. In a statement meant to increase pressure upon his competitors, Raab said: “I hope that the other candidates take me up on my suggestion of holding a televised debate so that we can test each other’s plans on Brexit.” Other rivals are mulling over the suggestion, conscious that Johnson has previously struggled when pressurised by fellow Tories. During ITV’s referendum debate in 2016, Amber Rudd, then the energy secretary, memorably described Johnson as the “life and soul of the party but not the man you want driving you home at the end of the evening”. One aide to a leadership candidate said a debate could, without careful management, permanently damage the party. “We have to decide if we are going to expose ourselves to an all-out bunfight on the EU. It could turn out to be a race to the bottom,” the aide said. There are fears among Tory moderates that many of the eight declared leadership candidates will adopt hardline Brexit positions to win over 160,000 party members. They will choose who is to be the next prime minister from a shortlist of two candidates whittled down by MPs. On Monday,  after the EU election results, Johnson warned his party that it would face a fresh drubbing if it did not deliver Brexit “properly”. “The message from these results is clear,” he wrote in his column for the Daily Telegraph. “If we go on like this, we will be fired: dismissed from the job of running the country. “The only way to avert that outcome is to honour the result of the 2016 referendum, and come out of the EU; and that means doing it properly – not with some frail simulacrum of Brexit, but clearly and sensibly, so that we are able to join every other independent country in being able to set our own tariffs and make our own laws.” Leadsom issued a statement on Monday describing the results as “truly terrible”. “It is now vital we now find a way to decisively leave the EU … I have a three-step plan for how we deliver Brexit which I look forward to discussing further during the leadership campaign,” she said.