Bodies with missing limbs and limbs without a body. Bodies and body parts, just the legs, or a breast, or a head. Unconscious Landscape – the title comes from a work by Louise Bourgeois – is filled with grim and strange things. Spread through five galleries at Hauser & Wirth Somerset, all the works are by women, all from the collection of Ursula Hauser, co-founder (with her daughter and son-in-law) of Hauser & Wirth gallery. Collecting for more than 40 years, and with an emphasis on women artists, this small part of Hauser’s collection is filled with works any museum would be proud to own. There is much here I have never seen before: an unmade bed in an empty room, painted plainly by Méret Oppenheim, in 1939, three years after she made her famous surrealist furry teacup. Also from 1936 is her pair of wooden hands in fur gloves, red fingernails poking through, looking as though a bear had come in from a nail bar. Nearby is a great Carol Rama bricolage, with a circular sieve mounted vertically on a trestle and rubber hoses dangling from a wire holder. Picasso once told Rama she could take anything she wanted from his studio, and instead of a painting, her eyes lit on the wire hanger he used to drape his painting rags on. Here it is, incorporated into her own work, called Sortilegi, or soothsayers. Who are the soothsayers? The dangling rubber tubes? Rama often included bicycle inner tubes in her work, partly as a reference to her father, who developed an early unisex bicycle, eventually went out of business and killed himself. Rama herself died in 2015 at the age of 97. Whatever demons she had, her art never fails to unhinge and beguile. Her wit keeps things alive and approachable. Darkness is relentless in the almost symbolist, abject sculptures of Alina Szapocznikow, with its casts from parts of her own body and face, her lips, a single, pendulous breast. She is just one of the artists playing games with the body’s penetrability and vulnerability, with what goes on under the skin, and with the difference between physical anatomy and a more subjective sense of the body and what assails it, both from without and within. They all treat the body with a kind of gleeful obstreperousness. There is in almost all the works also a sense of necessity, of reclaiming the territory of desire and fear, and of owning their sense of vulnerability, and presenting it to the viewer as a kind of challenge. This is less a theme than a way of being, and is on constant display here, not only in the work’s subject matter, but also in the way they engage with form, with order and disorder, and in their handling of materials as much as imagery. What an exhilarating show filled with darkness and light, drama, delicacy and fury. Beginning with heads in vitrines by Bourgeois – one pink and looking asleep, another black and dangling upside down in its little cell, like a piece of hung meat – and a number of paintings by the Austrian Maria Lassnig, whose distortions of her own body and physiognomy, however extreme (pig-nosed, one-eyed, a lump of contorted limbs) always remain recognisable. I recognise those lips. In one painting, Lassnig waits to receive paint spewing from squeezed tubes. The colours arc towards her open mouth. Painting as a kind of parodic fellatio, or breastfeeding, or both. But one should beware such simplistic readings. Painting fed Lassnig’s life. In another almost abstracted canvas, we see her riding her motorbike (she rode until well into her 80s), viewed from behind, as if we were riding pillion. Which I guess we are, as she powers ahead. One of Bourgeois’s smaller spiders has settled beneath a window, and a woven doll slumps on a bench behind the lattice of its solitary cell. A much bigger spider dominates another gallery and Bourgeois dominates the show, which ends with a pair of enormously extended legs, like black stockings hung up to dry, the feet hovering just above the floor. However familiar her art has become, she was still full of surprises, even very late in her long life. Eva Hesse could have had a full-blown career with her rarely seen early paintings, from 1960, but luckily kept developing. Her 1965 relief works, with their peculiar appendages and wonky configurations – one with the almost onomatopoeic title Oomamaboomba – were a way of moving first from the flatness of the picture plane, and then into the works, often in fragile materials, that made her such an influential figure before her early death in 1970, aged 34. Hesse’s work demonstrates a terrific sense of materiality and humour. Similarly, an early Lee Lozano painting from 1963 shows some kind of projectile entering an orifice, perhaps an ear – and other later paintings in which images of screws and drills power their way, violently, across the surface, in a parody of male power. Sonia Gomes’s sewn fabric works and Sheila Hicks’s multicoloured woven sticks (get up close) and the sewn threads and other materials heave with complexity. Only the room dedicated to the paintings of Sylvia Sleigh disappoints. The Welsh-born portraitist, and also a collector and champion of other women artists, was a friend of Hauser’s, but her paintings here have none of the wildness or inventiveness that makes this such an otherwise unmissable, energising and at times disturbing exhibition. It is a lesson in going your own way, steered by tenacity and a refusal to be afraid. At Hauser & Wirth Somerset until 8 September. 