Daenerys sentences Tyrion to death but dragon fire fails to kill him, revealing him as the real Targaryen heir – being Aerys Targaryen’s son with Joanna Lannister. Tyrion becomes King, Bronn is his Hand, Ser Davos head of the Night’s Watch. Tyrion divides the Seven Kingdoms and sends Dany back to Essos to redeem herself, with Arya watching over her. Jon Snow goes north to live with the Wildlings, and finally gives Ghost that pat on the head he needs for being a good boy. Amanda, 41, Leeds The vision of Drogon soaring over King’s Landing came true, and so will the one of Dany walking up to the ash-covered Iron Throne. She will be the last person to sit on it before it is destroyed. But she surely won’t live to the end of the episode, not after the genocide she carried out. As to who kills her, Arya seems a likely candidate. Or perhaps she will take her own life, throwing herself from the Red Keep like Tommen did. I think the last episode will be more about coming to terms with what has just happened, rather than working out who should take charge over the ruins. Nathan Fisher, 30, teacher, China Arya Stark said: “I’m no lady.” Correct. Because she’s a Queen. She will take out Dany, and Jon will refuse the throne. Sansa will stay at Winterfell leaving Arya to sit on the throne as a reluctant but much loved, and feared, ruler. She will then be free to create lovely Stark/Baratheon kids with Gendry as it was always meant to be before the dragons intervened. Dominic, 51, design director, London No one will rule Westeros. The whole concept of the Iron Throne and the Seven Kingdoms is destroyed – both literally (Dany destroyed the capital, including, I assume, the throne room with the Iron Throne inside it) and figuratively. The show doubled down on its premise that the existence of the Iron Throne and the fights, intrigues and wars over it, is the true villain of the show. So my bet is that whoever still stands at the end, probably some Stark separatist, will go full Gorbachev and dismantle the Seven Kingdoms and the Iron Throne for good, opening a new era of peace between the surviving families and kingdoms of Westeros. Pau, 35, video editor, Barcelona. It has to be Jon. If you take the “g” out of A Song of Ice and Fire, you get A Son of Ice and Fire. Turns out it’s been Jon’s story all along and George RR Martin has been laughing because nobody saw it in the title of the books. Justin Lee Anderson, 35, author, Edinburgh I’d like to see Daenerys win the throne, but have to kill everyone she cares about (Jon, Tyrion, Grey Worm, even Drogon) to do it. She will then be left by herself, on a throne half-melted by dragon fire, in a shattered capital city. Alone and unloved trying to rule a kingdom devastated by not one war, but two, with most of the ruling classes and houses destroyed. The ultimate price of power. David, analyst, north Yorkshire Gendry Baratheon. The show started with a Baratheon on the throne and it will end with another, Robert’s now legitimate son Gendry. Jon will be warden of the North, and Arya will be queen with Gendry. It will make the entire bloodbath of a series complete but almost exactly where it started, proving yet again that war is pointless. Karol, media advisor, Sydney No one will rule Westeros. That is Daenerys’ plan. She is not mad. She understood that while the Iron Throne exists, there will be war and misery in Westeros, so the only way to end this for “future generations”, as she says to Tyrion, is to completely destroy the city and the throne. That’s why she has a heartbreaking moment when the bells ring, because she could have taken the city and become the queen, but she decided to destroy it all and be hated, but free Westeros from the Iron Throne. She will be known as Daenerys, Mother of Dragons, Destroyer of the Iron Throne. Vera Patricio, 29, astrophysicist, Denmark I think it will end with Jon Snow reluctantly sitting on the Iron Throne, surrounded by desolation and heartbroken by loss. Daenerys will have killed off Tyrion. Jon will have doubts about Daenerys as a ruler and won’t be able to hide them. He will turn the tables and kill Daenerys. Now a broken king, he will split the kingdom into North and South, giving Sansa complete control of the North. Then he will reluctantly rule the South. He might last some time – only those who don’t want the throne can stay on it for so long. Simon, 41, company director, Petersfield I’ve only seen the first couple of episodes but I’m thinking that Sean Bean fellow is looking like a winner, maybe with the smart one – little sparrow – as his loyal lieutenant. Mike, 53 All the main candidates to be king or queen are dead, the throne room is wrecked – but the throne itself remains intact, albeit a little battered. People are scurrying around, they don’t know what to do. They mutter about who will rule them now. There is real uncertainty. Then a voice booms out. “Sod it, if no one else will do it ...” It’s Bronn. He confidently strides to the throne and sits on it. “Buggers promised me a castle. This’ll do. ‘King Bronn, first of his name.’ I like the sound of that.” Ash Stewart, 45, analyst, Reading I think Ser Davos Seaworth will end up on the Iron Throne. I have firmly believed from the beginning that Daenerys would be unfit to rule Westeros, so when her character began making questionable decisions, I thought a different leader looked likely. The most likely other option is Jon Snow, however Jon has never been interested in ruling. I don’t think bloodlines will matter so much following the destruction of most of Westeros’ nobility, and Davos is by far the purest character. He has participated in all the major battles of the last few seasons, and was the Hand of Stannis Baratheon in the past. He is humble and rarely violent. Theodore Banks, 22, student, Chattanooga, US It’s got to be Sansa. Her entire life has shaped her for ruling. Her understanding of political games thanks to Littlefinger, her strength after experiencing such cruelty, her loyalty to her family and the faith that the people have in her – plus her willingness not only to listen to counsel from Tyrion and Jon, but to challenge them and others when she believes something is wrong. She’s not squeamish either. And Sansa has always accepted openness and honesty for what they are without getting caught up in bloodline drama – she never liked the Lannisters, but recognised that Tyrion wasn’t against her. She is unafraid of delivering harsh but fair justice, isn’t prone to irrationality, and she holds herself like a queen. She could very easily take the Iron Throne – and more importantly, keep it. Plus, a good judge of character. She clocked that Dany was a wrong’un and she’s been proved right. Emma Williams, 28, account manager, Manchester Although the most obvious answer is Jon Snow, I think the producers will throw a curveball. With support from his old friend Arya Stark, Hot Pie will turn out to be a product of a passionate liaison of Targaryen and Baratheon royalty, and the true heir to the Iron Throne. King Hot Pie, first of his name, will initiate a true happy ending, with free nutritious meals for all the dispossessed of Westeros. Martin Treacy, 58 The perfect final scenes of the series will be: Jon kills Dany and goes beyond the Wall to reunite with Ghost. There, he discovers a spiral of human body parts and realises the White Walkers are still here. Meanwhile, we see Bran on the Iron Throne closing his eyes to get one of his visions. When he opens them, they are blue. Todor, 25, Bulgaria Tuning in for the finale? Watch along live with Stuart Heritage’s liveblog