Too much porn. Too much screen time. Too much anxiety. Too little alcohol. There are myriad theories about why the British are having less sex – but none of them seems to offer relief. Importantly, it’s not because we feel we’re already having enough. And that’s according to the 34,000 Brits who took part in research between 2001 and 2012. During that period, the percentage of men and women reporting that they had not had sex in the last month (defined as vaginal, oral or anal sex with opposite or same-sex partners) rose to 29% overall, from 26% of men and 23% of women in 2001. More than half of men and women – 64.3% and 50.6% respectively – were unhappy with the amount of sex they were having in 2012 (up substantially from 2001 – the unhappiness, that is, not the sex). Where to start? Perhaps with the fact we are simply too knackered to go at it like we did before the financial crisis. Work has eaten into our physical, emotional and psychic energy reserves at an industrial rate. It seems no coincidence that in five countries with creeping overwork cultures – Japan, the USA, Finland and Australia, as well as the UK – sex is withering away to the point of becoming a golden-age pastime people used to enjoy. Combine this tendency with family commitments, longer commutes and an ever-replenishing sink of emails, and it’s no wonder that for many married and cohabiting people, skulking into the bathroom (preferably not the en suite) to watch porn on your smartphone before bed constitutes “sex”. Even young adults in their peak of physical health are not impervious to the libido-sapping perils of dog tiredness, particularly when the number of students simultaneously working full-time and studying is on the rise. The housing crisis is also kicking us out of bed. One in four 20- to 34-year-olds live at home, and there’s also more flat-sharing in poorer conditions. This is having an impact on multiple generations’ freedom to be intimate – particularly when, for many, they are living in much more cramped accommodation than they were brought up with. It’s easy to point at the reams of people in the world living in incredibly close quarters, who are still having plenty of sex. But this hasn’t been our cultural norm, and while creeping about the house might have been a teen rite of passage for older generations, young people now have a far keener sense of personal boundaries and a need for personal space, regardless of whether you consider that a luxury or otherwise. Infidelity with our smartphones also cannot be ignored (although the iPhone was only invented in 2007, and therefore only accounts for some of the decline in these statistics). Besides providing an infinitely pleasing world of Line of Duty memes and unboxing videos that will not remind us that the skirting boards are looking filthy, tech also now facilitates myriad novel ways to channel our sexual impulses, whether that’s through viewing porn, interactions with cammers, sexting or using dating apps. By the time we get the opportunity to have the real thing, too many of us are attentively spent. But it’s not all bad news. In many ways, it seems we’re on the threshold of a new sexual age. In Britain, we’ve never had more legal freedom to have the kind of sex we want, with whoever we want, and yet government attitudes to sex (for example, poorly designed age-verification tools for porn and cuts to crucial STI clinics) chip away at our sense of sexual liberty. From smart vibrators, to couples’ activity apps, tech is the devil on our shoulder, providing us with both solutions to our sexual malaise and distractions from deeper connection. Sexual nostalgia, let’s not forget, is one of our greatest self-pleasuring resources. But while more people in 2001 were happy with the amount of sex they were having, we don’t know if that means they were happier with the quality of it. Over the past decade, with women at the helm, a more nuanced conversation has evolved around what constitutes good sex. Consent, connection, mutual respect, a narrowing of the orgasm gap, are more than buzzwords: they are the standards by which we now measure the best intimate encounters. And if it’s easier than ever to admit that sex isn’t always that easy or that fun, perhaps us Brits have simply started being more honest about the sex we were never having in the first place. Maybe sex is also just sex these days. Post-50 Shades, the Tinderverse, and #MeToo, we’re more sexually and emotionally literate as a society than we were in 2001, better at reflecting on whether we’re using sex as tool for establishing power, expressing splintered feelings, or the words we’ve failed to say – and it seems to have taken some of the erotic charge out of it. As the therapist Esther Perel explains, intimacy and desire tend to be antithetical to one another. If it’s more culturally acceptable to be emotionally intimate in our relationships, perhaps it’s at the expense of our desire. In the meantime, while we struggle on through a fug of inaccurately appropriated spreadsheets, knuckle-clenching playdates, turgid drinks commitments and Brexit torpor, looking for a balm for our over-commitment and exhaustion, there is always sex. As one of the best natural tonics, sex boosts the immune system, lowers the heart rate and blood pressure, and eases stress. And that’s not to mention the bonding benefits of oxytocin and vasopressin, released when we are sexual with someone else. Oh, and it’s meant to be fun. Remember that? • Nichi Hodgson is a sex and relationships author and broadcaster