The immediate target of the vile remarks by Ukip candidate Carl Benjamin, discussing whether he would rape Jess Phillips, was of course the Labour MP herself. But the comments were demeaning and unsettling to women in particular, and anyone who disagrees with his rightwing mob of supporters more generally. Personal abuse is distressing and shocking to anyone. But giving evidence to a parliamentary committee on the safety of MPs on Wednesday, the Met Police assistant commissioner Neil Basu noted both the sharp uptick in MPs reporting offences and the clear pattern around misogyny and race. Such hatred is not new. But as Diane Abbott, one of those barraged by vicious hatred and graphic threats of violence has noted, “the anonymity and the ease” of online abuse has not just enabled, but encouraged it. The vituperation online has normalised increasingly graphic and violent language. Mr Benjamin first emerged as a driving figure in Gamergate, a campaign of misogynistic harassment in the guise of a spurious concern for “ethics”. That scandal saw three women hounded from their homes and drove more from their profession. It showed that what is said online can be devastating in its own right; it can also have offline consequences. This week, Ms Phillips described a man running down the street beside her, asking why Mr Benjamin should not be allowed to “joke” on such matters, with the cry: “I pay your wages.” The incident is redolent of the same sense of entitlement displayed in Gamergate, with bullies cloaking themselves as righteous victims and portraying the reasonable expectation for basic human respect as an affront to free speech and accountability. Social media platforms are belatedly beginning to take action against some peddlers of hate. They must do more. It is also right that police are investigating Mr Benjamin’s comments. As a candidate for the European elections, his words bear more weight than a single anonymous voice on the internet. Yet Ukip has stood by him and other reprobates it promotes as candidates. It appears to regard trolling as a form of campaigning, winning attention it is incapable of gaining by decent means. It is not and should not be regarded or treated as a normal political party. Yet Ukip candidates are not alone. When Conservative MPs spoke anonymously last year of Theresa May facing the “noose” , “knife” and “killing zone”, it both reflected the poisoning of political discourse and furthered the idea that such talk could be acceptable. From the top down, all parties must make it clear that the language of hate has no place, and that the right to forthrightly challenge opponents is not a right to bully them from office. MPs and others in the public eye are vulnerable to the merchants of hate. Jo Cox was murdered by a far-right extremist three years ago; recently a neo-Nazi admitted plotting to murder her colleague Rosie Cooper. But as Ms Phillips points out, violent rhetoric affects women not just in the Commons, but across the country, damaging us all. It tells women to stay silent. It minimises the seriousness of the violence so many face. The cumulative toll of abuse has an impact even on those as tough as Ms Phillips, Gina Miller or Anna Soubry. Few of us are as resilient as they are. No one should have to be.