There’s an extraordinary moment in the middle of Andy Packer’s staging of Emil and the Detectives. It’s the point in Erich Kästner’s 1929 novella, adapted here by Nicki Bloom, in which Emil’s posse of junior detectives are staking out the Hotel Kreid where the thieving Mr Grundeis is a guest. As darkness falls, the children realise they are to spend the night away from home. After the adventures of the day, their bravado disappears. That’s when two remarkable things happen. Up to this point, the children have been represented by a set of sketches arranged across the stage, full of character but with no facial features. It means we regard them only as a mob. Now, thanks to a trick of the light, we suddenly see their faces. As their eyes and mouths appear, they become individuals. At the same time, a sequence of vox pop interviews plays. We hear real children talking about how they felt on the first night they spent away from their parents. It’s a reminder that even if you’re not camping out in the streets of a big city in an attempt to corner a notorious criminal, to leave the safety of the family is a significant rite of passage. With this unsettling kind of magic, the production raises the stakes. A gung-ho gang by day starts to look very vulnerable by night. For them to catch Grundeis – if that’s even his real name – will require not just organisation, daring and wit, but considerable emotional resources. The scene is characteristic of the sense of drama and theatricality the Australian children’s company Slingsby brings to the story. Performed with precision and charm by Elizabeth Hay as a cross-cast Emil, and Tim Overton, variously baddie, urchin and ticket inspector, the show draws inventively on the techniques of street theatre, clowning, shadow puppetry, animation and object theatre without ever being confined by a single style. Especially impressive is Geoff Cobham’s lighting, whether it is helping map out a town bulb by bulb or illuminating the hotel windows through which we see Overton’s naked hand taking a bath. There’s also inventive use of light in And If I Were Me, choreographed by Catherine Dreyfus for France’s Act2 Company. Arnaud Poumarat’s rotating set is like a Rubik’s cube lit to create Mondrian-like oblongs of colour, while sliding doors reveal hands, legs and eventually whole slithering bodies of the three dancers, much to the amusement of the young audience. They go on an evolutionary journey from amoeba to crawling creature and onwards to upright man, making witty observations about dependency and cooperation along the way, although losing some focus as civilisation takes over. You can’t fault the ambition of Scottish company The Letter J in taking on the climate crisis. Super Human Heroes is like The Incredibles for the Greta Thunberg generation as three superheroes attempt to halt environmental disaster only to find themselves overwhelmed by the task. You suspect it says more about the despair of the older generation than the idealism of the young and, for all its comic bickering about heroic protocol, it feels weighed down by its own conceit. As each superhero in turn hangs up their cape, the atmosphere of despondency grows and, in the absence of a compelling narrative, the songs can only mark time until, from nowhere, they decide it’s fine if we all just do our bit for the planet. • At various venues, Edinburgh, until 2 June.