Sainsbury’s boss Mike Coupe insisted he has the full support of the company’s board to remain in his post despite a failed attempt to merge with Asda, which cost £46m last year. Annual pre-tax profits dived 41.6% at Sainsbury’s to £239m after £396m of one-off costs, including the cost of preparing a deal with Asda, which was crushed by the competition regulator last week. Total sales at the supermarket chain, which also owns Argos, rose 2.1% to £32.4bn. However, sales at established stores slid 0.2% for the year, including a 0.9% drop in the last quarter when food and clothing sales dropped back. “I’m sticking to the company, I’m very proud of the organisation I run,” Coupe told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. He added later that he expected to remain in the post for “months and years”. He said: “The board is fully supportive of the leadership team and there isn’t a single major investor that wasn’t supportive of the [Asda] deal but also recognised there were risks involved.” Coupe said the Asda deal now seemed like “ancient history” as it had been clear from February, when the Competition and Markets Authority revealed its preliminary findings, that a merger with Asda was highly unlikely. “We’re getting on with the rest of our lives, looking forward and adapting to customers changing shopping habits,” he said. Coupe said that Sainsbury’s was aiming to lower prices on core commodities, where it had lost sales in the past year, while stepping up investment in stores and digital technology. The retail group will spend about £100m more on improving the look of 400 supermarkets and digital services, including payment via mobile phone in stores and better beauty areas. Coupe said the group could afford £550m of total investment as it improved efficiency and because it had completed the costly integration of Argos into Sainsbury’s stores and the transfer of banking operations from Lloyds. “I am confident in our strategy and also clear on what we need to do to continue to evolve the business in a highly competitive market where shopping habits continue to change,” he said. But Sainsbury’s said in a statement: “Retail markets are highly competitive and very promotional, and the consumer outlook continues to be uncertain. However, we are well placed to navigate the external environment and remain focused on delivering our strategy.” It said economic conditions had eased slightly for UK consumers over the past 12 months as average weekly earnings  growth outpaced inflation for most of the year. Despite this, the continuing uncertainty around Brexit had an impact on consumer confidence.