Lawyers for Donald Trump, House committees and two banks are scheduled to appear in court Wednesday afternoon for arguments involving congressional subpoenas of his financial records. The proceeding comes amid the president’s ongoing battle against congressional oversight, in which he has reportedly vowed to fight “all of the subpoenas”. The House intelligence and financial services committees in April ramped up their investigation of Trump’s business dealings, issuing subpoenas to Deutsche Bank and Capital One. Several weeks later, Trump hit back with a lawsuit that seemed to profess a sense of victimhood. “The subpoenas were issued to harass President Donald J Trump, to rummage through every aspect of his personal finances, his businesses, and the private information of the president and his family, and to ferret about for any material that might be used to cause him political damage,” lawyers for Trump wrote in a Manhattan federal court lawsuit filed on 29 April. This lawsuit – which counts Trump’s children Ivanka, Eric and Donald Jr, as well as several of his companies, among the plaintiffs – also said Deutsche Bank and Capital One “have long provided business and personal banking services to plaintiffs”. Deutsche Bank said in an email that “we remain committed to providing appropriate information to all authorized investigations and will abide by a court order regarding such investigations”. Capital One did not respond to a request for comment. The resistance from Trump officials has been fierce. Former White House counsel Don McGahn on Tuesday flouted a subpoena to appear before Congress, as Trump blocked him from testifying on Robert Mueller’s report about Russian election meddling. On 8 May, House Democrats voted to hold the US attorney general, William Barr, in contempt for refusing to disclose an unredacted copy of Mueller’s report. Trump, meanwhile, suffered a legal defeat in his fight against oversight on Monday, when a Washington DC federal judge refused to stop one of his accounting firms from complying with a House subpoena.