The chances of a no-deal exit from the EU in October are rising – at least in the minds of Tory MPs. Indeed, the prospect provides another incentive for hardline Brexiteers to vote against Theresa May’s deal. Not that they needed one. Support is not confined to the Tory backbenches. According to reports this week, Steve Barclay, the Brexit secretary, is urging his cabinet colleagues to maintain the government’s contingency plans in case no deal happens in October. Being prepared to leave without a deal is a virility test in the Tory leadership stake. An election to choose May’s successor will happen at some point this year. The contenders know that opinion polls show three out of four Tory party members, who make the final choice, back no deal. So they nod and wink in that direction, ignoring the parliamentary arithmetic: there is no Commons majority for such an exit. Mainstream Tories fear a Dutch auction in which the contenders to succeed May make rash promises to renegotiate the withdrawal agreement to remove the Irish backstop, playing to the gallery of Eurosceptics, who have convinced themselves the UK would be in a much better place if only May had stuck to her no-deal-is-better-than-a-bad-deal mantra. Such feelings are bound to be even stronger if, as looks inevitable, Nigel Farage’s Brexit party inflicts a crushing defeat on the Tories at the European parliament elections on 23 May. Allies of Boris Johnson and Dominic Raab insist they are not instinctive no dealers, yet they are likely to go down that route when Brussels refuses to reopen the withdrawal agreement. Rivals still in the cabinet, such as Jeremy Hunt and Sajid Javid, might feel they have to talk the language of no deal to stay in the game. Yet there is a growing feeling among all parties that such talk could easily end in something few Tories want: a general election. If Prime Minister Johnson or Raab proposed leaving without an agreement, the lesson of the run-up to the 29 March scheduled leaving date is that MPs would find a way to prevent a crash-out – even if that meant voting to revoke Article 50, a move previously seen as way off limits. They would do so again in October. So a no-deal PM might have no option but to call an election to try to win a mandate for such a departure. The bottom line is: a general election is far more likely than no deal. Another option is also starting to be discussed in Toryland. The incoming PM, not wishing to be turned out of office after a few weeks, instead opts for a referendum with no deal on the ballot paper. It would have the advantage that they would still be in power if voters rejected the idea. So the odds of a second referendum are also probably rising. What about the EU? There are many competing interpretations of the contentious last meeting of the European Council, when France’s Emmanuel Macron opposed a longer extension, pitting him directly against Germany’s Angela Merkel. If by mid-October, nothing has changed – if May remains in place and parliament remains unable to coalesce around a deal – expect a very tough debate among leaders at their regular October summit. By that time, and in these circumstances, more member states will view the costs of another extension as broadly equivalent to those of no deal. Indeed, Macron’s subtle argument that the mere presence of the UK in the EU – not simply the risk of UK officials’ or politicians’ “misbehaviour” – will stymie the union’s efforts to reform and renew, is gaining ground in EU capitals. With six more months to prepare for no deal, and the exit of the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, and the European council president, Donald Tusk, who are two UK allies, the decision to grant another extension will be even more finely balanced than last time around. Ultimately, however, another extension is still more likely than no deal – especially if a new prime minister is in place and a general election or referendum look likely, or if the process to succeed May is well under way. The EU won’t want to be blamed for no deal, and its incoming new leaders will want to tread carefully as they look to “reset” UK-EU relations in phase two of the negotiations on future ties. So don’t believe the headlines or noise from cabinet or Westminster. Despite the political bluster, no deal is still the least likely of all Brexit outcomes. • Mujtaba Rahman is the managing director of Europe at Eurasia Group, a political risk research and consulting firm