When the fixtures for Anfield’s debut Magic Weekend were issued, few would have expected Leeds Rhinos v London Broncos to be the most anticipated of the six matches. Super League’s joint-bottom two meet on Sunday afternoon just before table-topping St Helens take on high-speed Castleford. Whoever loses should start seriously planning for relegation. That’s a bold statement with half of the season to go. But London know they have to overtake either Leeds or Hull KR, or hope Huddersfield, Wigan or Salford have an unlikely summer slump to the basement. Beating Leeds seems the easiest way of doing that. So far, London and Leeds have both won just four of their 15 games. The Broncos snatched a dramatic late win at Headingley and beat out-of-sorts Wigan, but their other two wins have both been over Wakefield at Ealing. Shambolic Leeds’ two most recent wins over Huddersfield and Hull KR could turn out to be crucial. But, defeat London on Merseyside and the Rhinos will look considerably less likely to drop through the trapdoor come September, enabling under-fire supremo Kevin Sinfield to at least be confident he is offering any potential new coach a Super League gig. Among the Magic debutants this weekend will be London Broncos’ in-form full-back Alex Walker, who knows how important Sunday is. “Everyone looks at the table and knows what position we’re in, but I don’t think we are looking at other team’s results yet. We have to focus on our own. We’re the only ones who can get ourselves out of this position.” London romped to an astonishing 42-12 lead over Wakefield last Saturday only to concede four late tries. That vulnerability has frustrated fans, coach Danny Ward and his players. “Our biggest challenge is playing for the full 80 minutes at the moment,” says Walker. “We look good in parts, we’re always in the game, but we switch off for 10 minutes and get punished, and that leaves us too much to do. I don’t think we’ve put in a full 80-minutes performance all year.” While Leeds are only struggling as much now as they have for three of the last four years, newly promoted London started 2019 on the crest of a wave. Still, no one gave them a chance of surviving. Instead their low-budget side has proved themselves not only entertaining to watch but capable of pushing everyone in Super League, even restricting Saints with a brave defensive effort in defeat. “We’ve earned the respect of the big teams with our performances this season,” says Walker. “I don’t think anyone’s taken us lightly. Maybe just coming down to our astro pitch might put questions in some player’s heads. We can are competitive with most teams and there have been a few games where we missed out on wins that were there for the taking.” Neither day at Anfield is expected to draw as many as last weekend’s record-breaking 31,000 crowd at Camp Nou, where Catalans beat Wigan to go third in the table. Super League boss Robert Elstone has made cautionary noises about ticket sales and optimistically hopes for 50,000 for the whole weekend. That would make it the least popular Magic ever and the decision to move it from Newcastle to Liverpool short-sighted. Yes, the hosting fee was apparently more than Newcastle paid, but low ticket sales look like wiping out that benefit. London Skolars’ New River Stadium was a surreal and uplifting place to be on Saturday afternoon. The Greek food caravan and Norway RL merchandise stall both sold out as excited visitors cried out in support of Greece and Norway in their native tongues. With their four permitted heritage players providing a fine spine, Greece romped to a 32-0 lead at half time. But Norway fought back heroically after the break, going down a respectable 56-26, as the Mayor of Haringey – of Greek origin – presented the Euro C trophy to the Greece players. It was a joyous, feel-good occasion. The cosmopolitan Norje RL XIII were happy with their achievements and will concentrate on boosting their 12-club domestic league, and victory over Russia in November should see Greece qualify for the World Cup for the first time. Watch out for the name Peter Mamouzelos: the baby-faced 18-year-old South Sydney Rabbitohs hooker was devastating, scoring four tries. So the RFL have approved Ottawa’s application to play in League One next season. Having bought Hemel Stags’ RFL license, Ottawa have fewer hurdles to jump than the new New York City franchise, who have been told to work towards a 2021 entry as they are “without the benefit of existing operations already being in place”. What existing operations will transfer from west Herts to east Canada is unclear. Ottawa RLFC have not confirmed their name or colours but will be operated by Eric Perez with the backing of Ottawa Sports and Entertainment Group, who own the CFL’s Redblacks’ soccer and hockey teams and both the stadium and arena at Lansdowne Park. We can assume they will draw rather more there than the two-figure attendances at Hemel last year when a Sheffield-based Stags team lost most weeks. Let’s just hope the Hemel club, which has provided rugby league for local folk for nearly 30 years, is reinvigorated as a community club. In between the wall-to-wall rugby league, you may have seen “Doctor Dance” on Britain’s Got Talent last weekend, teaching the audience about the benefits of dance. In our family, he is better known as Dr Peter Lovatt: my wife was blown away by one of his dance sessions when she featured him for a health magazine and he oversees my mum’s dance class for people with Parkinson’s. But the good Doc also has a rugby league connection. Apparently, seven years ago, Dr Lovatt spent the summer trying to convince Rochdale Hornets that dance could aid their spatial awareness (upon which Trent Robinson bases his world-conquering coaching philosophy). He took coach John Stankevitch and an un-named winger to see the elite ballet training and the winger picked up on how ballet could improve his balance and agility. Last weekend was rugby league nirvana, especially for those outside the M62 corridor. If you couldn’t go to Barcelona, there was always Summer Bash (there’s a misnomer for you) in Blackpool or even the Americas 9s in Toronto. Or you could stay at home and watch 11 live games on Sky! That didn’t exactly help attendances in London on Saturday afternoon. Newcastle Thunder drew more to see them beat Keighley (1,423) than were at the Broncos’ extraordinary game against Wakefield (1,205 at Ealing) while 600 saw London Skolars go top of League 1 (after Greece knocked Norway out of contention for the 2021 World Cup). Perhaps least recognised but most impressive achievement of the weekend was getting 6,000 kids to coastal Lincolnshire from all over the country to play rugby league! On yet another dismal weekend for Leeds’ first team, the club can at least be hugely proud of the annual Rhinos Challenge at Skegness Butlins. Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook