The light that pours into the twin patios of an old house near the centre of Seville reveals the familiar signature of time and neglect. Wood has rotted, plaster blown and paint bubbled. Mushrooms bloom across the ceiling. Four centuries ago, the late spring sun would have lit a very different scene, one that might have inspired the work of a little boy who would grow up to be one of the finest artists the world has known. In one of these rooms – perhaps the large, bright one that gives on to the narrow street outside – Diego Rodríguez de Silva y Velázquez was born around the beginning of June 1599. Although Velázquez spent four decades at court in Madrid as painter to King Philip IV, his origins lie in this Andalucían house, which would have been shared with a few other families and perhaps the odd chicken. The rambling dwelling, built in the mid-16th century, is among the oldest houses in the city, and has served as a home, an art gallery and even a couturier’s workshop. Today, after a decade’s abandonment, the house is about to undergo yet another transformation. A group of five local people bought the property last year and hope to turn it into a learning-centre-cum-museum to celebrate not only the life and work of Velázquez but also the golden age splendours of his native city. Inspiration for the project came not from Seville or Madrid, but from a trip to the West Midlands three years ago. Writer and journalist Enrique Bocanegra was in the UK working on a book about Kim Philby’s experiences in the Spanish civil war when he decided to head to Stratford-upon-Avon one weekend. As he came out of William Shakespeare’s house, Bocanegra recalled visiting Velázquez’s birthplace years earlier. A pang of shame was accompanied by a shiver of excitement. “I remember very clearly standing outside Shakespeare’s house and thinking: ‘This is a 16th-century house where hundreds of thousands of people come to learn about the man and his work,’” he says. “I’m from Seville, where there’s another 16th-century house, where another giant of world culture was born – and the house is deteriorating and rotting away and no one gives a toss. I was just embarrassed and saddened as a Spaniard.” But Bocanegra was also inspired. Once the book was done and he was back home, he began investigating. The house, which had been used as studio by the Andalucían designers Victorio & Lucchino, had been left empty since 2009 and had not been bought by either the city council or the regional government. “This is possibly the oldest house in Seville,” he says. “This is the house where Velázquez was born and the only surviving house in which he lived. And only the facade and the entrance way were protected. But apart from that, if you wanted to turn it into a McDonald’s or a Zara, or a tourist flat or a brothel, you could.” By the time it eventually came on the market last year, Bocanegra and his partners had borrowed and scrounged the €1.4m needed to stop it becoming a burger bar, an Airbnb or a bordello. “I’d run the numbers and I reckoned that if we had 60,000 visitors a year, that would be enough,” he says. “Then I went around people I knew in Seville with money and told them about the project. I said it wasn’t the usual business venture, but that they wouldn’t lose their money. Some ignored me; others were convinced and went on to convince other people.” The plan now is to strip away the modern partitions and begin the long and expensive task of coaxing the building back to life. Earlier this month, Bocanegra and his partners teamed up with the conservation group Hispania Nostra to launch a crowdfunding appeal to raise the €50,000 needed to repair the roof. If the money comes through, they can begin restoring the house and getting it back to how it would have looked when the young Velázquez lived there. Furniture, tiles and props will need to be sourced, craftspeople found and audiovisual guides created to build up a picture of Seville as it revelled in trade and treasure from the Americas. Bocanegra, who is aware of the quixotic nature of the endeavour, hopes to have a flexible space for workshops and exhibitions and, naturally, a gift shop. He would also like to see the house play its part in rediscovering and preserving the craft skills of the 16th and 17th centuries. So far, the new owners have had to go it alone. But the culture and heritage department of the Andalucían government is ready to help. Its forthcoming budget will include funds of almost €2m for private cultural enterprises such as the Velázquez house. “The department is also at the service of the house’s owners when it comes to exploring new avenues of collaboration for conserving the property, such as having it declared a building of cultural interest,” it said in a statement to the Observer. Bocanegra wonders whether Andalucía has been slow to embrace Velázquez’s legacy because the painter committed the cardinal sin of leaving Seville when he was 24. “In Seville, Velázquez is seen as another of the baroque geniuses, along with Bartolomé Esteban Murillo, Juan de Valdés Leal and Juan Martínez Montañes,” he says. “But, to put it simply, Velázquez is the Messi of the Spanish/Sevillian baroque dream team. He really is. Everyone knows who Velázquez is, and Las Meninas is every bit as much an icon of Spanish culture as Don Quixote or Guernica.” The English writer Amy Sackville – whose last novel, Painter to the King, explored Velázquez’s life and era – has contributed to the crowdfunding effort and hopes the venture will serve to tether the paintings to the artist and his origins. “I like the idea that it’s going to be a space for education and a space that people can move through and not just a sort of shrine – something that continues to live and be used,” she says. Almost 400 years after Velázquez’s death, she adds, his paintings still fascinate – and puzzle. “Velázquez’s work – and a lot of the artistic and literary production of the time – is very interested in the difference between artifice and reality and the idea of illusion and surface. “I think part of the reason that his work still compels us is that it is representational but also enigmatic, and it asks questions of us as we’re looking at it. It asks us to think where we stand in relation to it across time and across space.” Bocanegra has been roaming the house for months and still remains beguiled by the building and its most famous inhabitant. Every now and then he looks up from his makeshift desk on the patio to watch the light drift along the walls and corridors. He also wonders whether it was through one of these windows that the painter-to-be glimpsed an elderly neighbour frying eggs, or whether perhaps the Waterseller of Seville drew his stock from the ancient cistern beneath the floor. “The light in here changes almost by the minute and I can see Velázquez here as a young boy, playing in this patio,” he says. “I can see him here very clearly, watching the light as it changes and shifts the shape of things and the distances between them. “He came out of his mother’s womb a genius, but maybe it was here that he watched the light and began his training.”