From the top four to the trap door. One year after making the play-offs for the first time, Newcastle were relegated to the Championship. Their latest defeat on an afternoon when they needed five points to take the relegation scrap into the final round summed up a campaign which for once started with expectation rather than hope only to slowly dissolve into despair. Newcastle were trailing 21-19 with 19 minutes to go and mounting another attack. After being outplayed in the opening half, when their two tries came against the run of play, they pinned back Gloucester and, after being held over or near the line three times, scored their third try from a driving maul. One more try would give them the lead and the bonus point they needed to leave Leicester to do more than just turn up for their final match at home to Bath later this month. The No 8 Nemani Nagusa received the ball near Gloucester’s 10-metre line going right. Newcastle’s most forceful runner looked as if he would test the resolve of the defenders in front of him with no sign of an overlap but as he gathered pace something told him to fire out a pass. It had weight but not direction and went straight to the Gloucester wing Matt Banahan who had held his line rather than go for an intercept. He did not need to move as Nagusa’s pass was forward by a few metres. With Newcastle on the attack, there was no covering defence. Once Banahan had seen off Nagusa, he had a straight run to the line. There was still time for the Falcons, who had trailed 21-12 at half-time, to make one final push but the try finally dowsed the spirit that had kept them in touch in the first half when Gloucester had 85 per cent of the territory. Newcastle had won their two previous Premiership matches here but the size of their task, somewhere in between a miracle and the impossible, left them clinging to the wreckage of a campaign that started slowly and rarely generated momentum. Gloucester needed a point to secure third place: it was hardly the most motivating of factors and they were frustratingly casual at times, scoring tries after slick moves and blowing others through basic errors. The Falcons at times matched Gloucester’s creativity. The opening try of the game, which saw Toby Flood slip a short ball to Alex Dunbar on Newcastle’s 10-metre line and initiate a six-pass move that finished with the scrum-half Michael Young scoring under the posts, was one of its highlights, but the Falcons were too often fragmented, lacking the cohesion and solidity of their hosts. Their second and third tries, scored by Sinoti Sinoti and George McGuigan, came after driving mauls, but too many of the seven clean breaks they made came to nothing. They had two players sent to the sin-bin in the first half, the captain Flood and Calum Green punished for slowing down release of the ball at the breakdown in a match in which the defending team won precious few penalties. Newcastle’s plight demanded that they contest breakdowns, but fate gave them the Premiership referee with probably the lowest tolerance threshold when it comes to competing for the ball. Gloucester used Flood’s time in the sin-bin to sculpt their first two tries. They both came from scrums, Danny Cipriani first holding the defence to create space for Jason Woodward and then himself. When Charlie Sharples scored just before the interval, Newcastle were being overrun. The Falcons dominated the third quarter but five clear chances resulted in just one try. The will and desire were there but their strengths were outweighed by their flaws. Immediately after the final whistle, Newcastle issued a statement that stressed their intention to return to the Premiership at the first attempt and that Dean Richards would continue as director of rugby. International players such as the England flanker Mark Wilson and Scottish back-rower Gary Graham are likely to remain in the Premiership on a season’s loan. “I will be there,” said Richards. “We will be giving it our all to come back up. This match summed up our season. The boys put their heart and soul into it but lacked that little bit of accuracy which cost us two or three tries. The players went into a huddle on the pitch at the end of the match and then sat in the changing room. There was no need to say anything.”