Not since the heyday of David Ginola has there been as much Gallic interest in Newcastle and the trek to watch the Challenge Cup final was definitely worth it for the travelling yellow army of Clermont Auvergne supporters. For the first time in 12 years their team have secured a European trophy, 18 points from the boot of Scotland’s Greig Laidlaw helping to reward a forceful team effort. It was a slightly more bittersweet evening for the Clermont captain, Morgan Parra, who was helped off inside the first quarter with a knee injury which may yet interfere with his World Cup prospects. On this occasion it had only a limited effect, Laidlaw taking over the goal-kicking duties to steer his adopted club to a raucously celebrated success, their first since they beat Bath in 2007. The Michelin men have also now equalled Harlequins’ record of three Challenge Cup titles. A huge party is virtually guaranteed when the Massif Central and the Bigg Market collide and even before the game the atmosphere in the Toon was infectious. The Frog on the Tyne would make a great pub – there was apparently once a band of that name – but all the local hostelries will remember this bumper weekend with a smile. The actual game was as madcap as widely anticipated, a Barbarians-style cavalcade of ambitious offloads and daring thrusts interspersed in equal measure with errors and colossal hits. When the dust finally settled on the opening half Clermont found themselves 13-6 ahead but the margin should have been wider. The lively Damian Penaud was an inch short of completing a striking early score but the French Test winger made amends after half an hour, taking Isaia Toeava’s pass to storm over for the only try of the half. With players from nine different countries on the team sheet, the question at the interval was simple enough: which of the two teams could compose themselves sufficiently to finish even half of what they started. In the shape of their full-back Vincent Rattez La Rochelle have a mazy runner capable of illuminating any stadium but the gargantuan Clermont pack were proving a serious handful. It was another reminder of the rich talent in French rugby if anyone ever gets around to harnessing it. Equally it will require all Shaun Edwards’s powers of persuasion – assuming he is confirmed as the national team’s next defence coach – to instil a modicum of collective discipline. Second-half tries from Fritz Lee and the brilliant Wesley Fofana settled things, much to the relief of Clermont’s experienced former Leicester hooker Benjamin Kayser who has a European winner’s medal at the sixth attempt. Clermont will be back in the main Champions Cup tournament next season and every true rugby fan will applaud their return.