As we approached No Fifty Cheyne, in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea, of a Saturday evening, the streets felt quaintly pretty and soothingly silent. This is SW3. No Fifty Cheyne is a neighbourhood restaurant that, relatively speaking, almost nobody needs to frequent over a weekend. If you can afford to have this aesthetically splendid renovation as your local, there’s a strong chance you have other homes to flee to come Friday. No Fifty Cheyne sits close to the Thames, bathed in the iridescent twinkle of Albert Bridge, and blue plaques on nearby walls speak of rose bushes planted by Elizabeth I. Sally Greene, theatre impresario and owner of Ronnie Scott’s, has taken her former Cheyne Walk Brasserie and transformed it into an elegant, grown-up safe space from life’s beastliness. Downstairs is a 70-seat restaurant serving the likes of snail and black pudding vol-au-vent, chicken liver terrine, a 14oz chateaubriand to share, and native lobster. Upstairs is a claret-coloured, womb-like, windowless cocktail snug and, to the right of this, the sort of panelled, bejewelled, sofa-strewn lounge in which one could imagine Marquise Isabelle from Dangerous Liaisons wearing an enormous bonnet and plotting mischief. Obviously, this could all be quite horrific: stiff, sterile and squandersome. Instead, it is the perfect storm of very posh yet also pub-like. The roots of this lie with chef Iain Smith, formerly head chef of Jason Atherton joints Social Eating House and the now-defunct Sosharu. Should No Fifty Cheyne offer a rigid tasting menu, complete with the requisite “emulsions” and “fragments”, the chilly ambience derived from such faffery may have ruined the place, but instead there are grilled lamb chops, beef-dripping chips and pear crumble with custard for pudding. Prices veer from “posh gastropub” to “Jesus Christ, how much?”; from a Herdwick lamb rump main at £29 to lobster at £45 – but then, if you find yourself stuck in Chelsea at the weekend, rather than in your Cotswolds mansion, perhaps a little bisque will be some solace. Overall, the place is, to use the technical term, “a good laugh” and definitely romantic. The staff, led by Benoit Auneau, were jolly, prompt and unobtrusive, the customers largely married couples, some of whom looked as if they had weathered at least a silver anniversary yet still liked a stroll together on a warm spring evening. We ordered three starters, all of them quite brilliant. A satisfying bowl of smoked Scottish salmon arrived on a soft, warm salad of new potato and muscat grape melded together with a pond-green, herby cream. That was followed by dark, squid-ink rice armed with grilled langoustine and scallop, and titivated with an archly bouji champagne sauce that Charles decreed the best thing he’d eaten this year. The vegan option was a wildly ornate salad of shaved beetroot, pickled apple and pear, leaves and refined cashew nut cream. It was a touch sweet; nevertheless, a strong foray into the tricky world of dairy-free fine dining. For vegetarians, there was a slow-cooked hen’s egg with asparagus, morels and wild garlic. Portions erred on the side of healthy, rather than stingy, which is perhaps why the mood was so buoyant. People were simply being fed. Mains continued in a largely faultless manner. A comforting plate of cob chicken – breast and a neat croquette – came with an earthy wild mushroom stew and parsley liquor. A vegan main of braised hispi cabbage with broccolini and young leek doused in a herb-and-tomato olive-oil sauce was a bold, rural romp that I enjoyed, but that went unappreciated by Charles, who was distracted by his aged beef fillet and cheek topped with a generous amount of smoked bone marrow and creamed spinach, which was dictionary-definition largesse. Chelsea dinners of this genre do possibly explain the snugness of some men’s Speedos as they pooter around the Tyrrhenian Sea in their super-yachts come June. And I doubt their waistlines will be helped much by the arrival of No Fifty Cheyne’s pastry chef, Chiara Dello Buono. We loved her perfectly executed poached rhubarb with crisp, caramelised puff pastry, a sublime rhubarb sorbet and rippled chantilly cream. There was little real need for the pretty, perfectly melting hot chocolate fondant in a decadent goo of salted caramel sauce, but we struggled on in the name of research. No Fifty Cheyne’s broad-based menu is for the many, but affordable only by the few. We left and walked down deserted Chelsea streets filled with dark, unoccupied houses. The few had other options. • No Fifty Cheyne 50 Cheyne Walk, London SW3, 020-7376 8787. Open all week, noon-11.30pm (upstairs 5.30pm-midnight Mon-Fri, Sat & Sun noon-midnight). From about £50-plus a head for three courses (set lunch, £28.50 for two courses, £35 for three), plus drinks and service. Food 9/10 Atmosphere 8/10 Service 9/10