In late February Jack Steven stood up in front of his St Kilda teammates and told them he was taking time away from the club to deal with mental health issues. Saints football manager Simon Lethlean told reporters: “Jack’s decision to put his hand up and acknowledge that he needs some time away is a brave one.” Steven’s admission followed a string of prominent AFL players who also suffer from mental health issues: North Melbourne’s Majak Daw fell 25 metres from the Bolte Bridge in December last year; former Essendon forward Josh Green was diagnosed with severe anxiety stemming from the pressures to perform, ongoing trolling and losing self-confidence after being labelled “fat” and “slow”; and just last week, former Hawk Xavier Ellis opened up about feeling low about his constant injury woes. There was also Jesse Hogan’s much publicised drinking incident and clinical anxiety diagnosis; Collingwood’s Alex Fasolo wrote a column titled “Death was an escape fantasy”; Dayne Beams came forward to express that he had a “full emotional breakdown including suicidal thoughts” after the loss of his father; and Lance Franklin made a personal decision to miss the 2015 qualifying final against the Dockers for an “ongoing mental health condition”. The torrent of discussion around these cases and the issues underlying them has prompted the AFL to create a new role: a head of mental health who will oversee the league’s strategy, set to commence in the coming months. According to the AFL, 24% of young Australians suffer from anxiety, substance use disorders or other mental illness, whilst 45% of Australian adults will experience a mental illness at some stage in their lives. That’s as many as an estimated 20 people at one football club – players, coaches, staff, executives – who could be suffering. AFL players, coaches and club staff are more prone to mental health issues because of the nature of a job that invites public and media scrutiny, performance pressures and extracurricular problems. The AFL declined to comment on the record to Guardian Australia, and did not clarify what type of person they are looking for or if the role will have any coercive powers, but an AFL spokesperson did confirm the league will be providing resources not just for players, but also umpires, coaches and club staff. Commentator and former St Kilda great Danny Frawley says that while the new AFL role is a great start, he believes clubs need to be more honest if they do need more support, and that it should be a common goal for all clubs to join together on best practice about wellness and mental healthcare. “Back in the 80s it was survival of the fittest,” Frawley says. “If someone had an issue, whether it was stress or whatever, it was basically ‘get over it, and get on with it’. That’s just the way it was. Clubs are a hell of a lot better equipped now. They ask more questions about players. But now football is full-time, it’s the main source of income [for players] and it’s their livelihood. There are a lot more pressures.” Frawley admits it took him four years to open up about his hidden battle with depression and says it’s up to the individual if they want to work on things in private or make things public to raise awareness. He now hosts SEN’s No Man Should Walk Alone, a show that tackles men’s health, including addiction. “The pressure that these guys are under, mentally, is far greater than any other time in AFL/VFL footy,” he says. “The competition needs to be aware that this landscape is a beast moving very, very quickly and you’ve got to keep ahead of it.” Players aren’t alone when it comes to dealing with pressures of the game. Last week, former Geelong coach Malcolm Blight recalled how booing affected him, forcing him to leave the game. Mark Brayshaw has been at the helm of the AFL Coaches Association as chief executive officer for the past four years and says the dialogue around mental health has increased for coaches. “There’s no doubt it has steadily increased and 10 years ago I don’t believe it was regarded in the same way as it is now,” he says. “The AFL is on the verge of employing a mental health expert and nobody considered doing that 10 years ago. Talking to the coaches, it has become an increasing concern of theirs.” The players are a product of the AFL and the brand is only as good as its product. You need to take care of all needs Four times per year, the AFL Coaches Association sends out a wellness survey to roughly 180 coaches, inviting them to complete an anonymous, online assessment. The answers are analysed by a psychologist from La Trobe University who acts on any alarming responses with a follow up. Brayshaw believes the association’s wellness testing is the only professional sports league to conduct this kind of regular analysis. More than 80% of coaches take part and their willingness to be honest has revealed a number of key findings: how coaches can suffer from exhaustion by August, how the wellbeing of their players keeps them up at night, and how a gruelling schedule with travel burdens can cause anxiety. These health matters accentuate how critical it is to seek treatment and observe the toll that can manifest throughout the heavily-scrutinised football season. The AFL’s awareness of mental health issues dives into a larger movement in sport and beyond. Many universities, such as Melbourne University, are buying into mental health programs for elite sports and are offering academic tutorials on resources, training and access to greater care and awareness. The AIS has launched a nationwide mental health program for young athletes. A 2015 study showed that 46.4% of Australian athletes experienced mental health disorder at the very least, whether it was eating, distress, anxiety or panic disorder, and that what they experienced echoed the same symptoms observed in the broader community. Some of Australia’s elite athletes have talked openly about their personal mental health battles: rising Australian cricketer Will Pucovski and tennis star Nick Kyrgios, who is prioritising his life around mental health. Olympian race-walker Dane Bird-Smith has publicly spoken about his dealings with mental health issues and former Sydney FC player Stuart Musialik has been vocal about his mental struggles during his football career. The fact that mental illness can strike all Australians means it can be seen as common, but athletes need to be aware they are at a greater risk because of their unique work setting. Giving clubs further resources is part of the AFL’s shifting mindset towards wellbeing for players and coaches. Sport psychologist Tracey Veivers, who has spent 15 years working inside football clubs including the Brisbane Lions, says that given the demands of the modern day footballer, each club should have a full-time, fully qualified sports psychologist working with all staff members. “Every club will be different as to how they accept or embrace sports psychologists based on who else they have in other roles, like counsellors, pastors, welfare managers – that all have their place,” she says. “The players are a product of the AFL and the brand is only as good as its product. You kind of need to take care of all the needs. Could it be better? Always.” Veivers has worked across all the football codes and suggests the AFL is by far leading the way, with cricket in parts doing some things better. As part of her role, she has sat in on coaches’ meetings and managed what information she passes on to them while making sure players details remain confidential – something she says was a learning curve. Veivers also counselled players on issues like gambling, alcohol, illicit drugs, relationship issues, legal and body dysmorphia. Since the rise of social media, she also cautions of platforms such as Twitter, that can feed vulnerability and intensify the struggles of players and coaches. “You’re in an environment where you are constantly measured. And the pressure is on from pre-season, to round one, right through to finals. And then everyone is exhausted,” she says. “Whether they see it as a sign of weakness [mental health issues], it’s a smaller percentage now. I think it’s more a case of it’s harder to accept and acceptance is a big part of the process. And that can be very hard to process.” • Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14;Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636