Mike Grech says he may not be able to face attending a Doncaster sales ring today to witness the dispersal of the string of jumps horses he built up with his friend and co-owner, Stuart Parkin. “It’s going to be incredibly sad,” Grech said as he reflected on the sale of 28 horses, including classy types like Claimantakinforgan, River Wylde and Mr Whipped, all to be offered without reserve. Asked if he would be present, Grech said: “I’m not too sure. I’m a very emotional guy, I’m not an actor. If I want to show tears, I’ll show tears and I don’t know whether it’s appropriate tomorrow. I might watch it on the live-stream online. “Up until maybe four weeks ago, I was going to attend and, if they didn’t meet what I thought was their value, then I would step straight back in again. I’ve decided not to do that, kind of remove myself completely away from racehorses that Stuart and I owned. When I get involved again, it will be a complete fresh start.” In the meantime, he will raise money for Macmillan Cancer Support by riding in a charity race at York next month. When the news broke that the pair were to sell up, the explanation was that Parkin’s interest had waned. But Grech concedes his own enthusiasm also faltered due to a lack of return on their investment. “My point came a little bit later, probably at Cheltenham, when the weather went against us. There were horses needing good ground. Then I started to feel completely subdued. “Last year, we expected to bag one or two decent prizes and it didn’t come about,” he adds. The pair had more than their share of bad luck with injured horses. “It’s nobody’s fault,” he adds. “I think we went too big, too quick. We started buying store horses and two-year-olds and three-year-olds, trying to remove ourselves from the point to point market. Then we had a foaling operation as well. We should have gone a little bit quieter and kept it more realistic. When you have the amount of horses we have, it creates an awful lot of pressure.” Last season, they had 19 horses in training at an annual cost of £25,000 to £27,500 each. “The cost of buying and keeping a racehorse is going up but the prize money is going down and if that isn’t addressed quickly, will the big owners be around for long? I don’t know. It’s worrying times. However, when you do get the up side, it’s an incredible feeling.” Of the animals to be sold today, Grech adds: “I will follow their careers and I wish the new owners all the success and good luck in the world. I know there’s going to be serious owners wanting to bid for them.” Lingfield has got my attention, not least because of Seaborn (1.40) in the first. He came back from a long break, a wind operation and a change of stable to score at Brighton three weeks ago and was convincing enough to make me fancy him at 3-1 to do it again. That was only an apprentice race but this isn’t a great deal tougher and his limited form on the Flat suggests he has more to give. The promising William Carver keeps the ride. Princess Keira (4.35) was improving at the end of last year and, sharper for her reappearance third, she can be winning again in the fillies handicap. Franny Norton, who won on her at Yarmouth in September, returns to the saddle. I’m afraid the price has gone about Harrogate (5.10), who opened at 33-1 but is now all the way down to 6s. Jim Boyle’s four-year-old is 7lb below the peak rating he had for another yard last year. He has been ridden this year by a 7lb claimer who is still learning her craft but Charlie Bennett takes over here. In Chepstow’s opener, the 11-4 is big about Anif (1.50), who would be favourite in my book. He’s three from five since joining David Evans and is still below the rating he had last May. His recent wins have been on the all-weather but I think he’ll be as effective on fast turf. It’s an enjoyable card at Sandown but a betting edge is hard to find. I have found Regal Reality unconvincing since his Goodwood win last summer, so the progressive Matterhorn (7.35) appeals more in the Brigadier Gerard, though 7-4 is about what he deserves to be. Lingfield 1.40 Seaborn (nap) 2.15 Lawn Ranger 2.50 Le Musee 3.25 Scofflaw 4.00 Mutaraffa 4.35 Princess Keira (nb) 5.10 HarrogateChepstow 1.50 Anif 2.25 Brother Bentley 3.00 Bacchalot 3.35 Nubough 4.10 The Lords Walk 4.45 Brasca 5.20 Winged SpurGoodwood 2.00 Clan Royale 2.35 Game Player 3.10 Hyanna 3.45 Al Mureib 4.20 Grace And Danger 4.55 Hawafez 5.30 Born To FinishChelmsford 5.50 Kyllukey 6.20 Amor Fati 6.55 Muraad 7.25 Global Art 7.55 Star Of Bengal 8.30 Muraaqeb 9.00 Atlanta QueenSandown 6.00 Matewan 6.35 Full Authority 7.05 Dee Ex Bee 7.35 Matterhorn 8.10 King Of Comedy 8.40 History Writer