Andy Hornby may have held senior positions at some of the UK’s biggest companies but his name will forever be synonymous with the banking crisis. He was at the helm of HBOS in 2008 when it became one of the most high-profile victims of the crash. The bank had to be rescued by Lloyds as it faced total collapse, during a period so fraught with dangers that the deal had to be brokered by the then prime minister Gordon Brown. Saddled with HBOS’ toxic loan book, Lloyds then required a £20bn bailout and Hornby left the bank in 2008 with his reputation as the whizzkid of British business in tatters. Within months he was hauled in alongside his Royal Bank of Scotland counterpart Fred Goodwin – the pantomime villain of the banking crisis – to face the brickbats of one of the most bruising select committee hearings in living memory. As MPs lined up to lambast Hornby and Goodwin, the pair apologised for their role in a crisis with profound economic consequences. Hornby was considered the most contrite of the fallen bank chiefs but under the glare of the spotlight he elicited apoplexy among MPs by refusing to acknowledge any blame for the crisis. “I don’t feel I am particularly personally culpable,” he said. It should have come as no surprise if Hornby struggled to come to terms with public failure. His star as a City executive had risen very far, very fast. Educated at Oxford and Harvard, he cut his teeth at Asda under the legendary chief executive Archie Norman, where he was viewed as the most prodigious of talents. In 1999, at the age of only 32, his reputation for business acumen was already so stellar he was snapped up to run the high street business of the Halifax. He masterminded a successful rebrand of the business, including the deployment of breakout star Howard, the singing bank clerk. In 2006, aged 39, he was made chief executive of HBOS, formed via a merger with Bank of Scotland five years earlier. However, under his stewardship, HBOS overreached. Like Northern Rock, HBOS had expanded aggressively in the run-up to the credit crunch, leaving it burdened with bad debts and struggling to borrow from the financial markets. While Hornby’s face was plastered all over the media as one of the architects of the banking crisis, he never suffered quite the same ignominy as Goodwin and his rehabilitation was swift. Within a few months of his select committee appearance, the high street pharmaceuticals chain Alliance Boots appointed him as chief executive on a basic pay packet worth about £800,000 a year. Including his bonus and a golden hello, he picked up £2.1m in his first year in charge. For all of the riches on offer, Hornby initially struggled to unburden himself of the albatross around his neck left over from the banking crisis. Amid multiple regulatory investigations and lasting public opprobrium, he stepped down only two years into the job, saying he needed time to recover from the stress of an “intense five years”. Alliance Boots paid him £450,000 not to join a rival. In the event, he recuperated quite quickly. Less than three months later he became chief executive of the betting shop chain Coral, then part of Gala Coral. As a result of a merger with Ladbrokes, then a takeover by the online betting giant GVC, Hornby ended up as joint CEO of Britain’s biggest betting company, at a time when the industry has been under pressure over its commitment to tackling problem gambling. His appointment to run The Restaurant Group, with a pay package of up to £3.9m in his first year, is yet more evidence of his remarkable ability to bounce back. The 52-year-old’s new role at the group that owns the Wagamama and Frankie & Benny’s brands is his first chief executive role at a UK-listed company in more than a decade. Hornby has acknowledged he is taking the reins at a time when restaurant chains are under considerable financial pressure, with multiple rivals such as Carluccio’s, Prezzo and Jamie’s Italian having been forced into chastening financial restructuring plans to stay afloat. However, having been through the wind tunnel of the banking crash and emerged from its epicentre relatively unscathed, Hornby seems unlikely to be fazed by what lies ahead.