Kepa Arrizabalaga Jittery at first and risked spreading his nerves to his defenders with some flimsy early punches. But made a fine late save to thwart Lacazette. 6/10 César Azpilicueta Regularly drawn infield from the right in the first half but justified his presence there with timely interventions such as a headed clearance in front of his goal in the 28th minute. 6 David Luiz Untrue to his reputation, he was a tranquil force at the back, snuffing out trouble with quiet efficiency. 7 Andreas Christensen Looked a little uncertain at first but gained composure as the the match progressed and twice made brave clearances to frustrate Aubameyang. 6 Emerson A little dozy in defence but dangerous going forward. Tested Cech with a decent shot in the first half before creating the opening goal with a cross for Giroud. 6 N’Golo Kanté Not his usual dynamic self and struggled to get involved at first, but grew in influence as the game went on. Jorginho Barely noticeable at first because Arsenal had control in midfield, and discreetly dangerous when he started knitting his team’s moves together. 6 Mateo Kovacic Started sluggishly but soon improved, taking charge in midfield and making frequent bursts. 6 Pedro Always busy and full of wriggly runs. Found a bit of space and finished very well to make it 2-0. 7 Olivier Giroud Scruffy in the first half but smartened up big style in the second, opening the scoring with a fine diving header, then won a penalty and created the fourth goal. 8 Eden Hazard Uncharacteristically quiet in the first half despite one gorgeous flick to Emerson; then set up the second goal and scored the last two himself. 7 Subs: Willian (for Pedro) 71min; Ross Barkley (for Mateo Kovacic) 75min; Davide Zappacosta (for Eden Hazard) 89min. Petr Cech A sad way to end his playing career from a model professional in his last game. If not for his saves, Arsenal’s defeat would have been more embarrassing. 7 Sokratis Papastathopoulos Arsenal’s best centre-back thanks to his astute positioning until he, like the others, was overrun in the second half. 5 Laurent Koscielny Battled valiantly but helpless when Chelsea’s attackers were allowed to run freely at him, and was caught out by Olivier Giroud for first goal. 4 Nacho Monreal Comfortable in the first period but seriously flustered when Chelsea got going. 4 Ainsley Maitland-Niles His concession of the penalty just after the hour epitomised Arsenal’s decline, as he had been one of their best players in the first half, solid and full of enterprise. 5 Lucas Torreira Commendably busy in the first half but bypassed as Chelsea improved. Replaced after the hour by Alex Iwobi, who scored a superb goal. 3 Granit Xhaka Passed progressively in the first half and skimmed the bar with a terrific long-range shot. But then he faded. 4 Sead Kolasinac Got plenty of space down the left in the first half but did not use it well, and unable to stem Chelsea’s flow in the second. 4 Mesut Özil Flitted around with cerebral intent but failed to deliver anything meaningful before being withdrawn. 3 Alexandre Lacazette Looked sharp and strong from the start, holding the ball up well and linking cleverly. But failed to make the most of a couple of good scoring chances. 6 Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang A major disappointment from a man who loves the spotlight, failing to make an impact from the moment he skewed a shot wide in the eighth minute. 3 Subs: Mattieu Guendouzi (for Nacho Monreal) 66min; Alex Iwobi (for Lucas Torreira) 67min; Joe Willock (for Mesut Özil) 77min.