Way back in 1986, I went to the launch in Oxford Town Hall of my friend Martin Stott’s book Spilling the Beans – subtitled “A style guide to the new age” – where he coined the phrase “the Muesli Belt”. He meant the places where ex-hippies and other inner-directed types were downshifting to. A few years later, in 1989, the Green party leapt to third place in the European elections with 15% of the vote, its best ever national election result. It was a first-past-the-post-election (the party got no seats) and, if you looked closely at the results, the Greens came second or beat the Lib Dems in nearly every constituency in the great circle around the outer Home Counties, from Dorset to Norfolk. There was the muesli belt. Dorset and Norfolk were the fastest growing counties in the UK at the time. And these days, everyone eats muesli. I thought about that on Sunday night as the results came in, aware that the Greens had not matched that result from 30 years ago, despite their huge achievement this time, with MEPs elected in the Midlands and the north. Nor, despite their great leap forward, have the Lib Dems yet reached the giddy heights of their general election vote share in 1983, 2005 or 2010. What was unprecedented this time has been the collapse of the vote for the Conservative and Labour parties. There will inevitably be suggestions that they can’t recover. So, while 20% of the vote does not make the Lib Dems a potential government, it would do if they could join with the Greens and Change UK. So, although the Greens and Lib Dems will be thrilled after their showing in these elections, they should not be too thrilled. What will it gain them, after all, if their relative success lets in a monster? This is not necessarily a description of the Brexit party, which is too amorphous to pin down and is, in any case, a personality vehicle. There are more important issues than Brexit. Especially now that we all face the unpleasant struggle between Boris Johnson (Doris as Kenneth Clarke calls him) and Nigel Farage for the soul of UK conservatism (incompetence versus malevolence perhaps). This is likely to be a horribly backward-looking battle which entirely misses the point. It is absolutely vital the planet should win, and I for one would be happy in that cause to sacrifice the Brexit argument lock, stock and barrel. Nothing matters compared to the issue of human survival. That means beating Farage fairly and squarely on his own terms. Not by revelations about where his funding is coming from. Not by clever scepticism about the intelligence of his voters – which we will need to be our voters. It means we have to construct a vehicle on the radical centre capable of beating him, which will need to be as unifying as the 2012 Olympics, celebratory and fun. It will need a very simple message – human survival and a better life. So it may be that the next electoral battle is going to be between the Brexit party and a loose alliance of groups from the radical centre, from the Lib Dems to the Greens. Given that both Rory Stewart and Chuka Umunna have used the phrase “radical centre” in the past week, this now appears to be the direction of travel (and I have to declare an interest as policy director of the radical centre thinktank Radix). The tough question for this emerging group is how to break out of the Brexit boxes. The radical centre can appeal to leavers because Brexit is a minor issue compared to the survival of humanity from the climate crisis – and Farage is a climate crisis sceptic. We can hardly expect the Lib Dems to row back from their Bollocks to Brexit position at this stage. Yet somehow they have to develop language that stops belittling, and then includes, those who voted to leave the EU. That is a difficult task and a difficult paradox, but it is no more Herculean than the job confronting Jeremy Corbyn and the next leader of the Conservative party trying to unite the un-uniteable. • David Boyle is policy director of radical centre thinktank Radix