Forty-five years ago, Abba won the 19th Eurovision Song Contest for Sweden with their song Waterloo. Held in Brighton’s Dome, their success launched the quartet to international fame and in 2005, the tune was chosen as the best song in the competition’s history. The first contest was held on 24 May 1956 in Lugano, Switzerland, one of the earliest attempts to broadcast a live televised event to an international market. For a couple of decades the Guardian only occasionally reviewed the show and there was barely a mention of Abba’s victory (although Clive James wrote about it for the Observer). Recent years have seen more comprehensive coverage with the contest being viewed as a metaphor for tensions in European relationships and comparing it with international football matches. Christine Eade6 April 1968 Judging by their songs, the European singers who are in London for today’s Eurovision Song Contest are a gloomy lot. “Summer is over. Nothing else matters to me,” sang Carlos Mendes, of Portugal, in his spruce blue turtle-neck, at yesterday’s camera rehearsal in the Albert Hall. “Weeks are over, Days have no end, And I am waiting for you to return,” sang a diminutive blonde, Claude Lombarde, from Belgium. “We live life on small islands, You do not even know who lives next to you,” sang Karel Gott, of Austria, the man the publicists call the Sinatra of the East. Even the Luxembourg couple who sang “We shall live on love,” didn’t seem very happy about it. And our own Cliff Richard, bobbing about the stage, singing “Congratulations and celebrations.” was the positive extrovert of the party. For those songs which evoke wet pavements and belted raincoats had set the tone for rehearsals at the Albert Hall. It was no longer the home of gregarious Anglo-Saxon entertainment, of wrestling and the proms. The Europeans had taken over, including 250 foreign journalists, and an entourage – sometimes numbering a dozen – of managers and television and record people for each of the 17 singers. The contest will be televised live by the BBC and watched by an estimated 150 million people in 23 countries in Europe and North Africa. The producer, Mr Stewart Morris, gave each singer a 20-minute rehearsal, interlacing his instructions with “ca va” and “encore.” But even the European influence could not exorcise the ever-present echo in the Albert Hall. The orchestra of 40 players had to be spaced widely apart, and were given 24 instead of the usual 12 microphones between them. “We have got to get that sound before the Albert Hall gets it,” a BBC spokesman said. With Eurovision uniting continents in song for the 39th time, a dewy-eyed John Peel will be one of the 600 million people expected to join in30 April 1994 It was a report in the Guardian of March 14 that brought me back to the true path. I confess to having strayed and last year, for the first time in two decades, paid little heed to the Eurovision Song Contest. I watched the judging, as we all do, but had hardened my heart against the songs and their singers. But on March 14, Wendy Sloane reported from Moscow that Judith (or Youddiph), singing Vechni Strannik, had triumphed in the local heats for a place in the intermittent light rain in Dublin, beating Oleg Nesterov, a Rastafarian whose reggae entry was “deconstructivist in the last stage of post modernism”, into second place. As I read, I was filled with a great yearning to hear Vechni Strannik. My enthusiasm for the song contest is not dissimilar to my enthusiasm for football. Give me sizzling goal-mouth action and give me songs, songs, songs. Then let me watch the results coming in and, with Eurovision at least, share the televised backstage joy and despair of the combatants as they watch the points going up on the score-board. (I know this is all a trifle tabloid, but in the song contest there are no emotions between joy and despair, there is no worldweary resignation, nor quiet sense of satisfaction in a job well done.) Now and then I receive small magazines through the post devoted to Eurovision from zealots who know of my love for the event. These presume a high level of scholarship in their readers. Not for them the easy questions we part-time supporters pose at contest time. Ask them how often Great Britain has placed second and these fundamentalists would be withering in their disdain. They know, and would expect you to know, which country has competed longest without a win. They would know the date and place when and where Julio Iglesias forgot the words to his own song, the haunting Gwendolyne. Ask the Eurovision fanatic which, of all the songs sung in competition since 1956, when it all began, has contained the greatest number of “la’s” and I doubt you will get a reply. There might be a brief flicker of interest were you to ask in which year the BBC-TV commentary was supplied by Rolf Harris, but it is unlikely. My love for Eurovision has been a reckless, feckless thing. We have met once a year in a warm, secret place and after three or four hours of madness, have fallen back sated before parting shyly with never a backward glance. In recent years though, my ardour has been cooling. If this was a television script, the instruction “Fade in September Song” would appear here. But that report from Moscow has rekindled the fires. Oh, I know that our entrant, Frances Ruffelle – make that “the girl who carries the hopes of every Briton” – has been described as “a wild haired punk” some 17 years after punk, and has promised us some “daredevil sparkle”, but it is brave Judith (or Youddiph) I want to hear, along with the entries from Estonia, Romania, Slovakia, Hungary, and Poland, all competing for the first time. The bookmakers have made bold Silvi Vrait, Dan Bittman, Martin Durinda and Tublatanka, Bayer Friderika, and Edyta Gorniak rank outsiders, but my heart will beat faster when they take to the Dublin stage. If, say, Estonia wins, I will start, almost before the applause has died down and the tears have dried on the cheeks of Silvi herself (or himself, I’m bluffing my way here a bit), I will start hustling for someone, perhaps the Guardian, to send me to Tallinn next year. I have been to two Eurovision finals already, having celebrated one of his two wins with Johnny Logan in Brussels, and having run my fingers longingly down the gleaming flank of the scoreboard in Lausanne. On the latter outing, I noticed that, although the song contest is plainly unriggable, the quality of pre-match party does seem to have a bearing on the result. The British party, a half-hearted affair in the function room of a dull hotel, at which celebrants were offered warmish white wine and a choice between crisps and peanuts, resulted in a placing firmly amongst the also-rans. The Yugoslavian party, on the other hand, must have used up a substantial portion of the country’s resources for the year. Cakes, pies and sweetmeats were piled halfway to the ceiling, and dozens of creatures great and small had died only to be trampled into the carpeting by drunken revellers. All the fruits and spices of Old Barbary (believed to be considering entering in 1995) were there and Yugoslavia, as we all know, won. Before I go – 14; Finland; 1970 in Ireland; Spain’s La, La, La with 138; 1967. 9 May 1998 Ding-a-Dong. Boom Bang-A-Bang. Not to mention Diggi-Loo, Diggi-Ley. It’s that time of year again, when the peoples of Europe come together to express the most profound romantic sentiments with all the poetic finesse of which this sophisticated continent is capable. Forget Goethe and Shakespeare, Yeats and Baudelaire, and recall, with a fond tear, Dana’s 1970 euro-winner All Kinds Of Everything, a song that went a little like this: “All kinds of everything remind me of you/ Butterflies and flutter byes/ All kinds of goo/ All kinds of everything remind me of you.” It’s easy to mock the Eurovision Song Contest, and so much fun, too, and yet, amid the ill-advised appliqued frocks, shockingly stupid lyrics, jejune key changes, and bingy-bongy-boo sentiment, there is a serious political lesson to be learned. The European continent, by contrast, has always been divided by everything: languages, eating habits, football, literary sensibilities, toilet arrangements. What could bring us together? Not the the European Union, apparently. In theory, Eurovision can be seen as more successful: it has enabled us all to set aside our petty rivalries and bring us together for one night a year, united in kitsch contempt for the contest’s participants. But this theory doesn’t hold water. In reality as Terry Wogan recently noted, the contest promotes only a grand illusion of continental unity. In practice, patriotic feeling blinds many a viewer to the true merits of a Eurovision song: there are some among us, proud but frankly misguided Britons, who in 1974 championed Olivia Newton-John’s insipid British entry in preference to the transcendently wonderful Abba offering, Waterloo. Here, as with International It’s A Knockout, patriotic sentiment is revealed to be ludicrous. The true political lesson of Eurovision, then, is that national pride is, sometimes, a force to be overcome. Viewed like this, there could be more to the contest in Birmingham tonight than a single currency of Euro-gibberish. It might even be a chance to shake off the leftovers of our shared, nationalistic pasts - and sing a chorus of Boom, Bang-a-Bang! Julian Baggini18 April 2006 What can the Eurovision Song Contest tell us about the future of Europe and the nature of its peoples? The Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation may provide the answer, which is apt because it seems that Europe is an artificial society and Eurovision simulates it, warts and all. In the journal, Derek Gatherer of Glasgow University’s Institute of Virology has demonstrated mathematically what Terry Wogan has known for years: there are “patterns of collusive voting alliances” in Europe’s campest competition. Continue reading 13 May 2016 Abba star Björn Ulvaeus urges British voters to take a chance on the EU and vote to remain in the upcoming referendum.