I spent last week in Cuba, a time which overlapped with what should have been the country’s 12th annual Conga Against Homophobia and Transphobia. The march, however, organised by the government and the brainchild of Mariela Castro – daughter of Raul – was cancelled, owing to “new tensions in the international and regional context”. This essentially translates into a fear that people taking to the streets at a time of heightened tension in the region might turn into general unrest. But there is also the unmentioned fact that religious communities in Cuba are increasingly pushing back against the otherwise repressive state’s attempts to improve LGBT+ rights. Earlier in the year proposed changes to the constitution to allow same-sex marriages were scrapped after pressure from evangelical churches and sections of the population. A spontaneous civilian-organised march to replace the cancelled conga resulted in multiple arrests. LGBT+ discrimination still exists the world over – this can be insiduous, quotidian prejudice or extreme hatred. Homosexual sex and relationships are still illegal in 69 countries (including 35 Commonwealth countries), and can be penalised with life imprisonment, while some countries still have the death penalty on their statute books. But LGBT+ individuals had become used to good news stories: be it the ground-breaking vote for same-sex marriage in Ireland or Ana Brnabić becoming Serbia’s first openly gay prime minister). Now, however, as rightwing populism spreads around the world, there is a noticeable rise in bigotry. The LGBT+ community is feeling besieged once again. The introduction of death by stoning as punishment for sodomy in Brunei has spurred news stories and protest around the world. Jair Bolsonaro, elected president of Brazil with 55% of the final vote, has called himself a “proud homophobe” – he once said he would be “incapable of loving a gay son”. Five months ago two women in Malaysia were caned for engaging in lesbian sex. Meanwhile in Europe, Hungary’s prime minister Viktor Orbán has hosted anti-LGBT hate groups. Poland’s ruling Law and Justice party, elected by a landslide, is hostile to LGBT+ people, with non-heterosexual relationships considered an attack on the family. In the UK, Theresa May – who has pledged her support for the International Day Against Homophobia, Biphobia and Transphobia – is in a pact with Arlene Foster’s DUP, a party that has opposed LGBT+ rights. Protests have taken place outside schools in Birmingham and Manchester, because children were being taught tolerance around LGBT+ issues. Alarmingly, a survey published this week suggested that a a third of people would be against teaching primary-age children about the existence of same-sex families. An exhibition at the Whitechapel Gallery has mapped the recent decline of LGBT+ venues in London; 70 have closed in the past decade. But it is the rise in recent LGBT+ hate crime that is truly alarming. In the year 2017-2018, LGBT+ hate crimes in England and Wales have risen by 28% – Stonewall’s policy head called the statistics “a wake-up call”. In a high-profile case last year, the gay former rugby player Gareth Thomas was the victim of a homophobic assault. Meanwhile, in horrifying echoes of the 1999 Admiral Duncan nail-bombing in London, a man was convicted of making a threat to bomb the Pride parade in Cardiff. There has, of course, been some positive news: Taiwan has become the first country in Asia to legalise same-sex marriage (although the proposal was rejected in a non-confirmatory people’s referendum last year). It was heartening, too, to see the rejection of Brunei-owned establishments by various corporate entities and organisations after introduction of the death penalty for gay sex – eventually the regime backtracked on the laws. However, the rise of anti-LGBT+ rhetoric and the rolling back of protective legislation continues. The International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association (ILGA) in Europe has documented the revocation of pro-LGBT+ legislation in Bulgaria, Serbia, Hungary and Turkey. “Sadly, this year, we see concrete evidence of rollback at political and legislative levels in a growing number of countries,” said ILGA-Europe’s executive director, Evelyne Paradis. I was lucky enough to be born post-Section 28, and in a country that would not see me flogged for holding hands with a girlfriend in public, but I can’t remember feeling more uneasy than I am now with the negative rhetoric around LGBT+ lifestyles. Today, an unsettling report suggests that 70% of LGBT+ people had found themselves sexually harassed at work. In 2017, YouGov found a fifth had experienced a hate crime that year; 10% said they had been discriminated against when looking for a place to live – while 30% of LGBT+ people said they avoid certain streets. Moninne Griffith, chief executive of the Irish LGBT youth charity BeLonGTo, warned against complacency, even when it comes to countries we’ve come to think of as tolerant: “In the current climate, across Europe and in the United States, we see a stalling of progress and even regression in rights.” On a day dedicated to an international fight against prejudice, we must maintain vigilance in the face of increasing intolerance. • Hannah Jane Parkinson is a Guardian columnist