The end came suddenly, as it so often does for a jump jockey. But while so many of his weighing-room colleagues simply wake up one morning and decide that they can’t face it any more or get the news from a specialist that they can’t risk another fall, Ruby Walsh went out at the top with a Grade One winner, and on his own terms. After so many well-timed runs down the years, the final act was judged to perfection too. In a golden generation of National Hunt riders, Walsh was transcendent. Tony McCoy was the Iron Man, astonishingly tough and prolific, while Paul Carberry was a peerless horseman. Walsh, though, had it all: a matchless combination of the physical and mental attributes that a big-race jockey requires. The often brutal nature of a jump jockey’s life, with the falls, the injuries and the broken bones, can mean that the mental dimension to their job is sometimes overlooked. It takes courage, of course, to ride a half-ton horse over fences, but it also requires immense self-confidence, composure and the ability to make the right call in a split-second amid the noise and intensity of a race. In all of these qualities, Walsh was peerless. As a result, he was an almost unstoppable force at National Hunt’s major events for 20 years. It is almost a decade since he overtook Pat Taaffe, Arkle’s jockey, to become the most successful rider at the Cheltenham Festival and his final total of 59 winners at the sport’s biggest meeting – almost double McCoy’s career total of 31 - is unlikely to be approached for decades to come. He would have been nothing without the horses, of course, and the horses needed gifted handlers like Paul Nicholls and Willie Mullins to train them. But if Walsh needed the horses, then horses like Kauto Star, Hurricane Fly, Master Minded and Faugheen also needed him: the finest big-race jockey there has been, at a time when jumping was becoming more fiercely competitive by the season. Would Kauto Star have won two Gold Cups and five times in the King George on Boxing Day with another rider in the plate? Perhaps. But Walsh’s presence in the saddle all but guaranteed that punters would get a run for their money. Many things can go wrong in the frenzy of a race but with Walsh holding the reins, pilot error was highly unlikely to be one of them. Walsh rode his first winner over jumps in May 1996. Twenty-three years later, he has retired – minus his spleen but otherwise in sound physical shape – from a sport that has changed profoundly since he set out on his remarkable career. And it has not simply changed around him. Walsh has also been a key figure in the final phase of jump racing’s transformation, from a country pursuit to an established, high-profile sport. Jumping’s rise to national prominence has been driven by the success of the Cheltenham Festival, where Walsh has been a central character in most of the major plotlines over the last two decades. Year-by-year, compelling stories – tales both of victory and defeat – have raised the Festival’s profile in the mainstream media, persuaded new owners into the game in pursuit of a Festival winner and helped to turn a three-day meeting into four days that stand comparison with the Open golf or Wimbledon as a showcase for a sport. While McCoy was busy breaking records and reaching 3,000 and then 4,000 winners, time and again Walsh was the jockey for a hot favourite on the grand stage. As long ago as 2003, his win on Azertyuiop, the 5-4 favourite in the Festival’s second race, led off a week of winning favourites at the meeting which left the bookmakers begging for mercy. Walsh was in the saddle as Kauto Star became the first horse to regain the Cheltenham Gold Cup, and then as Willie Mullins emerged as a similarly dominant force in the training ranks. It seemed that there was always a hot favourite from the Mullins yard in the Supreme Novice Hurdle which opens the meeting and the noise was extraordinary as Walsh brought horses like Vautour and Douvan home in front to get the punters off to a blistering start. It was Walsh again as Quevega became the first horse to win the same race at the Festival six years in a row, cutting through the field each time to land the odds with ease. And also Walsh who hit the turf when Annie Power’s fall at the last, with the race at her mercy, saved the bookies from a staggering payout on a Mullins-Walsh four-timer. An almost identical drama played out this year, when Benie Des Dieux, in the same pink colours of Rich Ricci, came down at the same flight and in the same race when well clear of her field. Victory there would have seen Walsh become the first jockey to ride 60 winners at the Cheltenham Festival, but even with an extra day and several more races to aim at, the next jockey to reach even 50 has probably not yet been born. Walsh retires rich and famous thanks to his immense natural talent for riding horses at speed, but it has worked the other way as well. National Hunt racing is much more popular and successful thanks in no small part to Walsh’s many memorable triumphs over his brilliant career and the sport is in his debt for being the right jockey in the right place at just the right time. The post-Ruby era at Punchestown begins on Thursday but what Willie Mullins described as a “totally out of the blue” decision to quit has left the trainer with some jockey-juggling to do. There is a widespread – and probably fair – assumption that Paul Townend will switch to ride Bapaume in the day’s feature, the Grade One Champion Stayers’ Hurdle, though as yet this does not seem to have been confirmed. Bapaume took the Prix La Barka at Auteuil last year with Townend in the saddle and is expected to set off as the warm favourite at around 9-4. Townend will also be aboard Duc Des Genievres in the Grade One Ryanair Novice Chase at 6.40, though having ridden the same horse to an easy win in the Arkle Trophy at Cheltenham last time out, he would probably have kept the ride. The best of the domestic racing is at Chelmsford City, where the card includes the Listed Chelmer Fillies’ Stakes with £31,000 to the winner. Red Impression (7.25), who is quoted at around 33-1 for the Group One Commonwealth Cup at Royal Ascot next month, is the one to beat here having won her two starts last season by a combined total of nearly 10 lengths. Poet’s Prince (7.55) ran well to finish second on his season debut at Ripon last month and can go one better, while Bellepower (2.15) and Rock Of Estonia (3.35) look best on the afternoon cards at Musselburgh and Southwell, respectively. Musselburgh 1.15 Alright Sunshine 1.45 Lexington Place 2.15 Bellepower 2.45 Kajaki 3.15 De Latour 3.50 Downtown Diva 4.25 I Am Dandy 5.00 Cosmic Ray Redcar 1.55 Hypochondriac 2.25 Mina Velour 2.55 Conundrum 3.25 Melrose Way 4.00 Clayton 4.35 Fares Alpha 5.10 Midnight In Havana Southwell 2.05 Loose Chippings 2.35 Mama Africa 3.05 Masked Identity 3.35 Rock Of Estonia 4.10 Ticks The Boxes 4.45 Capofaro 5.15 Seasearch Salisbury 4.55 Falconidae 5.25 Sir Roderic 5.55 Alhakmah 6.30 Another Approach 7.05 Mandalayan 7.35 Bonneville 8.10 Thresholdofadream Chelmsford 5.45 Lambeth Walk 6.20 Smarter 6.55 Daring Guest 7.25 Red Impression (nb) 7.55 Poet’s Prince (nap) 8.25 Maamora 8.55 Mr Fox