Owen Jones still doesn’t get it (Labour must reclaim its insurgent spirit, 9 May). He says that for Labour to adopt a remain position “would mean abandoning not just radical leftism, but potentially millions of leave voters”. But what Labour has so far said it wants to do can be accommodated within the EU’s rules. His worries hark back to the misguided belief that the EU is a capitalist conspiracy. Capitalist, yes, but guided largely over the years by Christian democratic and social democratic philosophies. And with Labour’s newfound enthusiasm for fighting climate change, where better to do it than as part of the EU, which has a good record in this regard? As Timothy Garton Ash points out in the same edition (Why we must not let Europe break apart), Europe has a serious problem with rightwing factions in several EU countries. It will not help to combat this growing menace if we cut ourselves off from the rest of the EU. There clearly are many Labour supporters who back leaving the EU, mainly in the deprived areas of the north. But who has done more to create the deprivation these regions face: is it the EU, which has supported many a regenerative project in these areas, or the Tory government, which has brought devastation through its crippling welfare policies? And will leaving the EU make the problem better or worse?Michael FranklinBarnet, London • Owen Jones is plain wrong on Brexit. I came from a working-class background and made it to university, went to Greenham Common, marched against Thatcher, supported the miners’ strike, voted and campaigned for Labour. But I shall no longer support them purely because of their stance on Europe. To support remain is not to abandon radical leftism: there are far more left-leaning countries than us in the EU. It is clear that many leave voters came from poor, neglected communities. They are right to be angry, but leaving the EU will make their lives worse. Labour should have the moral courage to fight for remaining in the EU. This is where the insurgency should come from. There are millions of us just gasping for such a move.Kath GrayNottingham • Why does Owen Jones think that, if Labour adopted a pro-EU position, that would mean abandoning radical leftism? Isn’t internationalism more leftwing than nationalism?Michael BulleyChalon-sur-Saône, France • Did Owen Jones miss the memo from Corbyn when he signed the Party of European Socialists manifesto in Lisbon in 2018? If he’d read it he would know that Labour MEPs have signed up to working with European socialist and social democratic colleagues for: a Europe of “equality and fairness”; of “solidarity for the many, not the few”; a “sustainable Europe that protects our planet”; “a free and democratic Europe”; “a feminist Europe with equal rights for all”; “a progressive Europe with a youth plan”; and “a strong and united Europe that promotes a better world”. If we leave the EU, Labour will play no part in delivering the PES manifesto. This is why Labour MPs, members and voters overwhelmingly support a bold remain position.Magi YoungExeter • Owen Jones’s dismissal of the Blair government’s record ignores a wide range of achievements, from introducing the minimum wage and Sure Start, to increasing child benefit and providing winter fuel payments and bus passes for pensioners, lifting 600,000 children and a million pensioners out of poverty, securing free nursery places for every three-and four-year-old and much more besides. No government is perfect, but denigrating the last Labour government’s record will not help secure the election of a new Labour government.Jeremy BeechamLabour, House of Lords • I would add scrapping Trident to Owen Jones’s list of proposals to demonstrate Labour’s insurgent credentials. This should be clearly linked to a pledge to reinvest much of the money saved in our conventional forces, which are at their lowest ebb for decades. That in turn would reflect the need for capacity-building for the climate change crises we will inevitably face. That would indeed be an insurgent and, shall we say, patriotic gesture.Colin ChallenScarborough, North Yorkshire • Owen Jones exhorts Labour to reclaim its insurgent spirit by recommending that we all take our eye off the ball. Labour’s sense of radicalism would be best served by picking a fight with the “alt right” – the 21st century’s version of fascism. There is no bigger fight around, and losing it isn’t an option. Brexit is part of the far-right project. Labour would serve its voters best by understanding Brexit for what it is, stopping colluding with it, and leading the insurgency against it.Chris ScarlettSheffield • On 7 May you carried the headline “Humanity facing ‘urgent threat’ from loss of Earth’s natural life” above a story described by George Monbiot as “the most important news humanity has ever received, the general collapse of life on Earth”. So it was somewhat disappointing to read that the best Owen Jones can do is to suggest that Labour regain its “insurgent spirit” by committing to scrapping knighthoods, private dentistry and estate agents. If this is to be the rallying cry of the radical left, then God help us. Really.Rev David BlackTilston, Cheshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition