The UK’s biggest broadcasting union, Bectu, has passed an emergency motion expressing concern about the level of support and care staff and guests on programmes such as Love Island and The Jeremy Kyle Show receive, after members said they often felt ill-equipped to deal with vulnerable guests. The entertainment and media trade union, which passed the motion at its annual conference in Brighton on Sunday, will now enter talks with broadcast industry chiefs to compel them to do more to improve mental health and support for staff and guests working on TV and radio programmes. “Broadcast industry members, including TV and production staff, have put forward a motion following recent events in the TV industry around Jeremy Kyle and Love Island,” said Philippa Childs, the head of Bectu. “These formats place a weight of responsibility on production staff and as such play a huge role in workplace stress, as they navigate dealing with vulnerable participants who we know also suffer.” Bectu’s members include staff from ITV and the BBC, where it is the biggest trade union, as well as across the film and theatre industry. The motion was unanimously passed by the 200 Bectu conference delegates. “This emergency motion will see us negotiate with employers to accept greater responsibility for the mental wellbeing of workers and participants as we mark Mental Health Awareness Week,” said Childs. “It is much easier to take preventative measures than to put a plaster on things when the effects of stress take hold. It is also a question of maintaining dignity at work for everyone who contributes to TV and radio programmes.” Last week, the ITV chief executive, Carolyn McCall, moved swiftly to cancel The Jeremy Kyle Show, a staple of the broadcaster’s daytime schedule for the past 14 years, following the death of a guest. ITV is already reviewing the support offered to Love Island contestants, following the deaths of the participants Sophie Gradon and Mike Thalassitis. Bectu’s move follows the digital, culture, media and sport select committee of MPs announcing a formal inquiry into the British reality TV industry and the treatment of contestants. The parliamentary inquiry will be conducted over the summer, with ITV executives expected to be called to give evidence in public hearings on the aftercare and mental health support offered to participants. The MPs will consider stricter regulations on how contestants are treated on air and whether certain programmes place “unfair psychological pressure on participants and encourage more extreme behaviour”.