Roger Allam is a distinguished English actor whose stage work has ranged from Inspector Javert in the original London production of Les Misérables to Adolf Hitler in David Edgar’s Albert Speer. His TV roles include Peter Mannion MP in The Thick of It and DCI Thursday in ITV’s Endeavour. He is now starring in the National Theatre’s production of Githa Sowerby’s overlooked 1912 classic, Rutherford and Son. Is director Polly Findlay right to say that Githa Sowerby merits a place alongside Ibsen and Shaw? Yes, I think she is. I can’t think of another play as good from that period. It takes a very cold, hard stare at the patriarchy, capitalism, industrialisation and the relations between men and women, families. It’s extremely challenging and very strong stuff. It was a huge hit in its time but then languished for almost a century. It is certainly time that it was done again. Your character sounds a bit of a brute…He’s a driven kind of obsessive, really, who is the owner of a failing glass factory. Githa based the play on her own family. She came from Sowerby Glass in Gateshead, which was an enormously successful glass manufacturer throughout the 19th century and into the 20th. What’s your way into a part like this?I went up to the north-east in February to try to get to grips with the geography of the play. I was being slightly obsessive about “where is it?”. I went to the North York Moors, which I had never visited before, which are stunningly beautiful, then on a big journey up past Middlesbrough to Sunderland, to the National Glass Centre, then to Newcastle and Gateshead, which is where the Sowerby factory was. Do you always put so much effort into researching your roles?Not always. I happened to have the time and thought “What a wonderful opportunity to go up there.” I also spent a lot of time thinking about the world the play was set in, and I even bought a big book on glass manufacturing. Although you can give yourself too much information… I began getting these terrible headaches and I thought ‘Oh great, death’ I like the beard. It’s very luxuriant. Did you grow it specially for the part?I did, yes. It’s taken quite a while. How does it feel to be back at the National Theatre after a decade?It’s great, I love it here. It’s wonderful being in a place where you can just go upstairs and have a costume fitting. There are all these departments devoted to what’s going on onstage rather than stuff being farmed out, as it is in the West End. So you’re much more aware of every aspect of the production Do you prefer stage or screen?I like the fact that in the theatre nothing is ever finished because you’re going to do it all over again tomorrow, whereas in telly once it’s wrapped and in the can, that’s it. And then when you watch it, which I tend to do because it’s instructive, you think “Oh I wish I’d done it differently”. Lots of actors don’t like watching themselves on screen...I don’t like watching myself either! I don’t do it for pleasure... What’s the ideal personality for an actor?A huge part of the job is having an openness to working with other people and to finding out what that’s like and how to do it. A lot of actors are relatively shy people, surprisingly, so acting is a way of not being shy – and being paid not to be shy. How do you feel if you see a gap looming in your work schedule?I used to panic slightly but I had a period a couple of years ago which was just insane. I went straight from an independent film into an Endeavour series, then into another film. And the day after that finished I started rehearsals for The Moderate Soprano, the David Hare play. I began getting these terrible headaches and I thought “Oh great, death”. But it was just tension and tiredness. I had wanted to do all the jobs, but it wasn’t sensible. So now I welcome a gap in my schedule. Do you worry that theatre is inaccessible to too many people these days, especially young people?It’s really important to make sure no one is excluded in terms of price. Theatre should be available to all. It opens up so many possibilities. At school I was a disaster academically but being involved in drama helped me to find another pathway into things. The theatre became my education. As a teenager I went all the time to the Old Vic and paid 15p to sit in the gods – the price of the tube fare. You’ve played so many big Shakespearean parts on stage - Brutus, Macbeth, Falstaff, Prospero - is there a major role still on your wishlist?I think about Lear. But then there have been a lot of excellent Lears lately so it would probably be more interesting for me than for anyone else. How would you feel about your children going into acting?I wouldn’t mind at all. Hardly any jobs are secure any more. They haven’t shown signs of wanting to be a doctor or lawyer or any of those professions. So I think if you want to be an actor you might as well give it a go. And if you enjoy it and you’re making enough to live on, great. What’s the hardest thing about being an actor?Coming in night after night if you’re doing a play that’s been condemned as a failure. You have to try and put the criticism aside. Especially when I was younger and could see better and could make out how many were in the audience. It’s difficult to keep the energy going, but there are all kinds of ways of keeping your spirits up, not least backstage life. What would your character in The Thick of It, Peter Mannion MP, think about the Brexit mess?He would try to remain on the fence for as long as he could. He would stay very carefully in the middle, keeping every avenue as open as possible. He could be wooed by either side. What makes you angry?Politics. The fact that we live in a supposedly rich and successful country and there is so much poverty. That’ll do, I think. Rutherford and Son is now previewing, and runs 28 May-3 August at the National Theatre, London