My family of four was travelling back from France in February. En route I checked our Eurostar connection from Lille to London and found its status had changed from “on time” to “cancelled”. Eurostar confirmed the cancellation and said there was no availability on any train that day. The agent offered to rebook the next day and pay up to €600 for hotel accommodation or else refund our €409 tickets. Because we had to get home that day I asked for a refund and booked an easyJet flight at more than €900. There followed a mad dash to the airport and frantic repacking of our luggage to go from train- to budget airline-friendly. On the plane, my husband suggested I take a screenshot of Eurostar’s cancelled status for our records. To my horror the status had changed to “on time”. It transpired the Eurostar train had never been cancelled and Eurostar admitted that this was completely erroneous information given by one of its agents. I requested compensation towards the extra cost of the airline tickets, but was refused, even though my decision to fly had saved them €600 in hotel bills. I understand that when trains are cancelled by Eurostar the policy is not to refund for alternative travel arrangements. However, this was not cancelled: I was only told it was.DF, London This is a bizarre case that suggests either woeful chaos at customer services or a cunning ploy to avoid a payout. And it gets worse. An email from Eurostar sent two weeks after the fiasco stated that, due to a technical error, you were wrongly informed that the train had been cancelled when it was merely running eight minutes late. Another email, two weeks after that, again confirmed that you had been incorrectly advised and that an investigation would be carried out. When I contacted the press office it claimed the train had, indeed, been cancelled at the time of your first call, but was reinstated shortly afterwards and arrived on time. It seems you were not told directly by Eurostar because you’d booked tickets via a third-party website. In short, Eurostar is saying that the repeated confirmation that you had been misinformed was itself misinformation, and that since the train was cancelled (albeit only for two hours) you’re not entitled to compensation under its Ts&Cs. Eurostar does, however, agree to stump up a £200 voucher on top of the fare refund “as a gesture to acknowledge the change to this cancellation was frustrating”. This leaves you €300 out of pocket. Unlike airlines, train operators aren’t legally bound to offer set sums of compensation if services are cancelled or delayed. EU rules state that passengers should be refunded up to 50% of the ticket price if their train is delayed by more than two hours, but only five EU countries fully apply them. In November MEPs voted to double the compensation levels and require all countries to implement them. Eurostar awards e-vouchers of unspecified sums if a train is delayed by more than an hour but that doesn’t cover cancellations. If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number. Submission subject to our terms and conditions: see http://gu.com/letters-terms