The mild-mannered scone makers and knitters of the Country Women’s Association seem to have found a rebel streak. The 97-year-old New South Wales branch has declared war on Wicked Campers’ offensive slogans. The CWA wants the NSW government to ban the vehicles, which carry slogans that promote sexism, racism and violence. Two CWA members from Kyogle, in the state’s north, recently painted over an offensive slogan on a van that encouraged sexual violence. “Two of them went to the hardware shop and took direct action,” the Bangalow CWA president, Di Campbell, told Guardian Australia. “Enough is enough. For us on the north coast we see a lot of these awful vans.” Campbell’s branch put up a successful motion at the CWA’s Albury conference to ban the vans from Australian roads. Byron Bay council outlawed the vehicles in 2016 but enforcement has proved difficult. The federal government in March flagged it would attempt to get state and territory counterparts on board with a national approach to force the company to comply with community standards. Motor registries in Queensland and Tasmania have been granted the power to deregister any vehicle that does not comply with advertising standards. But the company has been able to circumvent penalties by changing vehicle registrations to other states once complaints are made. CWA NSW’s chief executive officer, Danica Leys, said the campaign against the offensive vehicles was one of the many social issues members have tackled in recent years. The association became the subject of media attention during the election campaign when it hosted Scott Morrison at its Albury conference, but its efforts to lobby for an increase to the Newstart unemployment payment were overshadowed when a protester tried to egg the prime minister. “Our national body … saw this issue as something they wanted to get behind and give more of voice to, as it is an issue that really impacts on regional people and also their communities,” Leys said. Climate change action and investment in renewable energy in rural areas is another key issue for the organisation as some communities and struggling farming families grapple with drought. The national body is also pushing to ban alcohol advertising in sports broadcasts as well as fix ineffective 2016 medicinal cannabis laws. With an ageing population, Leys said the CWA had been modernising its operations to attract younger women. Madison Bronte, 23, is one of the youngest members of the CWA’s new evening branch at Mascot in Sydney. Her grandmother grew up in Narrandera in rural NSW but moved to the city. Bronte said being part of the CWA was more than just swapping cake recipes but an opportunity to create social change and develop strong friendships across different generations. Younger members were also bringing different perspectives to policy debates, Bronte said. She cited the issue of genderless school uniforms and how wearing pants and shorts can help girls feel more comfortable running around playing sport during lunch breaks. “There were a couple of older ladies saying that’s ridiculous [but] we had a really good discussion,” Bronte said. She has taught a 60-year-old member how to use Instagram to reach a younger audience for a charity event in exchange for crocheting lessons. The push to stay relevant in the 21st century has seen the CWA yarn bomb the Groovin The Moo music festival in Bendigo as well as stage flash mobs against domestic violence in Port Augusta, South Australia.