A common view of Niki Lauda is that he was an emotion-free calculating machine, the antithesis of his great rival James Hunt. The misconception gained traction during their dramatic battle for the 1976 title, when the British crowd at Brands Hatch practically rioted after a first-lap collision with Lauda’s teammate threatened to eliminate Hunt from the race, and was revived by Daniel Brühl’s portrayal of the three-times world champion in the 2013 feature film Rush. Behind Lauda’s typically Austrian facade of blunt directness, however, was a temperament very different from the one that the Rush screenplay, concerned to set up a duel of opposites, chose to portray. Although he chose never to flaunt his appetites for the benefit of the tabloid press, they were not much at variance from those of Hunt, who had in any case been more of a friend than an enemy since their days racing against each other in Formula Three. Both of them started life as posh boys and each, in his own way, was a rebel. Rejecting the conventions of the comfortable Viennese affluence into which he had been born, Lauda took as much as he could in financial terms from his mostly disapproving family while climbing the motor racing ladder, but he was also willing to scrape and save like young men from less privileged backgrounds in order to achieve his ambitions. That made him a competitor at every level, all his life. In the cockpit it brought him 25 wins from 171 grand prix starts, and three world championships at the wheel of cars from two different teams. Only Michael Schumacher, Juan Manuel Fangio, Lewis Hamilton, Alain Prost and Sebastian Vettel have won more world titles. 'He worked like a professional,' Ferrari wrote, 'meticulous in his preparation of both himself and his car' How many more world titles would he have won in his career had it not been interrupted when he almost perished in the flames of an appalling accident at the old Nürburgring in 1976? Enzo Ferrari, whose car Lauda was driving that day, thought he knew the answer. Had the Austrian stayed with the team instead of leaving after winning his second title in 1977, believing that Ferrari had let him down when his need was at its greatest, there would have been many more. At least enough to equal Fangio’s five, in Ferrari’s view, and all of them in his cars. The Old Man certainly rated Lauda. How could he not, when the Austrian had worked so hard and successfully to end a decade in which the morale of the Scuderia had crumbled? “He worked like a professional,” Ferrari later wrote, “meticulous in his preparation of both himself and his car, something for which he showed a natural, instinctive gift.” But other aspects of his competitive nature got up the nose of Ferrari, who disliked Lauda’s tough stance on contractual negotiations and referred to him in private as “l’ebreo” – the Jew. Ferrari was used to drivers who showed a proper gratitude for being given the chance to drive the red cars. In Lauda’s case, initially there had been reciprocal gratitude for his part in restoring Maranello’s pride and winning the world title in 1975, his second year with the team. But when he was being treated following his near-fatal accident, Ferrari’s decision to hire a replacement, Carlos Reutemann, and then merely to offer the wounded champion the team manager’s job for the next season, seemed like a betrayal. Andreas Nikolaus Lauda is born in Vienna, Austria Makes his Formula One debut for March-Ford in his home Austrian Grand Prix Now driving for Ferrari, Lauda wins a Formula One race for the first time at the Spanish Grand Prix Lauda secures his first world title for Ferrari at the Italian Grand Prix, with one race in the season left to go Lauda is burned in a crash on the second lap of the German Grand Prix at the Nürburgring. His injuries are so severe that he is read the last rites, but remarkably, after reconstructive surgery on his face, he returns to racing the same season, only missing two races Lauda takes his second world championship, securing victory with a fourth place finish in the US Grand Prix, with two races to go Founds his first airline - Lauda Air Having left Ferrari for Brabham, Lauda retires from Formula One at the end of the season Lauda returns to the sport, this time driving for McLaren Lauda finishes second behind Alain Prost in the final race of the season, but it is enough to give him a narrow half-point victory overall, and he secures his third world title Wins his 25th Formula One race at the Netherlands Grand Prix Retires from Formula One after competing in the Australia Grand Prix, with an overall record of 3 world championships, 25 wins and 54 podium finishes Returns to Formula One in a consultancy role for Ferrari Takes on the role of team principal of the Jaguar Formula One team Lauda makes another airline venture, low-cost operator Niki. Lauda is sometimes in the cockpit himself Becomes non-executive chairman of the Mercedes team, where he helped bring Lewis Hamilton to the team Lauda dies peacefully, eight months after receiving a lung transplant Lauda was not accusing Ferrari of being unsentimental. No one could be less sentimental than Lauda. He just wanted help to get back into the cockpit as soon as possible. “What I really needed from the team was a sense of composure, a feeling of continuity and trust,” he wrote. He didn’t get it. Having already signed a contract for the 1977 season, he held on to his seat by bluffing Ferrari with the pretence of having been approached by McLaren. Months later, after wrapping up his second title, he walked out to join Bernie Ecclestone’s Brabham outfit. And in 1984, during a four-year stint with McLaren, there would be a third title, won by the narrowest of margins over a younger teammate, Alain Prost. That intense single-mindedness also cost him his first marriage. Like Enzo Ferrari, Marlene Lauda did not believe that he would return to racing after the accident, which happened shortly after their wedding. She supported him through the ordeal of recovery, but they were separated five years later. Was Lauda a genius at the wheel, a bar-raising virtuoso in the mould of a Nuvolari, a Fangio, a Clark or a Senna? Perhaps, perhaps not. In 1973, driving for the declining BRM team, the 24-year-old’s sudden leap from the ranks of the also-rans won him a Ferrari contract and within two years he had captured a first title in a manner that established his quality beyond doubt. Throughout his career he beat the best of his time, in an era whose other world champions included Emerson Fittipaldi, Jody Scheckter and Nelson Piquet. He was a man without a scintilla of narcissism. During his early years in Formula One, racing alongside men who looked and acted like movie stars, he became known – mostly with a kind of sardonic affection – as The Rat, thanks to his narrow features and pronounced overbite. After the accident, his refusal to undergo cosmetic surgery to a face terribly scarred and discoloured by fire made him an even more distinctive figure. He set a trend by covering his burnt head with a baseball cap displaying the logo of his personal sponsor, but few of his peers would emulate his lifelong preference for shapeless tweed jackets and chain-store jeans: the casual non-style of a man who really didn’t care what anyone else thought.