Jürgen Klopp has said Liverpool’s injury-hit squad will fight to the last to land the club’s first league title for 29 years on Sunday and will approach Wolves with the motto that defines their season: “It’s only pain.” Liverpool collected several injuries in securing a remarkable appearance in a second successive Champions League final on Tuesday, with Andy Robertson and Jordan Henderson hurt in the 4-0 comeback against Barcelona. With the Premier League title at stake on Sunday, however, when Liverpool need to beat Wolves to capitalise on any slip by Manchester City at Brighton, Klopp revealed his walking wounded were determined to play on. Only Roberto Firmino and Naby Keïta are confirmed absentees while Mohamed Salah should be available having missed the Champions League semi-final triumph through concussion. “The famous three words of this week in the dressing room are: it’s only pain,” said Klopp. “Very important for all the young lads to learn. Hendo said ‘it’s only pain’, Robbo said ‘it’s only pain’ but it was real pain. Wow. Robbo could deal with the pain but he could not activate the muscle. They should be fine. Mo looked good around the celebrations, and yesterday and the day before he was running outside. Today he will join in training.” Klopp said such defiance characterised Liverpool’s entire campaign and that his bond with the club’s fans, one that underpinned Tuesday’s incredible defeat of the Spanish champions, would be nonexistent without it. He explained: “In Liverpool it’s mainly about the supporters and not me. If I want to love LFC fans I have a bigger choice because there are so many. They have to deal with me and my character. It is a proper fit, but it’s about the performance of the boys. I could be the most funny guy in the world but if the boys would not play good football, nobody would laugh at my jokes. “It’s all about the boys, always. They have to deliver. If they don’t, no chance. The group of players we have here is so special. Since Tuesday, if I had to find a very short description for the group, I would say: ‘It’s only pain.’ That’s how they went through the season. It was always hard, always difficult, but it was only pain. So let’s carry on.” Klopp described the Champions League final with Tottenham as a meeting of the “two teams who showed the biggest heart in the whole competition” but was fiercely critical of the exorbitant prices fans are being charged in Madrid and of Uefa’s “irresponsible” choice of locations for finals. The Liverpool manager added: “With Madrid it’s unbelievably expensive, but it’s not another part of the world at least. Going to Baku for a Europa League final is really funny, I think. The guys who make the decisions, I don’t know what they have for breakfast. Last year we went to Kiev, which is a wonderful city, but that a Russian team or a team from that part of the world would be involved is not really likely. Then they had to prepare. “Now Madrid has to prepare for 200,000 English fans but it knew already that it could happen. Baku, I don’t even know how to go there or if there is any regular flight. These decisions, they must be much more sensible and reasonable. It looks irresponsible. I don’t know how they can do it. Maybe the cities that get the finals, they have to make a price cut, agree to something that it would not be more than this or something. I heard now that a room you would normally get for £100 is now £2,700! It’s just crazy. What can I say, I sympathise a lot.”