Untouchable when he won his 15th major at the Australian Open, the world No 1 can make more history in Paris. Three years after completing the career slam at Roland Garros, a second French Open title would make Djokovic the first man to hold all four grand slams on two separate occasions. But while victory over Stefanos Tsitsipas in Madrid secured the 32-year-old’s first title on clay since the 2016 French Open, he needs to recover from defeat to Rafael Nadal in the Italian Open final. The king of clay has had an ordinary season on his favourite surface by his high standards, losing semi-finals to Fabio Fognini in Monte Carlo, Dominic Thiem in Barcelona and Tsitsipas in Madrid. Throw in a heavy defeat to Djokovic in the Australian Open final and you could be forgiven for thinking that Nadal will struggle to maintain his rule over Paris. However his stirring victory over Djokovic in Rome will give the 11-time French Open champion belief that an 18th major is within reach. Chances are the Swiss would not have returned to the clay for the first time since 2016 if his recent results at the other majors had been better. The 37-year-old must be concerned about Djokovic and Nadal chasing down his record of 20 majors. But is he capable of grinding out wins over younger rivals? Federer’s only French Open title came in 2009 and his preparations have been disrupted by defeat to Thiem in Madrid and his withdrawal from his Rome quarter-final against Tsitsipas. A semi-finalist in 2017, a finalist in 2018, a champion in 2019? There is widespread agreement that the Austrian is destined to win the French Open one day. His game flourishes on clay and he has enough wins over Djokovic, Federer and Nadal not to feel inferior in their company. The 25-year-old beat Nadal on his way to claiming the Barcelona Open and was unfortunate to lose to Djokovic after outlasting Federer in Madrid. He should believe this is his year. While Alexander Zverev has struggled to shake off concerns over his form and fitness this season, Tsitsipas has continued to go from strength to strength. Having emerged as one of the biggest talents of his generation in the past 12 months, the entertaining 20-year-old Greek will hope to push on after reaching the semi-finals at the Australian Open, where he announced his vast potential by stunning Federer in the fourth round. Beating Nadal in Madrid shows he is not scared of anyone.