This summer is going to be a big one for Matthijs de Ligt. And not just because the Netherlands defender could have Champions League and Nations League titles in the bag, as well as an Eredivisie title to his name, in six weeks’ time. The 19-year-old Ajax captain will require some well-earned R&R regardless of what happens between now and the end of the season, but he could do with allocating some time to wade through the imminent love letters from across the continent. Bayern Munich are determined to beat Barcelona to his signature, while Manchester United, Liverpool and Juventus are also said to be big admirers too. If Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s planned overhaul has got off to a bad start then news from the horse’s mouth that Aaron Wan-Bissaka has no intentions of swapping Selhurst Park for Old Trafford anytime soon hardly softens the blow. To make matters worse, Juan Mata is umming and aahing over their latest contract offer. The midfielder has entered the final two months of his existing contract and United have offered him a one-year deal with the option of an additional year. Alexis Sánchez is in an altogether different position, with United trying to shove him out of the rear exit. They are even debating paying up some of his £500,000-a-week wages to help him find a new home. It is not all doom and gloom though, for United are battling it out with Juve for the 21-year-old Benfica and Portugal defender Rúben Dias. Perhaps Manchester City are dreaming up a move for a shiny new centre-back too, with Nicolás Otamendi and Danilo possibly heading out of the door. The former is wanted by Atlético Madrid, while the Brazil defender has, according to reports in Italy, agreed a long-term contract at Internazionale. Meanwhile, Arsenal believe they have finally identified the man to solve their defensive woes: Djene Dakonam, the Getafe defender. A £30m deal could pave the way for the departure of Shkodran Mustafi. Tottenham are confident they are at the front of the queue for the Fulham teenager Ryan Sessegnon, though the relegated side could ask Daniel Levy to stump up a record fee in excess of the £42m they paid for Davinson Sánchez. Sessegnon, who turns 19 later this month, has also courted interest from Paris Saint-Germain and Juventus but is keen to stay in England. Spurs could also plump for Diogo Queirós, the Porto defender, Aston Villa’s Jack Grealish, Barcelona’s André Gomes and Nice right-back Youcef Atal, with Mauricio Pochettino determined to keep Mr Levy busy. Elsewhere, Jean Michaël Seri wants to swap cold Tuesday nights in Barnsley with Fulham for sunny evenings on the Côte d’Azur with Monaco, West Ham want Alavés defender Guillermo Maripán, while the Liverpool winger Ryan Kent is keen to make his Rangers stay permanent. And, if Cardiff are relegated, Crystal Palace and Burnley are primed to offer Josh Murphy a route back into the Premier League.