Video killed the radio star, according to The Buggles in 1980 and many in 2019 would have you believe that VAR has killed football. Yet after a first half goal for Sydney FC was ruled out in the A-League grand final, the controversy was largely forgotten by the end of a heart-stopping penalty shootout as the resilient Sky Blues ran out 4-1 winners over Perth Glory. It was a fourth A-League championship trophy for Sydney; for Perth, who lost their nerve in the shootout with only one of their three spot kicks successful, the bitter 15-year-wait for another title goes on. Sydney’s victory ultimately came thanks to some brilliant goalkeeping by Andrew Redmayne and a decisive kick from Reza Ghoochannejhad in the shootout, but such an uncertain conclusion to the match might not have been necessary had a 27th effort not been chalked off. With the score locked at 0-0 Michael Zullo whipped a dangerous ball towards Adam Le Fondre in the middle and, with a helping touch from Matt Spiranovic, it found the back of the net to seemingly give the visitors to Optus Stadium a vital early lead. But Zullo was adjudged to be offside, despite replays later showing he was not, and the VAR ruled that as the margin was too tight it would not overrule the call made by referee Shaun Evans. It was bitter pill to swallow for Sydney and their supporters, and came exactly a year after the 2018 grand final was marred by a VAR howler at McDonald Jones Stadium. There was a distinct whiff of déjà vu. Despite the moment of controversy, this was a still final of merit. The 2018-2019 A-League season has been blighted by boardroom struggles, poor ratings and flat attendances, but there was little of that negativity on show in the Western Australia capital. The majestic Optus Stadium, which Manchester United and Leeds United will visit in the coming months, was sold out with a 56,371 record grand final crowd and a wonderful, noisy atmosphere was generated in the west. The two teams arrived in the decider in decidedly different fashion. Perth had dominated the league, picked up the premier’s plate and have been reinvented from underachievers to champions by coach Tony Popovic. But they only scraped into the grand final after being put through the ringer by an impressive Adelaide United in the semi-final. Sydney FC, the best team in the competition of the past few years, finished second in the league, but they had lost the FFA Cup final and been dominated in the Asian Champions League. But momentum was with Steve Corica’s side after they booked their spot in the final after obliterating rivals Melbourne Victory 6-1 in their last outing. Perth were the slightly better of the two sides over 90 minutes, even with the controversial disallowed goal. Redmayne was forced to make two brilliant finger-tip saves to repel Glory headers and keep his side in the game. Fullbacks Rhyan Grant and Jason Davidson enjoyed an engaging battle down one flank, marked by several strong challenges and flashpoints, with their contrasting audacious hairstyles also catching the eye. But the stalemate continued with clear-cut chances at a premium and as the match went to extra-time, still the scoreboard attendant was not troubled. Both clubs became more conservative in their play and seemed to prefer the Russian roulette of penalties to ultimately decide the winner. In the shootout it was Redmayne, doing his best wobbly-legged Bruce Grobbelaar impersonation, who proved the hero with two saves to thwart first Andy Keogh and then Brendon Santalab. Iranian import Ghoochannejhad delivered the final nail in Perth’s coffin to make it 4-1, after Stantalab’s attempted panenka was picked by Redmayne. The history books will show that Adam Le Fondre, Brandon O’Neill and Grant also held their nerve, and that in just his first season at the helm after replacing Graham Arnold, Corica won a major trophy. For his good friend and former teammate, Popovic, the search continues. The 45-year-old has now lost four A-League grand finals as a coach, despite his impressive coaching CV that includes an Asian Champions League title. Football, as the lottery ball that is VAR can attest, can be both cruel and beautiful at times.