Mo Salah was spotted in a pub on Liverpool’s Penny Lane on Thursday, where he was apparently filming an advert for an oil company. You would have thought the Egyptian might have had enough of oil companies, given that his team look like they are going to come second in the league to one, but such is life. Actually, Salah’s advertising deal could well be appropriate, attempting to ensure through his work for club and sponsor that: a) Liverpool FC are by far the greatest team; and b) the world has kerosene. You would have thought Salah might be running out of gas at this stage in the season, but at Camp Nou on Wednesday he and his side still looked pretty slick, barrelling around the attacking third without quite igniting. Certainly their final ball was often a bit crude and could have used some refining but, though when it came to goals the well was very much dry, it always looked like there was an opportunity in the pipeline. In the end, though, they ran aground and their hopes went up in smoke. Etc and so forth. And so, back to business. Over the course of this weekend – if you include Monday in the weekend which is normally a bit of a push but is fine on this occasion because it’s a bank holiday – the destination of the league title could be decided. If Liverpool lose at Newcastle on Saturday night, Manchester City will be recrowned champions with victory at home to Leicester on Monday evening. Fortunately Liverpool’s players, at least when Lionel Messi isn’t around, are in the form of their lives. “The boys are completely on fire,” Jürgen Klopp told reporters. “When you’re in the race, you don’t get tired. We are ambitious like hell. All we can do is beat Newcastle and that’s unbelievably difficult.” Well, 12 top-flight teams have managed it this season and Fulham could make it 13 on the final day, so not that difficult, but they have won six of their last seven home games in the league, including one against City back in January. “We’re going to make it tough for them. They probably know that themselves,” said Jamaal Lascelles. “It’s not a nice fixture to come here.” Liverpool don’t need nice fixtures, producing all the niceness they need independently. As Klopp explained: “We didn’t need to pick players up in Barcelona and give them a hug. It’s in us.” If Klopp has genuinely coached his players to proficiency at internal self-hugging it would be a remarkable achievement, fully deserving of him self-awarding an internal manager of the season gong however the season ends. Now it’s up to them to keep the title fight going into its final week. The challenge ahead might be unbelievably difficult, but then we are talking about an unusually well-oiled machine. A special report from Liverpool, by Donald McRae and Tom Jenkins. Join Ben Fisher from 8pm BST for red-hot Friday night Premier League MBM coverage of Everton 0-0 Burnley. “First when I came I couldn’t speak, you know? It was so hard because the dialogue here is … oh my God, I couldn’t understand anything” – West Ham’s Swiss forward Alisha Lehmann gets her chat on with Suzanne Wrack before the Women’s FA Cup final against Manchester City and recalls trying to get her head round some east Lahn patter. Here’s the latest Football Weekly Extra podcast. And Football Weekly Live is only coming back to Big London on 10 May. Ticket details here. “I was impressed to learn of Phil Jones’s passing prowess this season, having completed 93.1% of his passes successfully, according to Martin Laurence’s helpful summary (yesterday’s Still Want More?). Unfortunately, I suspect that 93.05% of those passes were straight back to David de Gea, but I suppose you have to start somewhere” – Roy Powell. “The email filter at my work has recently started flagging The Fiver as: ‘May contain offensive material.’ I had a quick scan for any swear words but came up short, so I can only imagine it’s offended by the overall journalistic integrity on show” – Chris White. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Chris White. Thousands of Celtic fans gathered at Parkhead to pay tribute to Billy McNeill, whose funeral cortege visited the ground after a service in Glasgow on Friday morning. Arsenal say they “utterly condemn” the behaviour of some Valencia fans who appeared to make Nazi salutes and monkey gestures at Thursday’s game, which Arsenal won 3-1. Bolton 0-1 Brentford. Maurizio Sarri has told fans who criticised him for starting Eden Hazard on the bench in their 1-1 Big Vase draw at Eintracht Frankfurt to pipe down. “For a player that has 70 matches in a season, starting him from the bench is a normal reaction,” sighed Sarri. “We have to play again in 62 hours.” Ole Gunnar Solskjær won’t drop David de Gea despite his goalkeeper dropping pretty much everything himself recently. “David’s been training well this week,” he blathered. “Of course we [trust him], he’s been fantastic this season.” Cardiff fans have set up a crowdfunding page to pay Neil Warnock’s £20,000 fine for calling officials “the worst in the world” after the 2-1 defeat by Chelsea. “The humour has gone out of the game,” sniffed Warnock. “I hope [the fans] provide the full lot, but it will all go to charity.” And look out Pep! There may well be a new sheriff in town when Xavi retires at the end of the season. “I believe it is my duty to take the initiative of the field and return through football whenever possible,” he tooted. “My philosophy as a coach reflects the style we developed for many years under the influence of Johan Cruyff. [I want] to return to the essence of what we all love from our childhood days: possession football.” You’ll never guess how many things we’ve collated for you to look out for in the Premier League this weekend. The Premier League does not have exclusive rights to a hot and steamy title race, writes Barry Glendenning, before inviting you to get feverish over the goings-on at the top of the Dutch, Portuguese, German and Turkish top-flights. USA! USA!! USA!!! may be even stronger at the 2019 Women’s World Cup than they were when steamrollering all before them in 2015, warns Caitlin Murray. West Ham must handle the Women’s FA Cup final occasion to shock Manchester City at Wembley, reckons Eni Aluko. Sid Lowe listened to Barça chief suit Josep Maria Bartomeu explain how the club’s lucky fans treat Lionel Messi’s mindbending genius as the norm. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!