Love Island’s creative director, Richard Cowles, has sought to justify the lack of body diversity on the hit reality TV programme, explaining that contestants need “to be attracted to one another” for the show to work. The programme, which has become one of ITV’s most high-profile shows, returns to screens next month amid growing scrutiny on the impact that reality television has on those that take part. Critics such as actor Jameela Jamil have called on the show to feature more plus-size participants to reflect the wider population, rather than simply selecting skinny individuals to lounge around the pool in a Spanish villa. But in remarks that quickly came under fire from body image campaigners, Cowles said the show’s aim was to provide entertaining programming rather than set an example. “First and foremost, it’s an entertainment show and it’s about people wanting to watch who you’ve got on screen falling in love with one another,” he said, according to Radio Times. “Yes, we want to be as representative as possible but we also want them to be attracted to one another. “Also, we’re not saying that everyone that’s in there is how you’re supposed to look. We’re saying here’s a group of people that we want to watch for eight weeks, and we want to watch them fall in love. That’s not at the front of our mind, but we do want to be as diverse as possible.” Love Island has already instituted new measures to ensure participants are looked after by the production team for more than a year after they take part in the programme, following multiple suicides by former contestants and the cancellation of the Jeremy Kyle show. The programme is also set to be examined as part of a House of Commons select committee into reality programming, while Ofcom has raised concerns about the show’s use of lie detector tests. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.