9pm, BBC One As always, the genius of this show lies in the human frailty that gradually materialises through the thickets of procedure. There’s no shortage of that in this finale, which is lent additional intrigue by Anna Maxwell Martin’s icy DCS Carmichael. Moments of absurdity aren’t entirely absent but it’s utterly nerve-shredding, too. Phil Harrison 10.30pm, Sky Arts Perfectly timed to follow the final episode of showrunner Jed Mercurio’s thriller Line of Duty, this encounter with the engaging Lancashire-born creator of compulsively watchable dramas is a must both for fans and anyone interested in the mechanics of modern TV. Watch the friendly, articulate puppet master describe how his military and medical careers led him to his current occupation and marvel as he even manages to dictate the narrative arc of the interview with Melvyn Bragg. Mike Bradley 8pm, Channel 4 To mark the 75th anniversary of D-day, an account of how MI5 enlisted King George VI, the Queen Mother and Princess Elizabeth in a ruse designed to “bamboozle” the Germans over the details of the Normandy landings. Ingenious deception that makes for a great story. MB 8pm, Channel 5 The original dating show still holds up, even if Paul O’Grady’s lines are often cheesier than an industrial shipment of Quavers. This week, there’s cringemaking pec-flexing and the show’s first bisexual lineup, including a razor-tongued “cross between Jennifer Lawrence and Tom Daley”. Hannah J Davies 9pm, ITV In a well-orchestrated penultimate episode, writer Ottilie Wilford sets the queen some entertaining challenges. Among them: how to restrain cheeky Lord Palmerston’s latest bid to play fast and loose; temper Albert’s naive zeal; and find a way to achieve a reconciliation with pinched Princess “no mates” Feodora. MB 9pm, Channel 4 The uncompromising famous-person version of the reality show concludes. Once again it’s the interrogation phase that breaks contestants, but the physical challenge isn’t forgiving either: a “Winter sickener” at the El Morado glacier, 3,000 metres up in the Chilean Andes. Jack Seale Maps to the Stars, 11pm, BBC Two Julianne Moore plays a raging, ageing film star – clearly descended from Sunset Boulevard’s Norma Desmond – who is trying to revive her fading career with a remake of a 1950s melodrama that starred her own mother. David Cronenberg’s superbly entertaining, vicious Tinseltown horror movie is full of nervous laughter. Paul Howlett Premier League Football: Huddersfield Town v Man United, 1.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event Arsenal v Brighton follows. International T20 Cricket: England v Pakistan, 2pm, Sky Sports Cricket One-off match held at Sophia Gardens in Cardiff. Premiership Rugby Union: Bath v Wasps, 2.30pm, BT Sport 1 Top-flight action from the Rec.