When news broke that The Jeremy Kyle show had been indefinitely suspended following the death of a guest, I would have loved to have felt righteous joy. Indeed, the overwhelming response I saw went along the lines of “good, it was only ever a means for normal people to laugh at poor people”. While the announcement of the cancellation of ITV’s daytime staple no doubt marks the end of an unsavoury 14-year chapter in British television history, I feel somewhat conflicted. I understand why the show was bad. That’s difficult to dispute. But it was one of the few times I saw people like those I grew up with, people whom you never see on television, speaking with their own voices. It didn’t confirm my prejudices; because I didn’t have those prejudices to begin with. I saw real human sadness, need, pain and people who had really got their lives in a mess. Sensationalism and exploitation still seem to be the dominant reason for putting poor people on television; we still only believe working-class lives are of note if exceptional or shocking. In general, working-class people watch a lot of television but we seldom appear on it, and even more rarely actually make it. The experience of being working class is often of being invisible until someone wants something from you. The prescribed role for guests on Jeremy Kyle’s show was to bring chaos into the living rooms of the nation; researchers managing to seek out people just distressed enough to be unguarded but not so distressed as to be tipped over the edge. Like a horrible stage magic act, complete with swaggering, hectoring conjuror, the format of the show was always rigged to capture people at their most desperate, and parade them at their worst for the entertainment of others. Rooted in tabloid moral indignation, Jeremy Kyle offered us what we said we didn’t want to see when really we did, just not up close and not in our own lives. The show was exploitative, not because it parcelled up poor people for middle-class people to feel repulsed by, but because it promised help it perhaps couldn’t deliver to people desperate for something to make life OK, and from someone who won’t make them feel small or stupid. The real moral failing of the show was that it gave the impression it only cared about working-class life as a novel spectacle that ended when the participants exited the stage. It dangled exposure on television as something transformative, extending an offer of aid that could only be gained by performing. The real drama was back at home where the cameras never go and where people who can help without judging are thin on the ground. I’d love to hear the same kinds of voices in a better, kinder, less confrontational programme, but that, too, would be a constructed version of reality. If the only people allowed on television are ones who have got their lives under control, we’ll never hear what life is really like when things are in a mess. In its ruthless exploitation, absent from The Jeremy Kyle Show was the desire to shape people into worthy, grateful victims. Jeremy Kyle was like a feel-bad montage. It was the flip side of the heartrending montage of struggling “poor people” soundtracked to some plinky-plonk Coldplay, where everyone was smiling politely through adversity at the food bank. The show shaped the presentation of people in lots of other harmful ways; but it didn’t turn them into the “virtuous downtrodden proletariat”. Middle-class people like working class people who are easy to love. Working-class people love working-class people that don’t make them feel embarrassed. The UK didn’t turn against disabled people, people on benefits, homeless people and other people who are poor just because middle-class people laughed at them. Middle-class commentators often miss that working-class people have feelings and judgments about other working-class people. Working-class life still struggles to be seen as noble, honest and hard-working. The Jeremy Kyle Show made working-class people uncomfortable because, at our worst, we are more judgmental of our own than we are of those we consider to be posher. We love to feel we’re “the respectable working class”. But not all of us working-class people are Daniel Blake. I can see why Jeremy Kyle was reviled, but for me it was also a corner of television to hear real people’s problems in their own words, people on their own terms trying to get something of value from a situation cynically structured to devalue and debase them. Their lives and pain were real, even if the setting was awful. Exploitative? Certainly. Preying on people? Yes. Untrue? Not really. It’s not the programme I would make, but people like me don’t often get commissioned to explore the lives of other working-class people with respect, concern and unflinching honesty five times a week on national television. • Mark Brown is a journalist and mental health blogger • In the UK and Republic of Ireland, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-TALK. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14