In the 21st century, the creative act of authorship is the magic moment of the liberated and expressive self that is simultaneously more idolised and tantalising than ever before. The enigma of creativity – whence does inspiration spring? – remains at once the key to its allure and also its bewitching riddle. How to explain Shakespeare’s sonnets? Where is the wellspring of Moby-Dick? And what is the spell of Sylvia Plath’s Ariel? English literature has many such magic moments: 1599 – the year of Hamlet, As You Like It and Julius Caesar – is one; 1922 – the publication of Ulysses and The Waste Land – another. But none is more famous in English poetry than 1797-98, partly because its leading characters made it so, mythologising as they went. Still, the record of their imaginative frenzy is off the Richter scale. This was the year in which two young men of genius and their muse found the inspiration for Kubla Khan, The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, and Lyrical Ballads, among many others, and transformed the English literary imagination for ever. From June 1797 to the autumn of 1798, while Britain was at war with revolutionary France, Coleridge, Wordsworth and his sister, Dorothy, known as “Dolly”, lived on the edge of the Quantock Hills in Somerset and began to explore a new way of looking at the world, and their place in it, as devotees of nature and the unfettered mind, almost single-handedly inventing the Romantic movement in whose long shadow we live today. This is Adam Nicholson’s subject in The Making of Poetry. As its subtitle (Coleridge, the Wordsworths and Their Year of Marvels) suggests, this is a romantic book about some young Romantics, but it sets off by offering a revisionist interpretation of an experience that its principals – Dorothy in particular – celebrated as an ecstatic moment of “unbridled delight and wellbeing”. Furthermore Nicolson, in the footsteps of Wordsworth, comes with his own Coleridge, the prodigiously gifted and colourful artist Tom Hammick, whose dreamy woodcuts and paintings are scattered through the narrative. Quite soon, despite Nicolson’s first intentions, most revisionist thoughts have been quietly put to sleep with biographer and artist in full flow. When the poets were not at home, they were walking and talking, sometimes 20, 40, even 70 miles at a stretch And why not? Wordsworth and Coleridge, at 27 and 24 respectively, with Dorothy in between, make an enthralling, quotable trio. Nicolson, whose method is “to lower myself into the pool of their minds”, paints a memorable triptych of the two poets and their Dolly in nonstop discussion about nature, art and life itself, carried away, in Coleridge’s account, with “an ebullient Fancy, a flowing Utterance, a light and dancing Heart, and a disposition to catch fire”. Nicolson has long nurtured a penchant for “great literature” (books on Homer and the King James Bible) and our landscape (Sissinghurst, the Somerset Levels and the national coastline). On this occasion, poetry and place are perfectly braided together in prose whose biographical mood pays tribute to Richard Holmes and whose topographical fervour evokes Robert Macfarlane. On top of these influences, Nicolson embeds himself in the story of this year, as if a part of him longs to be a fly on the wall in Nether Stowey and Alfoxden. When the poets were not at home, they were walking and talking, sometimes 20, 40, even 70 miles at a stretch, often “by the light of the good moon”. It seems that Coleridge never drew breath, spinning first Kubla Khan and then The Rime of the Ancient Mariner out of thin air, his head reeling with opium. Despite its avowed revisionism, and its references to the rural poor and the Tory repression, The Making of Poetry buys into an idea inspired by the greenwood of merrie England, in which the free-born Englishman, liberated from court and cloister, finds deepest self-expression in the forest under the canopy of the heavens. As the duke puts it in As You Like It, refugees from the city can “fleet the time carelessly, as they did in the golden world”. Hammick and Nicolson, like exiled lords, are happily lost in this mythic England, a teeming landscape where the English imagination and identity can take wing. Beyond this self-willed enchantment, there’s a more serious argument at play here; the persuasive suggestion that the creative artist – poet or painter – does best when at one with the natural world. This, outstandingly, is true of Wordsworth. Within this Eden, however, there’s a worm of doubt. Which brings us to the contentious question that nags at the heart of the poets’ bromance. What, precisely, was Dorothy’s contribution, she who is remembered as “always slightly behind” on the walks her brother took with Coleridge? Dorothy had her own, shy, occluded brilliance, the gift that Keats described as “that trembling, delicate and snail-horn perception of Beauty”. Nicolson writes that Dorothy was “both stronger and weaker” than her brother. She was small and bright, sharp, attentive and slight of figure, full of life. To Coleridge, she was Wordsworth’s “exquisite Sister – a woman indeed!” He loved her in a way he did not love Sara, his wife. Dorothy’s Journals bursts into life just as her brother was launching into the poetry for which he would be always remembered. Her observation of nature, especially of the famous daffodils, was superior to her brother’s and was prodigal in its gift of raw material. Here, Nicolson has hardly more interest in the fashionable “Matilda effect” than Wordsworth or Coleridge. To his ecstatic trio, no doubt, such issues would seem vulgar, irrelevant and reductive. As Coleridge puts it: “All things shall live in us & we shall live/In all things that surround us.” It could not last, of course. As this rural idyll unfolded, Coleridge discovered an imaginative polyphony that left Wordsworth rather cold. The older man became withdrawn and solitary. When Lyrical Ballads finally came out, the launch was, in Nicolson’s summary, “a publishing shambles”. The deepest mysteries of this “marvellous year” remain happily unplumbed, if much more famous. • The Making of Poetry: Coleridge, the Wordsworths and Their Year of Marvels by Adam Nicolson is published by William Collins (£25). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99