Confession: I’m a romcom fan. I know it’s not popular for a bloke, let alone a gay bloke like me, to say he loves a romantic comedy. But there it is. I point to Disney as the main culprit behind my fascination with a narrative arc that ends in happily ever after. I’ve supplemented these childhood foundations with romantic epics influenced by my Wiradjuri-hailing nan and her middle-of-the-road, nostalgic worldview. As heteronormative and formulaic as they can be, romantic films have been a secret, saccharine pleasure. I love the way the genre’s stray plot strands all come together in the end, where love inevitably triumphs and we’re left with a nice, neat bow. Yet sometimes a romcom goes beyond the genre. Top End Wedding is a uniquely Australian – but also decidedly un-Australian – celebration of a longing in our dusty and unreconciled heart. It blends Australia’s resistant past with the salve of our natural environment and a mob of characters who are unwaveringly committed to acceptance, hope, love and reconciliation. It tells the story of Lauren, played by Miranda Tapsell, a young Indigenous Adelaide lawyer who plans to marry her partner, Ned, in Darwin. That is, if she can organise the wedding in just 10 days – and if she can find her mother. The director, Wayne Blair, deftly navigates the romantic comedy terrain, steering clear of schmaltz and corniness. In one significant scene he nails the unique longing that is Aboriginal homesickness. It’s a pinnacle moment, featuring Ursula Yovich, that speaks to connection to country. The scene sings to the lament us mob feel, acknowledging disconnection and dispossession in a way that I know non-Aboriginal people will comprehend. When I watched the film in the Paramount Theatre, Echuca, I heard pennies-a-plenty drop in the audience around me. Tapsell is unquestionably the star in this film. Having a hand in the screenplay, our sister shines with unmistakable effervescence. As Lauren she balances the headstrong, accomplished panache the story calls for,with the character’s vulnerability. This is particularly true when it becomes clear that a lack of culture, language and being on country is missing in Lauren’s otherwise happy life. Tapsell explores this rarely-talked-about reality among Aboriginal people with tact and empathy. That her non-Indigenous fiance, played by Gwilym Lee, is there – charming, attentive and all ears – speaks volumes about the broader empathy us mob need when unpacking our experiences of colonisation. The script is strong and assured, with just enough cheese to satisfy romcom quotas. Credit is also due to the wider cast, including the hearty comic abilities of Elaine Crombie, the light-and-shade balancing act performed by Shari Sebbens, Huw Higginson, who plays Lauren’s heartbroken dad, and the brilliant Kerry Fox as the icy queen who melts in the warm climes of the Northern Territory. There is also a delightful, camp-as, cameo from the playwright Jason de Santis, who enters on a golf buggy, replete with Haus of Dizzy red, black, yellow and rainbow earrings, and sets about facilitating Lauren’s introduction to the Tiwi Islands. It’s easy to imagine that De Santis ad libbed his beautifully bent tour of the Tiwi, and so I take my hat off to Blair for weaving both a gay and transgender thread into a story dedicated to community. Top End Wedding serves as the perfect vehicle to represent an Australia that is rarely given media coverage. The film demonstrates a yearning for genuine reconciliation. As an audience, we hope that the Aboriginal woman lives happily ever after with the sensitive British lad, despite the trials of history, but we also suspend our disbelief for long enough to imagine an Australia that is no longer indifferent to Aboriginal deaths in custody, the disparity between the health we enjoy (or don’t) and the quality of life we’re all entitled to. Representations of Indigenous Australians are rarely – if ever – according such scenic flights of romantic fancy. This film promises a new dawn, an assuredly sophisticated Australia that wants to forge a heart made of black and white and rainbow-waving pride. Thank you, mob, for having the courage to go there. More please.