Change UK could agree with the Liberal Democrats not to stand candidates in the same constituencies at the next general election, the party’s spokesman has said. The former Labour MP Chuka Umunna said he thought a pact between the two parties “would be sensible” when asked if his recently formed party could forge an alliance with the Lib Dems, similar to that between the Social Democratic party and the Liberal party in the 1983 general election. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today on Saturday, Umunna said: “The remain forces in this country need to work even more closely together than we have managed to achieve up to this point between now and the general election. “I personally don’t think we should be competing at a general election and, of course, whilst we had a system of proportional representation at the European elections, it’s going to be first past the post in a general election, so we have got to get our ducks in a row and work out what configuration is appropriate for 2019 and beyond, instead of just perhaps using the same model from the 1980s.” However, talks with pro-remain parties about standing a single candidate in the Peterborough byelection next week collapsed and a Change UK memo leaked last month appeared to outline the party’s plans to usurp the Lib Dems and secure the public support of their backers. Umunna’s comments come after an internal row within Change UK. The party’sleader, Heidi Allen, threatened to quit in the run-up to the European elections after a majority within the party decided not to advocate tactical voting for Liberal Democrat candidates outside London and the south-east. “Yes, I did [threaten to quit],” she told Channel 4 News. “I am very, very troubled by this. This is a massive decision for a party to take. Had it been left to me, I would have absolutely advised tactical voting.” Allen, who left the Conservative party to join other breakaway Tory and Labour MPs in Change UK, said the majority view was that “they didn’t want to go that way”.