Today’s twentysomethings get a fair amount of flak for being righteous and moralistic, as if, given the world they’ve inherited, they’ve got much choice. Ed Night fits this description like an ethically sourced glove – but the challenge for him and any other young comic with a conscience is how to crank wokeness through the old comedy mincer and turn it into laughter. Night needn’t worry though, as he has the knack, and obviously so. He has an easy swagger about him, a dash of mischief and the all-important gags to prove his comic chops. But he isn’t ducking any issues either. Whether it’s his crusade to become a better feminist by giving up porn or how we rationalise listening to disgraced musicians such as Michael Jackson, Night is forthright and will let the gags slide for a minute while he makes his point. One of his main theses is that words aren’t enough, deeds are what change the world. As a comedian, words are his deeds, but Night mocks this as if it’s still not enough, such is his sense of responsibility. This show, An Aesthetic, began life at last summer’s Edinburgh festival, and gained Night some brief notoriety for a routine about Russell Brand. Much of the show has changed since then but that routine remains powerful. It also contains an utterly gratifying punchline, one that communicates by itself that he knows what he’s doing. Prior to all this is a fair amount of fluff; half an hour of bitty material on his Irish family and his recent experiences of gigging in Australia. Momentum only really comes after the mid-point, when he discusses gender, abuse and social media (Trump, Farage and the Tories, incidentally, don’t get a mention). On this evidence, Night is a much better comic when he’s got something to get his teeth into, and devotes due time to it. Things do get a bit Alan Parker, Urban Warrior (or Rick the People’s Poet, depending on your vintage), as he veers towards preachiness. But Night knows where to draw the line, blessed as he is with self-awareness and insight to go with the funnies. At Soho theatre, London, until 18 May