For a sport that has spent the majority of its existence confined largely to the M62, the significance of what Catalans Dragons have achieved in the past year with regard to broadening rugby league’s horizons is perhaps greater than anything seen before. In the wake of last August’s Challenge Cup triumph at Wembley those in charge of developing the game in Catalonia promised there would be a long-lasting legacy in the region after ensuring the sport’s most prestigious trophy was claimed by an overseas club for the first time. This was some way to deliver on that promise. Make no mistake about it, while the Nou Camp was not a sell-out on Saturday by any stretch of the imagination, it was an occasion that certainly underlined the appetite for rugby league in Catalonia - supported by an accomplished Catalans performance that continues their push for further honours. The occasion and venue will be the focus of attention but it was easy to overlook the fact that the Dragons now sit third after defeating the reigning champions, Wigan Warriors, in front of the largest regular season crowd, 31,555, in Super League’s history: beating 25,004 for Wigan v St Helens in 2005. That around a quarter of the crowd were estimated to have bought tickets directly from Barcelona also suggests this should not be a one-off adventure. The sport has flirted with Barcelona without success in the past but there are surely already serious conversations happening about a return in the near future. As for the game it was the hosts who put on a sterling second-half show after an opening 40 minutes when the occasion looked as though it had got the better of both sides. There were two tries in a stop-start first half, at the end of which Catalans led 8-6. Razzle-dazzle attack is normally the order of the day inside the Camp Nou but it was firm defensive efforts that laid the foundations for the Dragons’ half-time lead. After sustaining plenty of pressure on their own line, Catalans’ sole try in the first half came from the hooker, Michael McIlorum, who barged over from close range to make it 8-0. Wigan reduced the deficit on the stroke of the interval when Liam Marshall raced away down the right to touch down – but any hopes of a comeback were quickly extinguished by a near faultless Catalans performance after the break. Three tries in a devastating six-minute period took the game away from the Warriors, who were cheered on by around 5,000 of their own supporters in the stadium. Wigan thought they had gone in front when Marshall looked to have scored his second but the winger was in touch and Catalans made them pay. First, David Mead scythed through to extend Les Dracs’ lead, before Tony Gigot added a penalty to make it 16-6. From the resulting kick-off Brayden Wiliame broke free down the left and, though he was felled by the scrambling defence, Catalans held their nerve and, three plays later, Samisoni Langi charged over. Sam Kasiano then put the result beyond doubt with their fourth try, before Mead’s second brought the largest reaction of the day, as the home crowd were given further reason to cheer on what was fast becoming a momentous afternoon. Wigan finished with tries from Oliver Gildart and Zak Hardaker but by then it was clear this was going to be another special afternoon for Super League’s history boys. London Broncos moved level with Leeds and Hull KR on points but are still at the bottom of the table on points difference after their 42-34 win over Wakefield at Ealing. It was looking comfortable for the Broncos until Wakefield came back from 42-6 down and scored four tries in the final 10 minutes. Hull FC moved into fourth place after their 19-12 win at second-placed Warrington, who are now six points behind St Helens.