New York’s annual Met Gala (2019 theme: Camp: Notes on Fashion) gave the good sport of celebrity-watching the earnest air of a third-year dissertation last week, as people dusted off their critical theory textbooks – for decorative purposes, right there on the shelf, pristine, next to a well-thumbed 50 Shades – and wondered how many paragraphs of Susan Sontag’s Notes on Camp Spider-Man star Zendaya had managed to commit to memory. I love the spectacle of the Metropolitan Museum of Art fundraiser at the best of times, if only because giving a massive party for famous people a theme also provides spectators who are less versed in fashion’s regulations a kind of rulebook by which to judge it. This one was even more fun than 2013’s Punk: Chaos to Couture, which revealed that punk’s lasting legacy had in fact been a handful of studs and a heavier eyeliner than usual. If there’s one topic I enjoy more than toast, dogs or pretentious TV dramas that will never get close to an audience size that would justify the budget, it’s camp, so the fallout has been a feast of riches. Sontag wrote that to talk about camp is to betray it, which makes it the Fight Club of cultural phenomena, but then she went on to write a whole essay about it any way. Last week provided endless discussion around what, and who, is camp and who owns camp. If camp is about being an inherent outsider, then having that discussion in the context of one of the most elite parties in the world is certainly risque. It did, at least, upend traditions. Attendees who turned up in the usually safe tuxes and gowns: not camp. People who brought an entourage of men to help them make an entrance truly worthy of the theme: camp. The Pose star Billy Porter, who arrived dressed as a sun god carried in on a black velvet sedan by topless men, told Vogue that he thought the evening (and the exhibition of the same name that it launched) was “bringing the respect back to something that is high, high art”. The writer, producer and actor Lena Waithe joined Porter in directing the party where to look, when she arrived in a lilac tuxedo with “Black drag queens inventend [sic] camp” embroidered on the back. A closer look at its pinstripes revealed that they consisted of Diana Ross and Sylvester lyrics. Waithe, who wore a rainbow cape to last year’s gala, giving its Fashion and the Catholic Imagination theme a much-needed political shove, once again showed how it should be done. The north may well remember, but it has nothing on the long-term memory of Game of Thrones fans. Not only did Emilia Clarke have to answer to those who suggested she might be responsible for the errant disposable coffee cup in the scene where all around her supped ale from horns – “Did I just stumble upon the truth here?” she posted on Instagram, captioning a picture of her in costume, holding a suspiciously familiar-looking drinking receptacle. What’s more, an interview with her discussing the final season in 2018 has resurfaced, to the pleasure of everyone feeling a little funny about the controversial direction of Daenerys’s storyline. I had more of a problem with Sansa deciding she was grateful for all that sexual violence making her a stronger person, but each to their own. “Are you happy with how things ended?” asked a reporter. Clarke giggled awkwardly, before speaking directly to camera with a face that looked, at best, not entirely sincere. “Best season ever!” Obviously the Game of Thrones stars are pros at sitting on spoilers, so it could have been a diversionary tactic, but with only two episodes left, we’ll soon see just how sincere she really was. I have a lot of appreciation for the point during a once-mega-successful pop star’s long-term career when they stop feeling hamstrung by earlier achievements, the of-the-moment pop hits, the heartthrob years followed by their inevitable decline, and start embracing them. I also have a soft spot for “An Evening With” live events – so camp it’s a wonder nobody went to the Met Gala as one – so Jason Donovan’s current Amazing Midlife Crisis Tour’ sounds like it has been a real treat. Even more delightful than the prospect of on-stage banter about Bouncer the dog and an acoustic version of Any Dream Will Do, though, was a local news story, on the back of the tour, about a long-time Donovan fan called Helen Harris. In 1990, when she was 12, she won a competition on Children’s BBC after correctly identifying Donovan from his old school photo. “I’d seen it in Smash Hits magazine the week before, I adored Smash Hits, so I knew exactly which one he was,” she told BBC Hereford & Worcester last week. When Donovan phoned the 12-year-old live on air to tell her she’d won, and to invite her to see him on tour, she sounded entirely underwhelmed. “I might,” she replied. In fact, she had been too shy to meet Donovan in 1990 and it was the biggest regret of her life that she didn’t see him on tour. But on Wednesday she found that her husband had bought her surprise tickets for the current tour and had arranged for her to meet Donovan at long last. “It was all that I wanted it to be and more,” she said. “I don’t know how I’m supposed to do a day’s work after last night.” • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnist