So the “rich London v poor regions” canard has taken flight again. The statement “London is rich” is either meaningless or false. A great deal of money is made in London, very little of which accrues to the great mass of Londoners. Many very rich people live in London: this makes most Londoners poorer by pricing them out of accommodation and other limited assets. You contrast the situation in the devolved nations with that of the English regions (Left behind: How the capital has pulled away from the rest of the UK, 6 May). But London – with more people than Scotland and Wales together, or any of the regions – has no devolved government of its own. If London could tax the super-rich who choose to live here and spend the proceeds on Londoners – if London could control who is allowed to buy up London and how London property is used – then London would indeed be rich. As it is, London is rather under enemy occupation by the rich and their government.John WilsonLondon • Your editorial (London and England: Bringing the country’s two nations together is daunting – and essential, 7 May) breezily glosses over deprivation in the capital as an inconvenient truth. Almost 700,000 children are living in poverty in London – the highest rate of any part of the UK. The city has 68% of England’s homeless households, as well as 34% of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children. In London local government, we fully recognise our shared interests with the rest of the country. This is why we work with council leaders across England in calling for sustainable funding for local services and for greater devolution to shift power away from Whitehall and towards local democratic control. Londoners need investment in their public services, as do the people of Manchester, Leeds, Liverpool and all other communities across England.Cllr Peter JohnChair of London Councils • I started my working life as a sociology teacher 40 years ago in 1979. I quickly learned that it was an unpopular occupation even then and moved on. I entirely agree, however, about the importance of teaching it in schools (Letters, 7 May): it presents realities the present government would prefer not to think about. Another place that appears to be lacking sociologists is the Guardian’s editorial columns. Of course there is a divide between rich and poor in Britain, and at the top level that contrast can be seen by comparing London and the rest of the country. But that is the start of the analysis, not the end of it, since there are significant divisions in London too. Average life expectancy in Tottenham is not much over 70 years, while in the most wealthy parts of Kensington it is over 90. It is not a question of London versus the rest. As many sociologists will tell you, it is a matter of class.Keith FlettTottenham, London • Your editorial rightly calls for a “redistribution of power, of agency and ultimately of wealth”. Surely the easiest and most effective place to start is tapping land values to fund the local infrastructure needed for a better life? Local authorities need powers to fund the extra investment to tackle inequalities, whether through improving public transport, building affordable housing, or greening grey areas. My new report Land for Housing shows how Dutch and German cities have created fairer places, which offer models for rebalancing our towns and cities, and creating a more united country.Dr Nicholas FalkExecutive director, The URBED Trust