Mo Farah has conceded he will almost certainly never run a track race again and said his sights are now firmly on running the Olympic marathon in Tokyo. Speaking after winning the Vitality London 10km on Monday ahead of Andy Butchart, Farah admitted that, while he had wanted to defend his world 10,000m title in Doha, he had changed his mind because it was too close to the Chicago marathon. “I would have loved to have won more medals for my country, as well as run Chicago, but the two events are only a week apart in October,” Farah said. “If I did Doha how much would it take out of me for the marathon? At the marathon you can’t give these guys an inch. If you are not on your A game, you will get beat.” Asked if it meant that his track dream was now dead, he nodded. “I think so, at the minute.” The 36-year-old has changed his mind before but he accepts it is increasingly unlikely he would return to the track given he last raced there in 2017. “Whenever I watch the 10,000m guys, I speak to my coach and ask: ‘Do you think I could do that? Because I think I could.’ But at the same time you have to be smart and you have to think about not just this year but the Tokyo 2020 Olympics.” When asked directly if he was going to run the marathon in Tokyo he said: “At the minute, yeah. The strategy is to build up in the marathon. The more marathons I do, and the more experience I get, the better chance I have of a medal.” Farah also denied that his extraordinary row with Haile Gebrselassie had affected his performance at the London marathon when he finished a disappointing fifth. “To be honest I am kind of sick of it in a minute but I stick by every word I said. It is the truth,” he said. “As an athlete you’ve got to put your hand up when things go well and when they don’t. I felt great, it felt good. I was running 2:03 up to 35k, then shit hit the wall, bang, I was gone. From that point my last 7k was just ‘boom’. It won’t happen again.” Meanwhile, Jessica Ennis-Hill believes that Katarina Johnson-Thompson is ready to take on the world after her brilliant heptathlon victory in Götzis. The London 2012 gold medallist said that she regarded the reigning world and Olympic champion Nafi Thiam as the best athlete in any sport in the world – but insisted that if anyone could challenge her in Doha it would be Johnson-Thompson, who scored 6,813 points at the weekend. “If you put all of Kat’s PBs together she’s got a huge score so she is slowly working out how to bring those big performances on a big stage,” said Ennis-Hill. “Götzis, although it’s a cute little village, it is still the world stage. So that is the next step up, which she has done. Doha is going to test her in a different way. But I think she is more than ready for it.” Ennis-Hill said she was particularly impressed at how Johnson-Thompson had “massively” improved her throws since making the decision to train in France at the start of 2017. “But Thiam does not mess around,” she said. “At the Rio Olympics her shoulder was hanging off yet she still threw over 50 metres when she had to. I was like “Oh my God”. She is that kind of competitor and she’s not going to want to let Kat beat her. It will test Kat in so many ways, it will put a lot of pressure on her, but equally I think Kat can start putting a little bit of pressure on Thiam too.”