Our series of American-style puzzles set to suit British readers continues: you can download #12, Why do they suddenly appear?, in digital and printable form. Its setter, Spuggy, is familiar in our cryptic cluing competitions as Schroduck and was our guide in a fascinating tour of German crosswords. He warns us not necessarily to expect to follow crosswords’ usual one-letter-per-square rule, as this one has “rebuses”: Having got into US puzzles through this blog, I have become interested in the techniques that the Americans have developed, which are rarely found on this side of the Atlantic. The rebus is my favourite (or should I say favorite?), so I decided I would have a go at it myself. Setting the puzzle meant first listing as many phrases as possible that would work as rebuses, then finding the ones that could cross in just the right way to fit symmetrically into the grid (US rebuses aren’t always symmetrical, or even indicated, but it seemed only fair to make them easy to find for an introductory puzzle). A little advice to anyone else who wants to set US-style puzzles – pay attention to the grid. It is easy to delete a square or two to deal with a corner where the words just won’t fit, but if you are not careful then before you know it you will have blacked out half the puzzle. Which brings us to a reminder that we are continuing to experiment with what works in this form for a UK audience. For example, yes: US puzzle editors may look askance at some of this puzzle’s black blocks, or at its clues that offer definitions that are cryptic in a way that feels more British. Being pioneers, we can set our own expectations – feedback is appreciated. General tips: Every square is part of an across as well as a down answer. The clues are straight, if at first ambiguous, and crossing letters are helpful (although there may be some funny business in the longer “theme entries”). The entries contain fragments of phrases as well as “dictionary words”. An abbreviation in a clue indicates that the solution is an abbreviation. .puz files can be opened in Across Lite or Crossword Solver – solvers who don’t fancy that should use the print version. Your own puzzles are very welcome. The answers to this puzzle can be seen in the digital version or in this pdf. Many thanks to Schroduck (who can also be found at Sparrow & Dove) and on Twitter as @stejormur. Finally, the previous puzzles are: 1 And We’re Off!2 Cheers!3 PO …4 Store’s in what?5 Cryptic Currencies6 (miscellaneous)7 Money talks8 Shoot!9 Long shots10 [untitled]11 They’re Not *Always* Rude