1) Niki Lauda died this week aged 70. The three-time F1 world champion survived a near-fatal accident and was a boss behind the wheel as well as a ferocious competitor. Here are some of his most iconic moments, the remarkable story of his career, some lovely tributes and a video obituary. And it’s the Monaco Grand Prix this weekend, where Lauda enjoyed wins in 1975 and 1976. And get on board with Lauda’s vintage Ferrari at Monaco. 2) It’s the Football League play-off finals this weekend, and some of the teams taking part have been there before. Sunderland take on Charlton in the League One Wembley showpiece. Please let it repeat the chaotic brilliance of the 4-4 draw between the two sides at Wembley in 1998. Michael Gray missed the crucial penalty for Sunderland back then, but he was happy to recall an epic day’s football with Alan Curbishley 20 years later. Meanwhile, Tranmere face Newport in the League Two play-off final. Rovers were at Wembley only a year ago, beating Boreham Wood 2-1 in the National League play-off final despite being reduced to 10 men after 48 seconds. And Aston Villa will hope for a better outcome against Derby than last year, when Tom Cairney sliced through them in Fulham’s 1-0 win. You want more football? OK. Never try to humiliate Francesco Totti – he’s the boss. Cheeky finish wasn’t it? Speaking of which, here’s a school footballer getting inventive with his backside to convert a corner. 3) All eyes on lane four in this 4x100m relay comeback for the ages at the West Virginia state meet. 4) Some now you see it, now you don’t fake play softball brilliance here as Trine University’s pitcher fakes a throw to base, which the fielders fake reactions to, prompting the Geneseo baserunner to set off for home only to be tagged. The play gave Trine victory in the NCAA DIII Super Regional Championship too. Whoop! 5) Jack Field performs a world-record 974ft-high motorbike backflip on the top of Melbourne’s Eureka Tower because he can. And if you felt like that was cheating, here’s a 190ft monster flip and how about Ben Fiez sticking a double backflip on a mini motorbike in Melbourne in 2008? 6) What a winning rally to end your table tennis career on. 1) Phil Mickelson proves there’s more to golf than, well, golf. Thumbs up Phil! 2) All 79 minutes and 31 seconds of the longest frame in World Snooker Championship tournament history. 3) Pressure drop: all manner of puddle palaver for Jordan Spieth at the 2016 US PGA Championship Spotters’ badges: whobroughtoranges, GrahamClayton Do subscribe if you fancy. Do subscribe if you fancy.