Pep Guardiola has delivered a stark warning to the rest of the Premier League by declaring he is certain Manchester City will be “stronger, better” next season. City will become the first team since Manchester United a decade ago to retain the title if they beat Brighton on Sunday, which would take their haul to 198 points in two seasons, while they could complete an unprecedented domestic treble by defeating Watford in next Saturday’s FA Cup final. But Guardiola, who feels City have improved since their 100-point campaign last year, is confident they will progress again. “We will be better,” he said. “Next season we will be stronger. I am sure. We will be stronger. We will be better.” City scored a Premier League record 106 goals last season. They are on 91 so far but Guardiola feels they have developed as an attacking force, especially when confronted with the challenge of breaking down packed defences. “We understand what we want to do quicker,” he said. “I think we attack much better. Teams that have an incredible low block, that means 11 playing in the [penalty] box: how we attack them. “We concede not too many counterattacks and we defend the set pieces well. In general, especially in the Premier League, we were so consistent. We have done quite similar things to last season but we repeat it every three days so at the end we do many things better.” Guardiola is so convinced of his players’ determination to win back-to-back titles that he believes he does not need to deliver a team talk on Sunday. “I don’t have to say anything to motivate [them],” he said. “I think my speech will be zero. They want to win the Premier League. What I saw in the training sessions … they want to win it. Knowing we can lose it. Because the unpredictability of the game – that is what we saw in the Champions League quarter-finals – that is why this game is amazing.” The Catalan claimed he is sleeping perfectly and said the anxious moments in City’s season came before January’s 2-1 win over their title rivals, when defeat could have left them with an insurmountable deficit. “I am so happy,” he said with a smile. “No nerves at all. I was nervous before Liverpool, seven points behind, and we could be 10 points behind. It was: ‘Aah, it will be so difficult.’ Not [nervous] now, no way. I sleep like a little boy. It is a dream, a privilege. I love it. “The whole of England will be watching, probably Europe. We want to show our game, to our incredible fans coming to support us, dreaming to win the Premier League again. It is a joy to be here in front of the players on Saturday, then Sunday.” He said his message, were he to attempt a team talk, would be: “‘Go out and play like you have done in the last two seasons. Be yourself and whatever happens, it is incredible what you have done.’ That’s it.”