Michael Heseltine knows how to make a grand exit. The man who famously got himself suspended from parliament for swinging the mace, before going on to storm out of Margaret Thatcher’s cabinet over the Westland helicopter scandal, has now lost the Tory whip for threatening to vote Liberal Democrat in this week’s European parliament elections. The door has been left wide open for a return, but while he may not want to leave, Hezza evidently doesn’t intend to take his party’s descent into madness lying down. Which is more than can be said for some of his colleagues. Boris Johnson, we have been earnestly assured for years, would struggle to become leader because plenty of Tory MPs would lie down in front of a bulldozer rather than let him through to a ballot of the membership. Those who had seen his shortcomings up close would not risk him dazzling those who haven’t. They have had more than enough time to think about how that would work in practice yet when the One Nation group of Conservative MPs, the natural home of the moderate if not exclusively the pro-remain, met to discuss the leadership contest it was at pains to stress it wasn’t plotting to “stop Boris”. The group may come out against Dominic Raab, Esther McVey and Andrea Leadsom – the hard Brexiters who aren’t as likely to win – but not Johnson, with some of its members already falling in behind him. Nor is it likely to organise behind any one mainstream candidate, the obvious way of trying to stop a no-deal Brexit candidate winning, because again they can’t agree on one. Instead there’s a lot of optimistic chatter about how Johnson is a social liberal at heart (true) who never really meant all that populist stuff deep down (probably true) and will therefore pivot away from hard Brexit if he wins (and that’s where all bets are off). Tories have seen the polls showing the Brexit party lying second even in a putative general election and panicked, reasoning that they’d rather have a hard Brexiter who doesn’t really mean it in Downing Street than one who absolutely does. But the lesson from Theresa May’s tenure is that even a prime minister who voted remain was inexorably pushed to the right and that was before the Conservative party faced an existential threat from Nigel Farage. It is, I suppose, not impossible that Johnson has a secret plan for a spectacular U-turn that somehow gets around the fact that up to two-thirds of Conservative members actively support economic suicide by no deal and are in no mood to vote for anyone who contradicts them, while Farage is just waiting to scoop up any voter who feels conned. But if this strikes you as a watertight defence against the prospect of national disaster then I have a London Bridge to sell you. It seems inconceivable that the Conservative party could change leaders without going to the country, either in a general election or a second referendum, thus giving voters who don’t want to play Russian roulette with their lives an exit route. But there are no guarantees and that is not a risk millions of citizens should be expected to take. What makes this leadership contest unique is that in choosing their own next leader, Tory members and Tory MPs may be both choosing the next prime minister and making an irrevocable decision about the country’s relationship with Europe. They have a moral obligation to put country before party in the circumstances and it is time they started rising to the occasion. Some are trying. Philip Hammond, who must surely expect to be sacked as chancellor after May goes, is right that there is no mandate for a no-deal Brexit. Far from exploring the possibility with voters that they might fail to get a deal with the EU, prominent leavers bragged throughout the referendum campaign about how easy it would be. In deciding to make that point in front of the CBI, however, he is enlisting the help of traditionally Tory-voting businesspeople who already have their doubts about Boris “fuck business” Johnson. It is a clear attempt to wake the sleeping lions of the Tory mainstream, just as Heseltine’s tactical switch to the LibDems is a pointed reminder that millions of Tory remainers have other places to go. But it’s time for more Tories to stop crossing their fingers and to join the resistance, on behalf not only of remainers everywhere but of soft leavers who never imagined we’d end up here. As Heseltine put it, “on this issue, the transcending issue of our times, I need to stand up and be counted”. He shouldn’t do so alone. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist