Sir Philip Green’s landlords are seeking a significant increase in investment from the Arcadia owner in return for backing a rescue of his struggling fashion empire. As first revealed by the Guardian last month, Green has offered to invest £100m of new funds in the business to entice landlords into backing a rescue package that includes the closure of about 50 of Arcadia’s 570 stores and rent cuts on many more. It is understood he has offered the investment in the form of two £50m loans, one of which has already been taken up by Arcadia, which includes Topshop, Dorothy Perkins, Miss Selfridge, Evans and Wallis. However, landlords want more than £100m from the Green family and for it to be cash rather than loans. They also want a detailed business plan outlining how the money will be spent. One source said: “It’s about sexy stores combined with the kind of omni-channel offer [digital services linked with click and collect] that means the customer proposition is again compelling.” Landlords believe a cash investment would help Arcadia more than a loan as it would not lumber the retailer with interest payments and also enable it to borrow against the sum. They are keen to find a formula to keep the majority of Arcadia’s hundreds of stores trading, particularly Topshop and the multi-brand chain Outfit, which remain a draw for shoppers. There is more scepticism about the future of the group’s other brands, such as Wallis and Evans. A number of Arcadia’s major landlords, including British Land, Hammerson and Aviva, are understood to be planning to negotiate collectively, taking advice from the investment bank PJT Partners. Another major landlord, Intu, is not thought to be keen to join the group negotiations, however, as it believes Arcadia sites in its centres, which include key destinations such as Manchester’s Trafford Centre and Gateshead’s Metrocentre, are unlikely to face the brunt of rent cuts or closures. Green has put a 10% stake in the business on the table but it is understood that landlords are not keen on that option. Property companies may find it hard to explain to shareholders why they have taken a share in a business in which sales are sliding after years of underinvestment and rising competition from rivals such as Zara, Primark and H&M as well as the online specialists Asos and Boohoo. The retailer’s advisers, led by Deloitte, had hoped to announce details of the restructure, known as a company voluntary arrangement (CVA), this week. However, plans have been delayed as Arcadia struggles to secure enough support from landlords. The complex insolvency process, which could involve up to eight different trading entities, requires approval from 75% of landlords for each one. The alternatives to the CVAs are either a sale of the business or administration, but both would be difficult to swallow for Green, whose reputation has already taken a hit after the collapse of the department store chain BHS only a year after he sold it for £1 to a former bankrupt. Arcadia has bought back a 25% stake in its Topshop chain from the US private equity firm Leonard Green and is aiming to halve annual payments into its pension fund from £50m to £25m in a rescue plan designed to cut costs, and update the business to cope with online competition. The family has offered to hand over the freehold of Topshop’s main Oxford Street store in London to the pension fund as part of the negotiations. The site is thought to be worth more than £400m but is heavily mortgaged, with one source suggesting it has less than £100m of equity in it.