Bravo, Wiglaf, responding to the election of Volodymyr Zelenskiy as Ukranian president … 1ac Kyiv’s new ‘tsar’ is comic, he noted (10)[ wordplay: anagram (‘comic’) of KYIVS + abbrev. for ‘new’ + TSAR ][ anagram of KYIVSNTSAR ][ definition: composer (‘he noted’) ] … with that clue for STRAVINSKY. And if – like me – you solved Serpent’s puzzle on the last day before May without noticing anything “extra”, here’s a visual reminder … … that stepping back for a moment offers not just a restful moment and a passing of the buck to your subconscious; it might also reveal something that gives you some “free” squares. Meanwhile: Plaque to Rev John Graham / Araucaria inside Somersham Church. A memorable @guardian crossword compiler among many other things. pic.twitter.com/R3aXWCy2Th Solvers might – or might not – enjoy this 1990 episode of BBC radio sketch show And Now in Colour (starring Calendar Girls creator Tim Firth), not least for the promise of hearing “Brideshead Revisited read by Rod Hull and Emu”, but also for this voice from Wimbledon when the match is tied at six games all: — The tie-break will now come into operation. Caracas. Caracas is the capital of which South American country? Hands up: Mr Edberg?— Peru?— Sorry, Mr Hlasek?— Colombia …?— … is the correct answer! Game, set and match to Mr Hlasek. Now, this kind of geographical infelicity was more common before every writing room had a wifi connection to free access to the sum of all human knowledge; the fine film The Hudsucker Proxy had this scripted exchange from a newsroom … Behind Amy an ancient man wearing an inkman’s visor and sleeve garters toils at a large checkerboard surface over which he shuffles letter tiles and blank spaces. ANCIENT PUZZLERSay, Amy, what’s a six-letter word for an affliction of the hypothalamus? AMY (still typing)– And it’s a cinch – goitre – it’s a cinch this guy isn’t on it. … even though a goitre afflicts the thyroid; more pressingly, the earlier BBC tennis intervention is explained by this further exchange: — Advantage Edberg. Incidentally, while they’re just playing this point, er, I can’t get four down in the Times crossword today. ‘Exterior in a shout, three letters’.— Out!— Ah yes, of course, that’s it: thank you. Now then. Funny, but of course the Times would never think of publishing a container clue with a superfluous “a”. So, reader: how would you clue OUT? Thanks for your clues for (sorry) QUORN. And thank you to Cmiall for a message to those who are frustrated by the Times’ baffling attitude to subscribers. The most informative clue is PeterMooreFuller’s “Following the leaders, squire hunts fox cruelly in Leicestershire village” (read on). Croquem gets the audacity award for the mind-boggling subtractive anagram “To cook that, remove silly mistake from this?”; the same construction is in Lizard’s splendid “Marque not bad when you want to avoid meat somehow”, though he prefers “Special marque not excluding ‘fake’ meat”. The runners-up? One is Harlobarlo’s grim “Finally, Iraq and Iran importing our processed protein product”; for the other, Smylers gets an enormous hat-tip for preferring GappyTooth’s “‘Question or nominate?’ originally an option at teatime” to his own clue. The winner is Jmpyyy’s “Liquor not entertaining fare for abstainers”. Kludos to Jmpyyy; please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics below. I continue to welcome your puzzles and recommend Porcia’s. If you’ve been trying out American-style puzzles, Brendan Emmett Quigley’s Do Me a Solid is not representative of the form but might divert the more curious among you. Back over here, a reminder that Hectence never disappoints. From the quiptic (a ‘cryptic puzzle for beginners and those in a hurry’), this clue … 7d Gone off and fled with police in pursuit (6)[ wordplay: synonym for ‘fled’, followed by (‘in pursuit’) abbrev. for law-enforcement branch (‘police’) ][ RAN + CID ][ definition: ‘gone off’ ] … for RANCID. Sweet, more like.