This match encapsulated Chelsea’s bizarre campaign of extremes. There had been a chorus of boos from the home support as the players retired at the interval, all the festering doubts over Maurizio Sarri’s stewardship exposed yet again, only for the jeers to be choked within the first few minutes of the restart and replaced with a raucous taunting of Tottenham Hotspur. The Italian’s team ended the weekend with Champions League qualification guaranteed, a reality celebrated in the bars around this empty arena as Chelsea leapfrogged Spurs into third place. A return to Europe’s elite club competition constitutes a successful first season in English football, though the head coach swerved the post-match lap of appreciation, preferring to survey the scene from the mouth of the tunnel as Gary Cahill, his children in tow, led the players round the pitch. Sarri’s relationship with fans remains strained and the doubters will clearly need more than a dismissal of the FA Cup finalists to be convinced that his tenure is to be embraced. Even at a club where life is never simple these are strange times indeed. Chelsea have secured Champions League football, reached the League Cup final earlier this year and could secure passage to Baku and the Europa League final later this week, yet Sarri remains unloved. Perhaps the rather chaotic first-half showing here partly explained why, given their lack of pattern or focus as Watford, slicker and stronger, threatened to run riot. The hosts were outclassed in that period, during which unrest mounted in the stands. The head coach put that slack showing down to fatigue, his squad having returned from the 1-1 draw in Frankfurt only at 4am on Friday. “When you are not brilliant physically, you have to move the ball, one touch or two touches,” he said. “The ball is not tired. The man is tired.” Scoring so early in the second half, from Eden Hazard’s beautifully clipped cross and Ruben Loftus-Cheek’s powerful header, raised the collective mood. Within minutes David Luiz buried a second from Hazard’s 15th assist of the season. Even Gonzalo Higuaín, desperately slack in so much of his play through that plod of a first half, roused himself to clip in an exquisite third after darting behind Craig Cathcart to reach Pedro’s shrewd pass. Further chances were passed up by Olivier Giroud, Higuaín and Pedro and their new-found comfort persuaded Sarri to grant Cahill a farewell appearance for the final few minutes before his summer free transfer. A player dismayed by a lack of communication over his final year at the club could at least depart with a first appearance since November, and his team-mates giving him the bumps in the centre-circle. This could, of course, have been a Premier League farewell at Stamford Bridge for Hazard, Giroud and David Luiz too, not to mention the loanees Higuain and Mateo Kovacic, though they will feature here against Eintracht Frankfurt on Thursday, when N’Golo Kanté is likely to be absent after hurting his hamstring early on. “It’ll be very difficult to recover him for the next two matches but we’ll try and have him in the final in case [we qualify],” said Sarri, who accepted it might have been wiser to have granted the Frenchman a breather. “Probably today he had to rest. Sometimes it’s very difficult to put on the bench a player so important like Hazard, like Kanté, but you have to do it. Otherwise you take a risk. I made a mistake.” That is a concern, for all that Eintracht spent their Sunday being humiliated at Bayer Leverkusen in the Bundesliga. They will travel to London in hope rather than expectation. Watford, in contrast, had expected more than this. Quite how they ended up losing so emphatically was baffling given their considerable dominance of that first half. Troy Deeney had bullied his markers while Abdoulaye Doucouré, Gerard Deulofeu and Roberto Pereyra swarmed unchecked through midfield. It took a brilliant, instinctive save from Kepa Arrizabalaga to deny Deeney’s early header, the Spaniard leaping acrobatically to his right to push the ball on to the post. Yet profligacy became a recurring theme. Doucouré, José Holebas and Deulofeu, three times, should have scored. Holebas also clipped the bar late on and Isaac Success would have scored with his first touch had his header not flicked off Andre Gray, standing in an offside position, en route into a gaping net. Watford have now lost 11 of their last 12 games against the top six, and Manchester City await in the FA Cup final later this month. “But analyse the games against Arsenal, United, Chelsea... in many of them, we had real chances to get better results,” said Javi Gracia. “After that, for sure, I recognise we have to do something better. We have to be more clinical in that situation, more aggressive, in both boxes.”