Coventry City have announced that they have reached a groundshare agreement for next season, in case they fail to agree a deal to remain at the Ricoh Arena. An EFL extraordinary general meeting to discuss the club’s future planned for 29 May has been cancelled, with the club still hoping to agree a deal with Wasps to stay at their current home. “This groundshare is in place to make sure the club has somewhere to play in the scenario of a deal to play at the Ricoh Arena not being agreed,” a club statement read. “We can confirm that talks with the aim to achieve a deal to play at the Ricoh Arena are continuing between Coventry City FC, its owners Sisu and Wasps Holdings Limited. Our focus and desire is to agree a deal at the Ricoh Arena – this is everyone’s preferred option, and the right option for Coventry City.” The statement does not name the ground in question. Two options have been mooted, the first being Birmingham City’s St Andrew’s stadium, 18 miles away – but the EFL has said they do not want Coventry to be based any further than six miles from the Ricoh Arena. The other reported possibility is Butts Park Arena, the 6,000-seater home of Coventry’s rugby union team. However, non-league side Coventry United have recently agreed a deal for their men’s and women’s teams to play there for the next 10 years. “While the back-up of a groundshare exists to ensure the future of the football club continues, another groundshare is not something anyone wants to happen,” Coventry City’s statement continued. “Details of the agreed groundshare and of our ongoing discussions with Wasps remain confidential, due to mutually signed confidentiality agreements. “We understand the frustration that fans are feeling, and have expressed to us, at not knowing where their club will be playing next season, not being able to plan for next season and supporting Mark Robins and the team, and the time that this is taking. We will provide a further update to supporters as soon as we are able to.”