Love Nigel Farage or loathe him – I rather doubt there are many Observer readers who fall into the first category – the man knows how to run a campaign. Only a few months into its existence, his Brexit party is heading for first place and the largest vote share at the Euro elections. The substantial “just get on with it” chunk of the electorate is massing behind him. One thing this demonstrates is the potency of the simple political tune when it is played by a brassy demagogue. It is a pointless expenditure of oxygen to mock the Brexit party for its lack of a manifesto. To harvest a large haul of votes, its frontman really need do nothing else than repeatedly cry the word “betrayal” from here until polling day. This presents a formidable challenge to his competitors and it is a challenge that both the Tories and Labour will fail. A riven Conservative party cannot deal with resurgent Farageism because a cabal of its MPs, a lot of its voters and a majority of its members are in sympathy with him. It may not be entirely a joke to suggest that there will even be Tory candidates at these elections who will, in the secrecy of the ballot booth, put their mark against the Brexit party. Labour is hobbled because its message is so contorted and crippled by its leader’s ambivalence about Brexit. Jeremy Corbyn went to Kent to make a speech to launch Labour’s manifesto for these elections. Or, rather, the Labour leader had three speeches written for him and decided to read out all of them. Depending which passages you concentrated on and which face of Mr Corbyn you paid attention to, you could have had the Labour leader down as a Leaver, a Remainer or a Still Don’t Know. Whenever pressed to say whether Labour is a pro- or anti-Brexit party, he just shuffles to another place on the fence. A strong showing by the latest Farage vehicle will have consequences because of the effect it will have on the dynamics of the other parties. The greatest impact will be on the Tories. A success for the Brexit party will embolden the crash-out faction of the Conservatives and make life even harder for those Tories trying to warn their party that it will be folly to fully transform into an English nationalist sect. Mass defections of Tory voters to the Brexit party will make it more likely that the struggle to succeed Theresa May will become a competition between the many wannabe Tory leaders to see who can sound the most Farageiste. The most effective antidote to him will be a powerful result for the parties unequivocally committed to reversing Brexit. Remain has established a consistent lead over Leave in the opinion polls, but Remain voters are faced with a quandary in these elections. They are spoilt for choice – and that is a bit of a problem. In England, the Lib Dems, the Greens and Change UK are all unambiguous supporters of a fresh referendum. In Scotland and Wales, where the nationalists offer another option for anti-Brexit voters, the Remain constituency will be spread four ways. While the Brexit party is gathering the no-dealers behind one shouty banner, the anti-Brexit parties are elbowing each other as they jostle for support and fight for a hearing. Witness the Lib Dems’ adoption of the “Bollocks to Brexit” slogan: pub demotic that is crude, but attention-grabbing. There’s one advantage to be had from the multiplicity of options for the Remain voter. Change UK may be able to reach parts of the electorate that wouldn’t touch the Lib Dems – and vice-versa. The Greens can attract support that won’t back the nationalists – and vice-versa. The split in the Remain vote matters less than it would in an election decided by first past the post. These contests are fought in large regions under a version of proportional representation. But the split still matters somewhat. The form of PR employed doesn’t allow for second preferences, so the Remain parties are likely to secure fewer seats than they might have done as a unified force. Encouraging tactical voting could help a bit, but its record of achievement in British contests is spotty. The anti-Brexit cause is certainly not helped by petty squabbling between Remain parties that ought to be firmly on the same side in an election that asks only one question. Yes, I am talking to you, Lib Dems. And to you, Change UK. On Friday afternoon, a Lib Dem press release plopped into my inbox. Did it rebut the mendacities of the Brexit party? Did it nail Labour’s evasions? Did it scorn the Tories? No, the Lib Dems devoted this press release to boasting that an outgoing MEP in the south west region had endorsed them rather than Change UK, as if anyone is really interested in such feeble willy-waving by one anti-Brexit party at another when Nigel Farage is on the rampage. I am told by those very familiar with what went on in the negotiations that the Lib Dems, the Greens and Change UK did get very close to fielding a joint, pro-referendum candidate to contest the Peterborough byelection, but ultimately they failed to coalesce behind a single advocate. Some tension was inevitable between parties that are seeking support in broadly the same sort of territory. It is understandable that Change UK wants to make a splash at the Euros because this will be their electoral debut. It is natural that the Lib Dems, who have endured years of being beaten up at the ballot box, want to follow up the local elections with another strong performance to show they are back in the game, and to send Vince Cable off into retirement with a pat on the back. The Lib Dems and the Greens have always contested for the affections of voters animated by environmental issues. Healthy competition is one thing; sour rivalry is another. There is too much of that, especially between Change UK and the Lib Dems. Fault can be found on both sides. When Change UK first launched themselves into the firmament, some of their spokespeople suggested the Lib Dems were so tainted that the choice for them was between being shoved aside or gobbled up. A recently leaked strategy document spoke of stealing donors and activists from the other party. This high-handedness is resented by the Lib Dems, a party that can trace its ancestry back two centuries and currently boasts about 100,000 members. The Lib Dems were never going to just fold themselves into a new party that had not even agreed what it was going to call itself. The Lib Dems publicly welcomed the arrival of Change UK. This was sensible, because they don’t have the heft to realign British politics by themselves. Yet they have often reacted in a tribalistic and hostile fashion when the two parties have explored ways of co-operating with each other. “They see us as a threat,” says one Change UK MP. “They want us dead and gone.” How do we explain this aggression between two parties that have a mutual and passionate opposition to Brexit as well as other shared goals? Sigmund Freud would say it is the result of the innate human desire to have and protect a distinctive identity. To see a neighbour reflect oneself too much threatens a person’s unique sense of self and superiority. Freud labelled this phenomenon “the narcissism of small differences”. Well, they ought to get over it and they need to do so now. British politics is tough enough for challenger parties without self-indulgent, self-sabotaging spats with each other. Both the Lib Dems and Change UK like to commend the virtues of political traditions working with each other. They should act that way. They have their divergences of history, emphasis and approach and that may matter for the future. But these are irrelevant to a Euro election that revolves around one single, stark and enormous issue about which they are entirely agreed. Every minute wasted trying to cannibalise each other’s support is a minute not spent striving to maximise the overall anti-Brexit vote. It is too late for the Remain parties to field a common slate of candidates for the Euro elections; it is not too late to behave as friendly allies engaged in a common struggle. Whenever they see Nigel Farage mouthing his dangerous fantasies, it should be a reminder to the Remain parties that anything that divides them is utterly trivial compared with the menace that ought to unite them. The stakes are far too high for any further energy to be squandered on the narcissism of small differences. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Correspondent of the Observer