Cristiano Ronaldo was not the first man to tell Alessandro Florenzi that he is too short. As a teenager, the Italian almost lost his place in the Roma youth system when puberty failed to deliver a growth spurt in line with his peers. Only an intervention by the great Bruno Conti – capped 47 times by Italy at 5ft 6 ½ins – persuaded coaches to give him another look. Now 28 years old, and a relative giant next to Conti at 5ft 8ins, Florenzi has made more than 250 appearances for Roma’s first-team. If Ronaldo was hoping to get under his skin with a jibe about height, then the Juventus player was destined be disappointed. The two players exchanged words in the 58th minute of the Bianconeri’s game against Roma on Sunday night. Florenzi had shouted at Ronaldo for failing to put the ball out of play so a team-mate could receive treatment. The Portuguese responded with a shushing gesture and then the rejoinder: “you’re too short to talk”. Moments later, Ronaldo had the ball in the net: sprinting onto a Paulo Dybala pass and beating Antonio Mirante only for the goal to be disallowed for offside. Instead, Florenzi would open the scoring, executing a neat one-two with Edin Dzeko to get behind Giorgio Chiellini before chipping Wojciech Szczesny. As the ball bounced into the net, Florenzi kept running towards the Roma supporters in the Stadio Olimpico’s Curva Sud. His height did not keep him from vaulting the advertising hoardings, nor from leaping to the top of the fence that separates fans from the pitch. When he was done there, Florenzi turned to a TV camera and mimed shooting web from his wrists. Up in the broadcast booths, commentators wondered whether this was a coded message for Ronaldo. ‘Little’ men can still be superheroes? In fact, Florenzi’s was simply fulfilling a promise to his wife and two daughters with an impression of Spiderman. He was not thinking about Ronaldo in that moment, and why should he? Roma and Juventus have run separate races all season: the former club battling just to maintain their top-four status, while the latter romped to an eighth consecutive Scudetto. That reality has been a disappointment to Florenzi and his team-mates. Hopes were high at the start of this campaign for a Roma side that went to a Champions League semi-final last season, and which believed it was building towards a brighter future thanks to Monchi’s transfer market expertise. Instead, they have regressed. The departures of Alisson, Radja Nainggolan and Kevin Strootman in the same transfer window deprived the club of veteran leadership, and there was a lack of balance in the team-building process to replace them. Monchi amassed plenty of promising young talent, yet too much of it similar in profile. Roma have quick-footed wingers and line-breaking midfielders but a shortage of quality centre-backs or ball-winners to station in front of the defence. Too many younger players remain intermittent in their performances. Too few expensive veterans have delivered. Eusebio Di Francesco was fired as manager, and then Monchi quit. Claudio Ranieri was brought in to steady the ship, which he did, tightening the defence, but it might be too little, too late. Florenzi’s goal paved the way for a victory over Juventus on Sunday, with Edin Dzeko making it 2-0 before the end. But if Inter beat relegated Chievo on Monday night, Roma will still finish the round three points outside the top four with two games remaining. They would lose a head-to-head tie-breaker with fourth-placed Atalanta, or indeed Milan – who sit level with them in fifth. In the build-up to Sunday’s game, Florenzi described it as “our worst season in six years”. He is hardly free from blame. It was Florenzi whose needless tug on the shirt of Fernando gifted Porto a penalty in the second-leg of their Champions League last-16 tie, paving the way for Roma’s exit. He left the Estádio do Dragão that day in tears. Florenzi feels the weight of defeats more than most. Following the retirement of Francesco Totti, he has taken on Daniele De Rossi’s mantle as ‘Capitan Futuro’ – Future Captain – and in practice already wears the armband often, with his colleague no longer in condition to play every game at 35 years old. Just like Totti and De Rossi, he is Rome born and bred, a son to parents who ran a bar in the Vitinia suburb. Yet following those two is no small task for a player who, whilst talented, does not belong to the same bracket of superstar. Florenzi never lived up to the claim of former sporting director Walter Sabatini that he could become a better right-back than Dani Alves. Indeed, even after half a decade in the position, there are plenty who question whether he is a right-back at all. Earlier in his career he played more often in central midfield and on the wing. In any role, he is a diligent and hard-working, but is that enough? He is Roma’s joint-fifth best paid player, yet when Monchi signed Rick Karsdorp in 2017, it was ostensibly to take over as starting right-back. Only a string of injuries to the Dutchman have prevented us from finding out who would win that battle. A section of Roma’s fanbase turned on Florenzi after he refused to come and apologise under the Curva – and he stopped Nainggolan from going at the same time – following a defeat by Sampdoria in early 2018. His stalling over the new contract that he eventually signed in August added fresh fuel to their fire. Goals like the one he scored against Juventus may serve to douse their anger. Nobody in the Curva was protesting as he leapt to celebrate with them on Sunday. The crowd at the Stadio Olimpico was the biggest Roma have had for a league game all season – notwithstanding their bleak prospects of making it into the top four. Champions League football is hugely important to this club as it seeks to sustain protracted and costly efforts to break ground on a new stadium. Sometimes, though, football can also bring simpler pleasures. How could Roma fans fail to find joy in the moment when their little man made Cristiano Ronaldo look small? • Sunday night’s game also saw the launch of Juventus’s new home kit for next season, with the iconic black-and-white stripes abandoned in favour of a half-and-half approach with a pink stripe down the middle. The look has gone down very badly in Italy, with former Juventus midfielder Zbigniew Boniek among the gentler critics with his suggestion that it looked more like what a jockey would wear in Siena’s famous Palio horserace – but inevitably this look will have been designed with international audiences (and the opportunity to sell something different with Ronaldo’s name on it) in mind. Suggestions that Americans were put off by the classic look’s resemblance to a referee’s jersey from their own domestic sports, however, do seem a little far-fetched to me. Juventus already had the best-selling shirt of any Champions League club in four US states as of last October, according to soccer.com. • Could Milan yet squeeze back into fourth? They beat Fiorentina and now have games against relegated Frosinone and a comfortably safe Spal to come. Atalanta go away to Juventus next. Unlike Roma, Milan would hold a head-to-head tie-breaker over the Bergamese. • It’s even tighter at the bottom, where Empoli closed to within a point of Genoa. But the Tuscan side have to go away to a Torino team battling for Europe next. Genoa are at home to Cagliari, but the goalscoring gap left by Krzysztof Piątek’s departure is glaring. He remains their top scorer on 13 goals. Nobody else has more than four. • The shadow of Antonio Conte looms ever larger over Luciano Spalletti at Inter. Officially no deal is done, and Conte took a lie-detector test on Le Iene last week in which he denied any formal contact with any club (he also insisted he had all his own hair), but many in Milan believe that it is now a formality – as long as the club make the Champions League. Which would, of course, present a fascinating conundrum of motivation for Spalletti … · If you only watch one Serie A goal this week, make it this one from Andrea Belotti. Fiorentina 0-1 Milan, Cagliari 1-2 Lazio, Atalanta 2-1 Genoa, Roma 2-0 Juventus, Spal 1-2 Napoli, Sampdoria 1-2 Empoli, Frosinone 1-3 Udinese, Torino 3-2 Sassuolo