The start of Mental Health Awareness Week on Monday was marked in racing by the publication of ‘stark’ findings in research undertaken by a team at Liverpool John Moores University’s School of Sport and Exercise on the impact of mental health on individuals involved in the sport. The research, which involved detailed interviews with 131 people employed in racing including jockeys, trainers, stud and stable staff and other stakeholders, was commissioned by Racing Welfare. It will also lead the response to its findings, which include a suggestion that “the weekly workload [required for many roles in racing] potentially seems unsustainable individually or organisationally”. The concern, the report continues, “is that extensive working hours, including overtime without pay, is now normalised, placing great psychological strain on those involved.” It is a stark assessment of the working lives of many of the individuals and groups without whom the sport would cease to function, but it appears to be backed up by interviews with the people concerned. For instance, almost 87% of the jockeys interviewed said that they are currently experiencing “stress, anxiety or depression”, or had experienced one or more of these during the last 12 months. For trainers, the figure was 74.6%, while among stable and stud staff it was 72% and 79% respectively. Nine per cent of trainers and 13% of jockeys reported “problems due to alcohol use”, while only 9.3% of riders responded to a list that also included problems due to gambling, illegal drugs and memory problem by saying that they “had suffered no such health concerns”. In terms of stress, different groups within the sport listed different principal causes of stress in their working lives. Jockeys, for instance, listed “financial uncertainty” as the number one cause of work-related stress, followed by “finding rides generally” and “maintaining appearance of success (status)”. Concerns about being “jocked off” rides as well as weight management were also mentioned, along with isolation, long hours driving to the races and both online and verbal abuse from “the gambling public”. “Downtime, there isn’t any,” the rider said. “I suppose if you were one of the top 15 jockeys you could afford [it] or not worry about missing anything … but me personally, I couldn’t take time off as such to go on holiday. If you are one of the top boys, if they had a week off they’d be almost guaranteed to get their rides back where if a journeyman jockey was to have a week off halfway through the season, somebody jumps on them horses, or wins on them, you’d probably never get back on them again. I’ve been riding for 15 years and this [while injured] is the first time my wife and my two children had had two weeks holiday with me without a horse.” Another highlighted the pressures of getting to the races on clogged roads, and the potential impact on performance, saying: “Saturday, I rode up in York and I literally only just got there, the traffic was horrendous and I got there and I was shaking cos I had just driven so fast up the road, and then you’re straight on the back of a horse and you’re riding this horse like a lunatic because you’re head’s going round a million times an hour, you haven’t had time to sit down, a cup of tea or anything, straight on the back of a horse and then you’ve got all these people’s expectations riding on your back for this minute that you’re on this horse and then it’s all over.” In terms of weight management, a third rider reporting “doing [losing] 13½lb in 22 hours” when “sat in the car with the heaters on full blast and … I had two tops, coat, woolly hat on and we were sat in traffic … there’s people with their convertible roof down and shorts and T-shirt it’s something like 28 degrees outside and I still had to get there and drop another 4[lb].” That required a run around the track and three hours in the sauna, and then, having shed the weight, the horse “didn’t even jump off”. For trainers, meanwhile, the three leading “stressors” in their jobs were “injuries to horses”, “financial uncertainty” and “bad debts from owners”, with “owners’ expectations” and “balancing family/personal alongside work” also a concern for a significant number of interviewees. Among those interviewed, nearly 70% said that they were taking home “less than £29,000” a year income, and more than half said that training provided their sole income. Training, the report concludes, “is not an incredibly lucrative profession with only 14.54% earning more than £60,000 per year”. Among stable staff, the most significant causes of stress were “ensuring wages cover personal costs”, “feeling must work even when sick, ill or injured” and “working overtime without pay”. Here too there are disturbing personal accounts of working conditions and attitudes, including one pregnant groom who describes being “treated like shit” and having “to leave on maternity early and paint houses instead”, and another who says that “they did not know a day without pain”. Will Lambe, an executive director of the British Horseracing Authority, welcomed the report, saying that it “is essential that the sport shines a light on what is a major societal issue, and better understands how it impacts on the British racing and breeding industry”. Lambe continued: “It is very important that everyone in racing should focus on the content of this report and understand and consider the implications for their own area. There are some stark findings, and the report clearly highlights that steps need to be taken to better support the mental health of our participants and diverse workforce.” • In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org. You can contact the mental health charity Mind by calling 0300 123 3393 or visiting mind.org.uk. York’s Dante meeting will dominate the remainder of the week but there are still some decent fields and competitive events on the two Flat cards on Tuesday. Beverley should certainly attract a few of the early arrivals in Yorkshire, and Kylie Rules (3.50) could well extend her winning run to three this season in the best race of the day. A switch to Ruth Carr’s yard over the winter has produced immediate results, with Kylie Rules winning over this track and trip off marks of 60 and 66. The times of both races have been good and a further 5lb rise in the weights seems unlikely to stop her. Qaaraat (3.20) has been in decent form on the all-weather in recent weeks and returns to turf with a decent draw in the sprint handicap at the same track, while Who Told Jo Jo (3.30) and Lady Reset (4.30) have decent chances at the odds on the card at Chepstow while Soulsaver (7.00) The Drone (7.10) look best at the evening meetings at Ffos Las and Southwell respectively. Beverley 1.50 Quiet Place 2.20 Execlusive 2.50 Scale Force 3.20 Qaaraat 3.50 Kylie Rules (nap) 4.20 Highwaygrey 4.50 Homesick Boy 5.25 Casanova. Chepstow 2.00 Waqt 2.30 Noble Fox 3.00 Flippa The Strippa 3.30 Who Told Jo Jo 4.00 Agent Gibbs 4.30 Lady Reset 5.00 Born To Frolic. Sedgefield 2.10 Royal Beekeeper 2.40 Istimraar 3.10 Fix Sun 3.40 Caius Marcius 4.10 Baiser Interdit 4.40 Quest For Life 5.15 Shanroe. Ffos Las 5.30 Ali The Hunter 6.00 Isaac Wonder 6.30 Dead Right 7.00 Soulsaver (nb) 7.30 Fortunes Hiding 8.00 Centreofexcellence 8.30 Pogo I Am. Southwell 5.40 Charlie Papa Lima 6.10 Ballotin6.40 Oliver’s Gold 7.10 The Drone 7.40 Sudden Destination 8.10 Indian Native 8.40 My Turgeon.