Food banks up and down the UK can expect a different kind of delivery, after the writer and campaigner Jack Monroe raised money to give out more than 7,000 copies of her latest cookbook. Monroe’s Tin Can Cook, published on Thursday and already No 3 on Amazon’s chart, is a collection of 75 recipes that can be made purely from store-cupboard ingredients. With recipes including Tinned Spud Fishcakes and Carrot Cake Overnight Oats, the cook has described it as “the book I wish I’d had when I was in my worst of times, trying to feed myself from food bank boxes with little energy, no self-esteem, and feeling like most recipes were out of my reach”. After launching an appeal in November, Monroe has now beaten her goal of raising £30,000 to send copies of the book to food banks. Remaining money will be donated either as cash or books to food bank charity the Trussell Trust. Her publisher Bluebird is also distributing 50,000 recipe cards with dishes from Tin Can Cook to food banks round the country, and Heinz has donated £10,000 to the Trussell Trust after seeing the fundraising campaign. “The response and generosity to this initiative have been overwhelming and I want to thank the hundreds of people who have supported me in delivering this to the people who need it most,” said Monroe. “Working with the Trussell Trust ensures that these books will make a real difference and we really hope that this activity once again highlights an issue we all need to be paying attention to.” The Trussell Trust, which runs 420 food banks across the UK, said last month that 2018 had been its busiest year, with a record 1.6m emergency food parcels given out, more than half a million of them to children. Monroe lived in what she said was desperate poverty between 2011 and 2013, writing at the time of how she gave her two-year-old son a breakfast of “one of the last Weetabix, mashed with water, with a glass of tap water to wash it down”. “‘Where’s Mummy’s breakfast?’ he asks, big blue eyes and two-year-old concern,” she wrote on her blog in 2012. “I tell him I’m not hungry, but the rumblings of my stomach call me a liar. But these are the things that we do.” Monroe was eventually referred to a food bank, where she “survived for six months on kindness and donated tins and packets”. “I have donated my previous books to food banks and told them they can photocopy the pages to hand out to their clients, and they have done so in their thousands,” the author writes on her fundraiser. “I have made thousands of recipe cards to hand out to food bank users in conjunction with Oxfam and the Trussell Trust. But I want to do more. I want this book to reach as many people as it needs to. I’m not in this to make money – the royalties for an author are laughably piteous, 7-10% of the RRP – so this isn’t about flogging books. It’s about giving people hope, dignity, and decent meals in the most dire of situations.” 