Warning: this article contains spoilers. At least in the early years, Game of Thrones teased out its silliness in dribs and drabs, carefully unpacking the introduction of dragons and zombies so as not to spook the audience. And then – BAM! – out of nowhere in season two Melisandre strips nude, drops to the ground and gives birth to a murderous shadow demon. But then again, haven’t we all. One of the few joys of this final season has been watching old characters find each other again. None has been better than the moment where Arya was reunited with The Hound, her enemy-slash-protector. The scene is packed with surface-level hatred – “You left me to die,” he growls. “First I robbed you,” she sneers – but undeniable affection. Who among us didn’t have a tender tear in their eye when he called her a ‘little bitch’? Shireen Baratheon was almost the sole force of good during her time on Game of Thrones; a little girl who lived to help others whenever she could. So, needless to say, a witch ended up burning her to death while she screamed for her life. It is, to date, the single most upsetting scene in the show’s history. It isn’t the Battle of the Bastards, because that was all a lot of fuss about nothing. It wasn’t the Battle of Winterfell, because that was like trying to look through a windscreen during a downpour of diarrhoea. Instead, the winner is Hardhome, where Jon Snow first meets the Night King and the full horror of the undead enemy facing civilisation is underlined in red. Only one person could receive this gong, and that’s Bronn; the character responsible for making the world forget about Robson and Jerome. But which insult was his best? “I like you, pampered little shit that you are”? “Look at these two shining warriors, Ser Teryn Mant and Ser Whosit of Whocares”? My vote is for “There’s no cure for being a cunt,” which should be embroidered on pillows, quite frankly. Sexposition is the tool where Game of Thrones balances out boring backstory with scenes of gratuitous nudity. The definitive example of this is where Littlefinger lays out his entire personal thesis against a backdrop of simulated lesbian sex. Although, having said that, the sex isn’t quite as distracting as whatever Littlefinger’s bizarre cockney accent was back in season one. Animals don’t tend to come off well in Game of Thrones, but by far the worst scene of pet negligence came recently, when Jon Snow bid farewell to his beloved direwolf Ghost by just sort of looking at him and wandering off, leaving Ghost to pine alone. This is true RSPCA territory. Post-Joffrey, Game of Thrones needed to promote someone to the role of new sadistic antagonist. It picked Ramsay Bolton, a genuinely superfluous character who was essentially just evil for the sake of it. His utter pointlessness only made him more of a scumbag. He was The Joker in The Dark Knight. He was the shark in Jaws. He existed purely to be cruel and nothing else. A disclaimer: every parent on Game of Thrones is a turbo-powered monster, from Stannis Baratheon to the Moon Door lady. However, purely for how much he messed up his kids, the winner has to be Tywin Lannister; a man whose death – shot through the heart on the toilet – could only partially make up for what a raging bellend he was. Dorne. It’s obviously Dorne. It’s not going to be any of the places they shot in Belfast, and it’s certainly not going to be anywhere snowy. So Dorne it is, partly because it’s sunny but mainly because there are always a ton of orgies going on. Oh for the days when Syrio Forel was still around. What a delight that man was, charismatic and agile among a sea of lumbering brutes. Everything that Arya is today, she owes to Forel. Only two people have killed dragons so far. One is Euron Greyjoy, who doesn’t count because he’s too much of a lip-licking scenery-chewer to qualify as an actual person. So the winner by default is the Night King, who not only killed a dragon but turned it into a massive great zombie. Even if you don’t like the Night King, you have to admit that’s pretty cool. The winner is coffee. Delicious, modern coffee, served in receptacles made of materials that don’t even exist in Westeros. Coffee: because these new episodes are way too long and something needs to help keep you awake. Hodor’s death – holding a door for Bran and Meera so they can escape the White Walkers – is valiant enough. But the circumstances of his death, witnessed by a younger version of himself in a moment that permanently breaks his brain in the past and sends him into seizure in the present, drives the action into the realms of tragedy. Dear god, Hodor was the best. As soon as Joffrey Baratheon swaggered into view for the first time, dripping with gleeful, petulant cruelty, the entire Game of Thrones audience was basically just looking forward to his death. He could have died in any manner – crushed in a pig stampede, drowned in urine – but watching him get poisoned on his own wedding day was particularly satisfying. In the penultimate episode of season one, Game of Thrones offed its main character; the character played by the show’s most famous actor, who fronted its entire promotional blitz. The death was truly shocking, sending Game of Thrones off on a tangent where (at least for a while) everything felt dangerous and unpredictable. So arise Ser Eddard Stark, for you have won this meaningless award. Whipped. Racked. Cut. Teeth broken. Fingers and toes amputated. Flayed. Penis chopped off. Endless psychological brutality, to the point that he forgot his own name and willingly accepted a new identity. During his time on Game of Thrones, Theon Greyjoy took more hits than almost everyone combined. Hi Ed Sheeran! Ready to accept this award? Great! All you need to do is sit here self-consciously drawing attention to yourself while barely even adopting a semblance of a character. Can you do that? You can? Terrific! Here’s your award. It’s a hard stare. Poor Jaime and Cersei. They could have had such a happy life together, if only they weren’t brother and sister, and if only they hadn’t tried to murder a child to cover up their affair, and if only they didn’t have partly-consensual sex over the corpse of their own son. A romance for the ages. Here’s where Game of Thrones lost me. The Night King had been set up, since right from the start, as the terror who’d test the protagonists to their very core. He was the Big Bad. He was unstoppable. He had an army of the dead. He … was killed with three episodes left, so that all the characters could keep squabbling about stuff their dads did. The Night King deserved so much better than this. Tuning in for the finale? Watch along live with Stuart Heritage’s liveblog