The BT-owned mobile operator EE will turn on the UK’s first 5G network on 30 May in six cities, but has dropped Huawei phones from its launch plans. Britain’s largest mobile phone network said it would switch on 5G initially in London, Cardiff, Edinburgh, Belfast, Birmingham and Manchester. By the end of the year, 5G would be expanded to 16 cities including Nottingham, Sheffield, Liverpool, Hull, Leeds, Newcastle and Glasgow, it said. EE added that the network would grow to 50 towns and cities in 2020. EE pulled Huawei phones from its launch lineup of 5G-capable devices, saying it took the decision after Google’s move earlier this week to comply with a US ban and stop supplying its Android operating system to the Chinese company. Huawei is a Chinese telecoms company founded in 1987. Politicians in the US have alleged that Huawei’s forthcoming 5G mobile phone networks could be hacked by Chinese spies to eavesdrop on sensitive phone calls and gain access to counter-terrorist operations. Allies who allow Huawei technology inside their 5G networks have been told they may be frozen out of US intelligence sharing. Australia, New Zealand and Japan have banned Huawei from their 5G networks. In the UK, BT has excluded Huawei telecoms infrastructure from its own 5G rollout and removed some of its equipment from the 4G network. In January 2019 Vodafone said it had decided to 'pause' the use of Huawei equipment in its core networks across Europe. The UK's defence secretary Gavin Williamson was sacked by prime minister Theresa May after a leak revealed the sensitive decision that the UK would not be totally banning Huawei from 5G projects. Poland’s internal affairs minister, Joachim Brudziński, has called for the European Union and Nato to work on a joint position over whether to exclude Huawei from their markets, after an Huawei employee was arrested on spying charges. Much of the doubt surrounding Huawei stems from founder Ren Zhengfei’s background in China's People’s Liberation Army between 1974 and 1983, where he was an engineer. His daughter, Huawei’s senior executive Meng Wanzhou, was arrested in Canada in December 2018 over allegations of Iran-sanctions violations, and she awaits extradition to the US. Ren, referring to trade issues between the US and China, says the company is 'like a small sesame seed, stuck in the middle of conflict between two great powers'. Marc Allera, the head of BT’s consumer division, said: “We’ve put the Huawei devices on pause, until we have more information. Until we have the information and confidence that ensures our customers will get support for the lifetime of their devices with us then we’ve got the Huawei devices on pause.” EE has beaten Vodafone to be first to launch 5G in the UK. Vodafone has said it will turn on 5G on 3 July in seven cities – Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Glasgow, Manchester, Liverpool and London – expanding to 19 by the end of this year. Allera said: “Some people will ask, ‘Will I need 5G?’ They said the same about 4G – 4G sparked a huge shift. Uber, Netflix, Deliveroo, YouTube, the iPlayer. None of these services would exist in [the] way they do today without a fast, reliable connection. Everything changed when we launched 4G and this is the start of everything changing again. “Our networks are getting busier, meaning networks can slow down in congested areas where you need it most. Peak speed might be the headline, but reliability is the key for 5G.” Allera said 5G would be most beneficial at sites where 2,000 phone users or more were connected simultaneously to 4G masts, overwhelming the limits of current technology. “5G will be like getting a seat on a packed train, or a lane of the motorway all to yourself,” he said. Paolo Pescatore, a telecoms analyst, said Huawei’s absence from EE’s initial offering could slow down the adoption of 5G by UK consumers. “It is a move that makes sense for now. Lots of uncertainty surrounds 5G in light of the recent security concerns surrounding Huawei. This will have a negative impact on 5G consumer takeup in the short term,” he said. BT is in the process of removing Huawei technology from core areas of its 4G network, the sensitive parts potentially susceptible to cybersecurity breaches, a continuation of the company’s policy after its £12.5bn acquisition of EE in 2015. BT’s 5G service is being built on top of its 4G network, but the company says there is no security risk and Huawei technology will be completely removed from its core systems by 2022. EE said it planned to upgrade its mobile sites to 5G at a rate of 100 a month, to have 1,500 live in the biggest towns and cities by the end of 2019. Download speeds could be up to 40 times faster than 4G. Next-generation 5G technology is forecast to underpin an internet-connected world of driverless cars, smart-home appliances, delivery drones and lightning-fast video on the go. However, there are currently few smartphone devices that can support 5G, so people who want to see the immediate benefit will have to buy a new device. EE is pricing 5G as a premium product at about £5 more per month than a regular 4G plan. The cheapest 5G plan starts at £54 a month, with a 5G handset priced from £150. An EE spokesman said customers would get about “£30 of value” out of perks including BT Sport and data-free usage of YouTube and the gaming service Twitch.