For most of us, the sight of Kamindu Mendis on his international debut in Colombo last year bowling left-arm orthodox spin to Jason Roy and then switching to right-arm off-breaks to the left-handed Ben Stokes brought a frisson of novel excitement. Five thousand miles away in Brisbane, John Buchanan was thinking: “What took you so long?” Buchanan, who coached Queensland to their first ever Sheffield Shield title in 1995 and later spent eight years as coach of Australia, was preaching the benefits of cricketers being ambidextrous at least 20 years ago. Buchanan is a divisive figure – Shane Warne has described him as, among other things, “a goose [who] has no idea and lacks common sense” but Justin Langer considers him “a great visionary”. Wherever your sympathies lie, it’s hard to deny that he’s an original thinker on the game. Mendis is not the only one. In India there is Akshay Karnewar and, in Pakistan, Yasir Jan, the game’s only ambidextrous pace bowler. In the women’s game, Shaila Sharmin, from Bangladesh, and Jemma Barsby, the daughter of former Queensland opener Trevor, both bowl spin with either arm. So, is Buchanan surprised that it took so long for an ambidextrous player to be performing at international level? “Yes and no. Yes insofar as if you agree with the principles then you’d think everybody would be rushing to do it. No in the sense that there are brick walls there in the way people perceive the game to be played.” Those principles, according to Buchanan, are the same that apply to the benefits of having all-rounders in the team. “One way to outgun, outmuscle or outpoint the opposition is to have more players on the field than they do,” he says. “Taken to its extreme, I’d have bowlers who could bowl left- and right-handed, and fielders who could field with their right and left hands. If you look at batters, there might be a particular bowler, or spell, or particular wear and tear in a wicket that gives a batsman the opportunity to reverse his stance and take back control of the game. That’s our aim – to control the game, to counteract the opposition’s strengths and eliminate our weaknesses by having more options.” This all sounds wonderful in theory, but the practice is more challenging. Only one in a hundred people are truly ambidextrous. Buchanan believes that sporting ambidexterity can be trained but it has to start at a really young age. Mike Hussey was a right-handed batsman until he saw Allan Border bat in a Boxing Day Test and decided he wanted to be a left-hander like his new hero. But he was six or seven years old at that time. David Warner bowled wrist-spin with both arms until, Buchanan reckons, he reached elite age-group level and had to focus on one skill (aside from his powerful left-handed batting, of course). In his book, On Cricket, Kevin Pietersen explained the childhood origins of his 2006 switch-hit off Muttiah Muralitharan at Edgbaston, which he described as “a bit naughty”. Of his backyard games growing up in South Africa, he wrote: “If you were out for a golden duck you had to face six balls left-handed and, if you got out again, you were out for good. So I thought, I need to become good at this.” Baseball is generally regarded to be at the vanguard of innovation in the world of bat-ball sports yet the number of switch-hitters – batters who can bat right- and left-handed – has not increased in recent years despite the boom in analytics and the endless quest for competitive advantage. Last year, there were just 48 switch-hitters among the 750 active players across the 30 Major League Baseball teams. Switch pitchers are even rarer. Pat Venditte of the San Francisco Giants is the only switch pitcher in MLB and Greg A Harris, who played in the 1980s and early 1990s, is regarded as the only other such player in the modern era and his switches to left-hand were very sparing indeed. Just as in cricket, this unusual skill required a law adaptation whereby the switch pitcher has to inform the chief umpire which arm he is throwing with when each new batter appears. “The people who bowl left-handed and throw right-handed are the interesting ones,” says Carl Hopkinson, the former Sussex batsman who became the ECB’s lead fielding coach last year. “Being able to throw with your non-dominant hand will clearly give you an advantage. But is it such a big advantage to make all the time spent practising it worthwhile? I’m not sure if I’m honest. It’s always something I’ve thought about but I wonder about the cost benefit.” Hopkinson believes there is so much work to be done on the quality and volume of throwing with players’ dominant arms that any serious tilt at universal fielding ambidexterity is some way off. But he’s quick to add: “That open-mindedness and willingness to try different stuff is something that we need to get better at.” He acknowledges it is no coincidence that, with the exception of Jemma Barsby, ambidextrous bowlers have mostly emerged from Asia, where players’ early development is traditionally less structured than in England or Australia. How far did Buchanan push his theory when he was coach of Australia? “As far as I could, which was really only around fielding and was really just a start, trying to get underarm throwing better. While there was a skill component to it, it was probably more about fun. By that stage it’s too late. They have to spend too much time trying to learn something that they haven’t for most of their careers. It has to start early.” Hopkinson agrees: “My advice to any coach of young players would be that, if you have an 11- or 12-year-old who can throw equally well with both arms, then encourage them to keep going as long as they can. Don’t choose. Practise throwing with both each session.” Buchanan believes the emergence of Mendis and others represents a critical mass that can spark some sort of explosion of ambidextrous cricketers. But he also acknowledges that even in football “where the idea of people using both sides of their body is not foreign, the best players still have a preferred foot”. The 65-year-old recently returned to grassroots coaching, taking on a role at Wests in the Brisbane Premier League. It is the first time he has been involved with grade cricket since 1993, when he coached the University of Queensland. The senior players may be too long in the tooth to adopt Buchanan’s ideas, but he hopes that junior coaches may be persuaded to challenge the status quo. Keep an eye, or two, out to see if Buchanan ever achieves his ambidextrous vision. Who is the best Test batsman in the world? What are the best cricket books ever written? Find out in the new issue of Wisden Cricket Monthly