Broke alertly, travelled strongly and stayed on powerfully to win the Lingfield Derby Trial, despite being said to need the run after an interrupted preparation. Scored three times as a juvenile, including in a Group Two in August, and ran well to be placed in the National Stakes and the Dewhurst, for which he lacked the necessary speed. That won’t matter so much here and any improvement from Lingfield would make him really dangerous. Winless in three as a juvenile but much better for some time and distance. Still, he was arguably lucky in both wins this year, having an experience advantage over Telecaster in March and getting a better run through than the runner-up in the Sandown Classic Trial. Must improve again and not clear he has it in him. Races lazily and can look hard work but finished strongly to win both the Ballysax and the Derrinstown at Leopardstown this spring. The runner-up on each occasion was one of his pacemakers, so he may not have beaten any rivals of substance. Was two and a half lengths behind Madhmoon in September and needs the extra half-mile to turn that form around. Was gifted an easy lead in a French Group One in October but was run down and beaten by a rival who has failed to win since. Ordinary pedigree by the standards of this stable’s Derby runners. Didn’t finish all that strongly in landing the Dee Stakes last month and it’s possible he will not enjoy the extra test of stamina posed by this race. Still, could get involved if he’s improved. Finished a length behind two subsequent Guineas winners when fourth in the Futurity in October. By Galileo out of a dual Royal Ascot winner. Not the most likely winner but underestimated at 20-1. Must have excited connections by scoring over this distance at Southwell in May and they have decided to take their chance. Seemed firmly put in his place when eighth behind Anthony Van Dyck in the Lingfield Derby Trial and pedigree does not suggest a big improvement is likely at any moment. Taking an enormous step up in class from the Salisbury novice in which he made all just over a fortnight ago. Fairly bounced off the fast ground that day and should have plenty more to offer but no evidence to suggest he’s good enough for this. Was thought to be Aidan O’Brien’s best chance until a month ago but has evidently had an interrupted preparation and needed his reappearance run in the Dante, when he was fourth. Only 16 days later, it is asking a lot for him to take the necessary step forward. Battled well to beat a more fancied stablemate in a Group Two in September but that form is hard to weigh up, the placed horses having not raced since. By Galileo out of a half-sister to an Arc winner, his sister was runner-up in an Oaks. Won the Juvenile Turf at the Breeders’ Cup but made a very disappointing return to action six months later when beating only one rival in the Dante. Having trailed Telecaster by 11 lengths that day, he must rate an unlikely winner here 16 days later. Fast ground was suggested as part of the problem but it seems likely to be fast again here. “Terrier-like”, according to his trainer, who thinks Epsom’s unusual layout will help to keep this quirky sort interested. Ran on well to be fourth in the 2,000 Guineas, in which the first two may have been helped by the draw. Beat Broome by two and a half lengths in a Group Two in September and seems well suited by a fast surface. Bred to be a miler and, for all that he finishes his races well, it’ll be a surprise if this mile and a half is really his thing. Steady progress to win a Listed race on his fourth run as a juvenile, though that form does not look strong now. Fourth of nine in a French Group One in October after trying to make all. Sweated up and raced freely in first-time cheekpieces on his reappearance in the Chester Vase, plodding on into a distant second place behind Sir Dragonet. A lot to prove now and does not look good enough. Brother to 2013 Derby winner Ruler Of The World. Most impressive in winning the Chester Vase by eight lengths, not least because he had made his racecourse debut only two weeks earlier. Had been regarded as “a big baby” at home and did not hold a Derby entry at the time of his Chester success. Has enjoyed softish ground in both starts, so the expected fast ground is an unknown. Suspicion that it may not suit him so well, as a strong stayer who has dwelt when the stalls opened in both races so far. Excellent pedigree for this, by a Derby winner out of a half-sister to an Oaks second, and clearly has a big engine. Looks like the Ballydoyle pacemaker, having helped force the pace in both races this year, before being well held by Broome. Son of Galileo is tough and might be capable of clinging on for a place if he doesn’t go too quick early on. Unraced until late March, he has catapulted himself into contention with three runs in six weeks, winning twice, most recently beating a few of these in the Dante, along with the previously unbeaten Too Darn Hot, which looks really strong form. Main query now is whether this comes too soon, only 16 days after that big effort, but so far he is thriving on racing. Bred to be good, being by a Derby winner out of a mare who lost an Oaks by a neck, so his success can be no surprise, for all that his trainer does not usually compete at this level.