Most Orwell biography is, at heart, an exercise in teleology: a reverse journey through his life and times that begins with the achievement of Nineteen Eighty-Four and then works backwards, in an attempt to establish exactly what it was about the intervening years that impelled him to write it in the way that he did. In this highly astute study, Dorian Lynskey locates the origins of the novel – now celebrating its 70th anniversary – in the six months its author spent in the first half of 1937 fighting on the republican side in the Spanish civil war. It was here in Catalonia, Lynskey argues, that the stanchions of Big Brother’s nightmare world – the disregard for objective truth, the rewriting of the past and the routine suppression of dissent – slid inexorably into place. And, as he makes clear, the “Spanish Beans” that Orwell spilled in his essay of 1942 affected their spiller personally. Having enrolled in the Trotskyist Poum militia rather than the Marxist International Brigades, he was immediately suspect: when the war descended into faction fighting and the Soviet hit-squads arrived in Barcelona, he barely escaped with his life. If the corruption of the left is such a feature of his later writing it is because he was a victim of it himself. Spain left an indelible mark on a man who had hitherto taken only an anthropological interest in the Depression-era Labour party. According to his friend Richard Rees, it was only when Orwell left for the war that Rees began to realise “how extraordinary he was”. Homage to Catalonia, the record of Orwell’s Spanish experiences, appeared in 1938, yet it took another half-decade for Nineteen Eighty-Four to take root in his consciousness – the decisive prompt came when he read reports of the Tehran conference of late 1943, at which the allied leaders sat down to carve up the postwar world – and another five-and-a‑bit years to bring the book to print. One of the most obvious questions to ask about the novel’s gestation is simply procedural: what took him so long? Set in the wider context of Peter Davison’s 20-volume edition of the complete works, Nineteen Eighty-Four is a flaring exception. The prewar Orwell had been known for his fluency: most of the books he wrote from 1932 to 1939 had occupied him for less than a year. A Clergyman’s Daughter (1935), written while he was convalescing from a bout of pneumonia, took a little over six months. Animal Farm (1945) – only 30,000 words long admittedly, but tricky from the point of view of plot – was finished in half that time. Compared with these high-speed surges to the finishing tape, Nineteen Eighty-Four was a marathon: a few pages written by the end of 1945; a first draft not completed until the end of 1947; a second draft not wrapped up until December 1948. What went wrong? The answer, as Lynskey shows in detail, lies in a combination of personal-cum-professional road-blocks, a series of obstacles strewn across Orwell’s life in the mid-1940s that stopped a once-prolific author from working on the book he burned to write. One of them was a file of personal traumas that began with the death of his first wife, Eileen, on the operating table and continued through his unavailing efforts to find a replacement. Another was the worsening ill health that led to a full-blown tuberculosis diagnosis and long periods of hospitalisation. But a third can be found in what Lynskey identifies as “a paper trail thousands of pages long”. The novel is one of those odd books that, if not exactly written on the hoof, betrays some of its intellectual armature almost from one page to the next. Item one on the roster of formative influences is Yevgeny Zamyatin’s dystopian novel We, whose discovery Orwell announced to readers of Tribune magazine early in 1946. To this can be added essays such as You and the Atomic Bomb (1945) with its warning that “the surface of the earth is being parcelled off into three great empires”, or his long consideration of James Burnham’s The Managerial Revolution (1946), the opening summary of which seems directly related to the minutely regulated, highly centralised and above all oligarchical world of Winston Smith. Politics and the English Language, too, published in April 1946, offers an eerie foretaste of the jargon phrases of Oceania’s news bulletins and its hectoring emcees. And then there is the shadow cast by the Hebridean island of Jura, to which Orwell relocated in 1946: a diary entry from the following year about rat attacks on local children feeds directly into the famous scene in which Winston muses: “Of all the horrors in the world – a rat!” By the time the manuscript was finished, Orwell had only a year to live. He survived just long enough to marry his second wife, Sonia Brownell, and receive the first outpourings of a royalty torrent that he would describe as “fairy gold”. What would he have thought of the long and controversial after-life, to which Lynskey devotes the second half of his book, culminating in the 9,500% increase in sales in the week of the Trump inauguration? Nineteen Eighty-Four’s weaponisation by the CIA, who underwrote the first attempts to film it, would probably not have surprised him: he had predicted that the novel would be used as a cold war propaganda tool, and his publisher, Fred Warburg, had worried that it might be worth a million votes to the Conservative party. What might have alarmed him – and he was on record as believing the novel to be a “warning” rather than a prophecy – was the faithfulness with which so much postwar life could be shown to have imitated his art. Christopher Hitchens, for example, visiting North Korea in 2000, was appalled to discover that Kim Jong-il’s fiefdom mimicked the world of Nineteen Eighty-Four in everything but its technological finesse. Thoroughly researched and wearing its scholarship lightly, The Ministry of Truth is at its best in some of its pop cultural gleanings: see, in particular, David Bowie’s obsession with the novel, which culminated in a proposal (eventually rejected) that the Orwell estate should license a biopic with Bowie in the title role. Meanwhile, Lynskey takes a cheeringly downbeat line on several of the hot topics that continue to inflame debate on Planet Orwell. Is Julia merely a projection of Sonia? Lynskey thinks not (“Sonia and Julia didn’t look alike and they certainly didn’t think alike”). Neither is he at all animated by the supposedly McCarthyite tendencies of Orwell’s “list” of Soviet fellow travellers. As he reminds us, this was not intended as the first salvo in an anti-communist witch-hunt, but was compiled to help a friend in the Foreign Office determined that her pro-democracy pamphlets should at least be written by people who were democrats themselves. If Lynskey misses anything, it is a suspicion that Nineteen Eighty-Four’s roots may lie even further back in Orwell’s work. After all, each of his four 1930s novels features a central character ground down and oppressed by a vigilant authority that he or she has no way of resisting. Each, too, offers the spectacle of a rebellion that fails and a rebel forced to make compromises. In the end, Gordon Comstock, Keep the Aspidistra Flying’s moth-eaten poet, Dorothy Hare in A Clergyman’s Daughter, drudging for her joyless old father in a rural town policed by vengeful gossips, and Winston Smith, convinced that “he had won the victory over himself – he loved Big Brother”, are all of a piece. • The Ministry of Truth: A Biography of George Orwell’s 1984 by Dorian Lynskey is published by Picador. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.