Everyone wants there to be a silver bullet. A single policy solution that will “fix” Facebook, restore our privacy, and clean up the tech industry. There isn’t one. Hefty fines, civil rights audits, antitrust, data privacy legislation, shareholder activism and employee organizing can all play a role. But we don’t just need regulation, we need a revolution – a massive cultural shift in how we think about our personal information and the companies that profit by collecting it. In this gilded age of big tech, Silicon Valley’s royal families have sat in their castles, amassing treasure mined from a mountain of our data, seemingly untouchable as they weather scandal after scandal while they offer empty apologies and their power grows. It’s time we prove that these kings are not gods. It’s time we dethrone Mark Zuckerberg. What better way to draw a line in the sand and demand real change? What better way to strike fear in the hearts of the tech industry’s oligarchs, and make it clear that internet users will no longer tolerate a status quo where our data is harvested and used to manipulate us and invade our most private moments. Under Mark Zuckerberg’s failed leadership, Facebook has become one of the most loathed institutions on the planet. The company was just slapped with a record breaking fine. Experts predict its profits will drop for the first time in years. Mark Zuckerberg has had a decade’s worth of second chances to address the underlying disease, but he has shown time and time again he has no real intention of doing so. Need another reason he should step down? Here’s 25: Security breach: A breach of Facebook’s computer systems left the personal information of 30 million users exposed – searches, locations, names, phone numbers, and more. It was the largest breach in the company’s history. Unencrypted passwords: Hundreds of millions of Facebook and Instagram users had their passwords stored in plain text for years, some going back to 2012. Passwords were unencrypted and easily searchable by Facebook employees. Two-factor phone numbers used for ads: Phone numbers given to Facebook for increased security via two-factor authentication were repurposed for targeted ads by the company. To opt out, users would have to turn off phone number-based two-factor authentication. Psychological experimentation: Facebook admitted it ran experiments on hundreds of thousands of users to test how emotions spread on the site. Users, uninformed, had their news feeds manipulated by Facebook researchers to see more negative or positive posts to study whether users reacted by posting more negative or positive content. Patriot Act hire: This month, Facebook hired Jennifer Newstead as its new general counsel, a Trump-appointed lawyer who co-wrote the PatriotT Act, the Bush-era law that allowed for warrantless wiretapping among other government mass surveillance abuses. Facebook praised the hire. Racist ads: Facebook allowed users to purchase ads targeted towards racist interests like “Jew hater” or “Nazi Party”, profiting from the sale of ads to users with those interests. Facebook allowed employers to exclude women from ads: Facebook allowed employers to target ads exclusively to men, violating the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which makes discrimination based on sex illegal. Secretly lobbying for surveillance expanding the “cybersecurity” bill Cisa, while claiming they weren’t. Lobbying against privacy legislation in California and federally: Despite Zuckerberg’s opinion piece in the Washington Post publicly calling for privacy regulation, Facebook’s public policy team lobbied to prevent such legislation from passing in California. Tracking non-users: If a website embeds Facebook features like the “like” button even if the visitor doesn’t have a Facebook account, Facebook is tracking you and shares your demographic data with advertisers. Data deals with device makers: Facebook gave preferential access to user information to over 60 device makers, like Apple and Samsung. These deals are currently under criminal investigation by federal prosecutors. Smear consultants: In the wake of the Cambridge Analytica scandal, instead of working substantively on internal reforms, Facebook’s policy team went on an aggressive public relations campaign, hiring a right-leaning public affairs group to smear, among others, the left-leaning billionaire George Soros. Mark Zuckerberg discussed selling user data, even after claiming that he wouldn’t, and used Facebook’s data trove to “punish rivals and help friends”. Recording call logs of Android users: Facebook got caught collecting SMS and call metadata from users of their app on Android phones, sweeping up names, phone numbers, and the lengths of each call made or received. Onavo spying: Facebook for years used an app called Onavo to learn how long users spent on competing apps and what websites they visited, using this information to for instance buy WhatsApp for $19bn. Ultimately, Apple booted Onavo out of the app store. Lax privacy exposed 6 million accounts. A White Hat hacker in 2013 found a bug exposing the email addresses and phone numbers of 6 million Facebook users to anyone who had some connection to the person or knew at least one piece of their contact information. Beacon: One of Facebook’s early advertising programs, Beacon, automatically notified friends when users bought something, without obtaining prior consent. Zuckerberg ended up apologizing and giving users the option to opt out. A bug exposed photos from 6.8 million users. The bug allowed third-party developers the ability to access users’ photos, including those that had been uploaded to Facebook’s servers but not publicly shared on any of its services Manufacturing user consent: In 2010 while rolling out granular privacy control features, Facebook baked in a new default that resulted in users sharing updates publicly. The new feature pushed users to share their status as well as pictures publicly (by default) instead of sharing with friends only. By 2011, Facebook would be forced to sign settlements with the FTC and the European Union’s privacy office promising not to change users’ privacy settings without proper notice and opt-in, and Zuckerberg was forced to apologize. Tracking unposted content: Back in 2013, a study revealed that Facebook was tracking metadata on statuses and posts even if users decided not to submit those posts. Deleting Palestinian accounts: Facebook admitted in 2016 that it was following the direction of the American and Israeli governments and deleting accounts of Palestinians for “incitement” – a standard it did not hold for accounts from other nationalities. Special access for tech giants: Facebook gave certain business partners like Amazon and Netflix preferential access to user data, allowing the tech giants to skirt the company’s usual privacy rules in order to grow its user base and attract more advertising revenue. Enlisting Koch-funded climate deniers as factcheckers in their effort to combat “fake news”. Shutting down activist pages: In its zeal to combat Russian trolls on its site, Facebook accidentally shut down the page of a grassroots activist group in Washington DC as it planned a counter-protest to a white nationalist rally in the capital. Sharing user data with advertisers: A privacy loophole discovered in 2010 allowed advertisers to gain access to individual users’ information, like names, ages, hometowns and jobs. Facebook shut down the loophole quickly after being exposed. Each revelation in this long and fraught list has been followed by promises, cosmetic fixes and apology tours. But Zuckerberg personally, and the ruling caste at Facebook generally, has shown no appetite for real reform – despite what they say on TV or in front of Congress. Facebook’s current business model is fundamentally at odds with democracy and basic human rights. A company that claims to bring people together has been poisoned by a maniacal focus on mass collection of user data to satisfy advertisers. Hundreds of millions have had their privacy violated and their trust betrayed. Enough is enough. Mark Zuckerberg must go. For the longest time we’ve accepted as scripture that Silicon Valley founders had a divine right to lead the most powerful companies ever created. We need to burst this cultish idea. Shareholders realize the problem is at the top. They’re lining up to Vote “No on Zuckerberg” at the upcoming AGM. However, Zuckerberg has structured the company so that he has more voting power than all other shareholders combined. It’s clear we need more than shareholders to make this happen. We need an internet-wide vote of no confidence. Zuckerberg’s resignation would send a message to tech workers, government regulators, advocates, and all who hold Silicon Valley accountable that leadership at these companies is a privilege, not a right. “I know that we don’t exactly have the strongest reputation on privacy right now, to put it lightly,” Zuckerberg quipped at the recent F8 developers conference, forcing a guffaw. The audience was silent. Not even a chuckle. We’re not laughing any more, Mark. And we’re coming for your throne. Evan Greer is a transgender activist, musician and writer based in Boston. She’s the deputy director of the viral digital rights group Fight for the Future. Follow her at @evan_greer