What is it about manga that makes it so compelling? Once a cult concern, the distinctive Japanese comics and graphic novels have now truly infiltrated the mainstream. From James Cameron producing a Hollywood movie of the cyberpunk fantasy Battle Angel Alita to Gucci creating a fashion range from Ide Chikae’s 70s girls’ volleyball series – manga is no longer the preserve of geeks. Last year, Japan’s home market officially totalled 441.4bn yen (over £3bn), while North America chalked up the best sales in a decade with over $1bn. A new exhibition at the British Museum, entitled Manga, traces the art form’s emergence as a global phenomenon. Yet despite its rocketing popularity, manga remains misunderstood. Ever since it arrived in the west with 1987’s samurai epic Lone Wolf and Cub and the thriller Mai the Psychic Girl, there were sniggering headlines: “Grown Men in Japan Still Read Comics and Have Fantasies,” reported the Wall Street Journal. That prejudice lingers today – Oxford University Press’s Advanced Learner’s Dictionary still defines manga, wrongly, as “a Japanese form of comic strip, often one with violent or sexual contents”. There is much more to manga than these descriptions suggest. In fact, manga offer an ever-growing diversity of characters, subjects, styles and even genres – thanks largely to the high percentage of women who work on them. Manga was influenced by the arrival in Japan of American cartoons such as Mickey Mouse, Bringing Up Father and Popeye – some mangaka (comic book artists) even travelled to New York to learn first-hand from those strips’ creators. Yet for many years, the received wisdom was that manga were too alien to ever cross over, not just because of the language barrier but because they mostly came in black-and-white over many, many pages, featured characters with peculiarly large eyes and – worst of all – read from right to left, requiring an elaborate and costly process to reverse the pages. Tezuka Osamu did cut a deal to release his animated adaptation of Astro Boy on American television only nine months after its Japanese debut in 1963, and to great success. But comic book publishers Western ignored Tezuka’s hundreds of pages of manga and instead hired an uncredited American team to cobble together a more conventional 32-page colour comic book. “Horribly drawn”, in Tezuka’s words, it lasted only one issue in 1965, released mere weeks before the end of the show’s second and last season. Sadly, Tezuka would not live to see his original manga printed in English in 2002. Nevertheless, Astro Boy paved the way for more “anime”, or animation made in Japan, to air in America and elsewhere. But it was only after VHS took off that manga aficionados – many in the US military stationed in Japan – could spread the word by disseminating their recordings of anime. Fans were then tempted to search out the source manga. One milestone was the global release in the early 90s of Otomo Katsuhiro’s landmark 1988 movie adaptation of his manga Akira. Another came in 1998 when Kodansha, the world’s largest manga publishing company, finally found an American publisher, the recently formed TokyoPop, willing to risk releasing the girls’ manga Sailor Moon in the paperback format used in Japan and without flipping the pages. Other companies dismissed the idea as crazy, and some retailers were baffled by the book, displaying the back cover instead of the front and even returning copies as misprints. But TokyoPop found that fans could adjust to reading in reverse and preferred this authentic approach, which respected the artist’s work, as well as saving time and money. It soon became the industry standard. The internet helped manga fans form communities. These day, some fans don’t want to wait for their new favourite manga to be published in their language, so they scan and translate them and share them for free online. Many Japanese publishers now make chapters of their manga available digitally and usually for free, at least for a period.. Never before has there been so much manga so readily available. But if the last comic you read was The Beano as a kid, where do you start? Nicole Coolidge Rousmaniere, curator of the British Museum’s immersive exhibition, promises that after 90 minutes at the show “you will emerge fluent in a new language”. It took the founding of the Organisation for the Promotion of Manga and Anime to bring together artists and publishers to lend an extraordinary wealth of original artwork to a major show outside of Japan. The variety on display is dizzying, from the Pythonesque comedy Saint Young Men – about a young Jesus and Buddha taking a gap year on Earth to understand contemporary Japanese life – to the personal documentary Ichi-F, by an amateur artist who helped clean up the Fukushima power plant after the 2011 disaster. You can delve into the historical secrets of Japan’s indigenous Ainu people in Golden Kamuy or see besieged humans devoured by giants in Attack on Titan. The Willow Tree is a study of a mother’s undying love for her son. Then there are genres unique to the art form, such as golfing manga, where a match can be played over hundreds of pages, or Boy’s Love, created by women as a space to explore non-heteronormative sexuality through romances between young men. At their best, manga are not about telling stories but feeling them. In one episode of Inoue Takehiko’s wheelchair basketball drama Real, an estranged father yearns to speak to his son. Inoue movingly conveys the old man’s confusion, desperation, and finally his isolation, drawing him stranded and vulnerable in one large empty panel. That such depth is possible in a medium without motion or sound is remarkable. Inoue explains: “For me, it is all in the frame. I think frames are set to take you beyond, and at the same time, to contain infinity within their confines.” Manga is not only being read around the world but also rewritten. In 2007, Japan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs initiated an annual international manga award. This year, for the first time, a British entry was honoured. Shangomola Edunjobi’s Miseyieki tells of a 16-year old Maasai girl in Kenya, frustrated at her village’s limited expectations of her and determined to slay the lion who killed her mother. “Manga creators outside of Japan can tell stories that someone in Japan could not,” says Edunjobi. “Being black British, I was able to tell an African story and use a tone inspired from early Beano comics.” He is also a successful dancer: “Both dance and manga can show dynamic movement and can move people emotionally through their expression and storytelling,” he says. “And both are devices for analysing and reflecting the human condition, there’s no reason that they cannot inspire each other to create something even more powerful.” The future of manga looks bright – and could well be realised outside the nation that birthed it. Manga is at the British Museum, London, 23 May to 26 August. Paul Gravett is the author of Manga: Sixty Years of Japanese Comics.