“Most jockeys go out to ride in the Derby and there’s a little box in the weighing room, they take their brain out and put it in the box. Then they go out in the Derby and they go flat out.” Willie Carson, long retired from broadcasting and even longer from the saddle, is in the kitchen of his Gloucestershire home, pulling out Derby memories – including some that have not been aired for a while – dusting them off and giving them a bit of a polish. He will be at Epsom on Saturday for the latest running of the greatest Classic, as he has been almost every year since 1968, when he rode Laureate and was scrapping for the lead at the turn out of Tattenham Corner. “I could see the winning post!” he says, mimicking the excitement of a young jockey unused to the big time. Then, playing with his glasses like Eric Morecambe: “Mind you, I had good sight in those days – it was a long way down the track.” The line was much too far off, as it turned out, but better rides were to follow. This is a milestone year for Carson, 40 years since he won the Derby for the first time, on Troy; 30 years since his victory on the mighty Nashwan; and a quarter of a century since the last of his four wins, aboard Erhaab. He had been in the game 20 years by the time Troy came along and there were frustrations along the way, such as Hot Grove’s narrow defeat in 1977, but Carson does not remember worrying that he might never win one. “You felt privileged that you finished second. Bloody hell, the Derby’s the race and it’ll always be the race – for owner, trainer, jockey, lad, box driver, everybody who’s involved.” But mention of Hot Grove brings up the main obstacle for jockeys of that era: Lester Piggott, who eventually drove The Minstrel past to win by a neck. “Piggott was riding a champion and I was riding a hurdler,” says Carson. “And I had to listen to all you press saying how brilliant Piggott was. Oh my God. You have to go along with it ...” Carson feels he and Fulke Johnson Houghton, trainer of Hot Grove, never got due recognition for almost pinching the Derby with a horse of limited ability. Their plan, to make the race a stamina test, so nearly came off. “Piggott had to knock skittles out of The Minstrel to get to me.” He admired Piggott and admits being in awe of him when young, but had to get over that in order to compete. “I’d pick up a paper in the morning, I’m riding against Lester nearly every bloody race. And I’ve got the press telling me: ‘He’s God, he’s brilliant.’ I’m not going to believe what the press say, am I? I think they’re idiots. It used to hurt me, yeah.” Put yourself in Carson’s boots before the Derby of 1979, in which he had to choose between riding Troy or Milford, knowing Piggott would then get the ride on the other one. It would have been easy to pick Milford, owned by the Queen and more fancied in the stable but after hours poring over the form book and reflecting on their gallops work, Carson went the other way. Troy could not go the early pace and Milford was more prominent most of the way but then Carson pulled his horse out with two furlongs to go and swept past them all. “It was just silence, the last furlong. I’m tuned in to horse noise, jockeys whistling and shouting, whips cracking. I’m listening for all those things and I just remember silence. Euphoria! The speed I was going, Concorde wouldn’t get by me.” Carson recalls another tricky decision the next year, which led to his second Derby success, on Henbit. No such issue preceded Nashwan’s win in 1989, the chestnut being the best middle-distance horse the Scot ever rode. “He had this lovely, long, fluent stride. When you asked him, you got this instant answer.” Five years later Carson delivered his best Derby ride, sticking to the inside rail as he picked his way through a packed field, hitting the front well inside the final furlong. His abiding memory is the roughness of that race while he was stuck out the back early on, which caused one rider to slip from his saddle “like a bar of soap”. Winning four Derbys in the era of Piggott, Steve Cauthen and Pat Eddery was a huge achievement, though Carson plays it down. “I was on the best horses,” he says. But that in itself reflected good judgment on his part, in a couple of cases. So who would he pick as the best horse this year? Broome is the answer – “because he’ll stay.” Chelmsford 1.25 Malotru 2.00 Nicky Baby 2.35 Poppy May 3.10 Arnoul Of Metz 3.45 Steaming 4.20 Seraphim 4.55 Javelin 5.30 Fairy Fast Huntingdon 1.35 Sharp Getaway 2.05 Nimby 2.40 Chilli Romance 3.15 Cesar Du Gouet 3.50 Butlergrove King 4.25 Tel’Art 5.00 December Second Leicester 1.45 Al Barg 2.20 Izvestia 2.55 Rathbone 3.30 Dubai Falcon  4.05 Arctic Ocean 4.40 Any Smile 5.15 Albert Boy Redcar 1.50 Iva Go 2.25 In Trutina 3.00 Al Mortajaz 3.35 Wise Words 4.10 Epaulement (nap) 4.45 Aiya 5.20 Mr Coco Bean 5.55 Hayward Field Windsor 1.55 Belated Breath 2.30 Ivatheengine 3.05 Firelight 3.40 Celtic Manor 4.15 Shareef Star 4.50 Mannaal 5.25 Onebaba (nb) Cartmel 2.10 Onthefrontfoot 2.45 Frightened Rabbit 3.20 Doing Fine 3.55 Demi Sang 4.30 Princeton Royale 5.05 Stage One 5.40 Lostnfound Tips by Chris Cook