In a spectacular surrender, the French government late tonight bowed to student violence in an attempt to defuse what has become a state of near insurrection. After conferring with President de Gaulle, Prime Minister Georges Pompidou conceded the principal student demands. (He had flown back to paris from Afghanistan barely three hours before making a radio-television statement at 11.15 p.m.) In a voice hoarse with fatigue and emotion, he declared first that the Sorbonne (which had been under the guard of armed police all week) would be open on Monday morning. Second, he said that the Appeal Court would review the cases of students arrested and jailed this week (implying they would be released). The student leaders reacted cautiously tonight to M. Pompidou’s statement. They described it as “interesting,” and promised to give it careful study. The climb-down follows scenes of violence such as Paris has not seen since the 1930s. And tonight thousands of students and workers, unshaved and battle-stained, were still milling around the Latin quarter, where scores of burnt-out cars and charred debris litter streets laid waste by this morning’s warfare. What began as a cheeky snub to authority by a handful of extremist students, exploded into a tidal wave of defiance to General de Gaulle’s regime. The complacent façade of Gaullism has been cracked wide open. The Opposition, which was timorous and divided yesterday, bayed for the Government’s blood. The two great Opposition parties, the Communists and the Socialist Federation of the Left, have called for immediate sessions of the National Assembly and the Paris Municipal Council. A one-day nation-wide general strike has been called for Monday by all the major trade unions – it is still not known whether it will be called off. Public services – transport, gas and electricity – and the whole State machine have been threatened with paralysis. The students’ fever spread like bushfire to half a dozen provincial university cities, where wild demonstrations took to the streets in solidarity with Paris. At Strasbourg early this morning “storm troops” seized the university, proclaimed its autonomy, and hoisted the Red Flag. Students and schoolchildren throughout France abandoned their classrooms for the streets. Police wheeling and charging The powerful National Union of Students called on its members to strike indefinitely until the Government submitted to its demands: the release of all students held by the police, the quashing of jail sentences against them, the reopening of the Sorbonne, and the withdrawal of all police from the university area. When the Government refused to give in, the students set out overnight to seize the Sorbonne by force. They brought up their own shock troops, motor cyclists and motor transport (mainly battered Citroen “Deux Chevaux”). Their organisation was impressive. They chanted “Liberate the Sorbonne” and “Fouchet (Minister of the Interior) to Sing Sing.” Deployed against this force were thousands of police, civil guards and gendarmes, wheeling and charging, mostly steel-helmeted and armed with rifles, truncheons and tear-gas grenades. Water hydrants were wheeled up. This morning the police were equipped with curious wire face guards, like fencing masks, to protect them against flying stones. At least 30,000 students and sympathisers took part in the Paris battles fought between 2 a.m. and 5 a.m. in a tight network of streets round the Sorbonne. More than 190 cars were damaged, overturned or set alight. The thuds of their exploding petrol tanks could be heard on the Right Bank, sealed off from the battlefield by strong forces of gendarmes rushed in from the provinces. All 19 bridges across the Seine, in the heart of the capital, were held by armed police. There was a mass of wounded on both sides of the barricades; nearly 400 were treated in hospital and 54 detained, and there is anxiety today for four students and one police officer, whose rib-cage was crushed by a paving stone thrown from a balcony. There were over 450 arrests. Scores of anxious parents whose children did not come home last night were given telephone numbers over the radio which they could call for information. Dozens of wounded students are, however, lying low too frightened to come out for treatment. By 4 a.m. today, when many students had left the streets, police found themselves face to face with a well-trained, hard-hitting guerrilla force, armed with tear-gas grenades – which police described as “of a new design” – Molotov cocktails and crates of inflammable material. “We will never forgive regime” Traffic signs were uprooted and used as picks to dislodge paving stones, and about 60 barricades were erected, some reaching first-storey level. The insurgents stripped a building site and brought tree-trunks by lorry. Some had smeared their faces with bicarbonate of soda to protect themselves against tear-gas. Many wore Chinese tunics. President de Gaulle was woken at 5 a.m. to receive an anxious delegation comprising the Ministers of the Interior and the Army, the acting Prime Minister and his chief Intelligence and security adviser. Special editions of the Communist Humanité and the Socialist Combat were on the streets here by late afternoon. “Infamy” thundered one headline; “Stop the Repression” said another. “We will never forgive the regime for what it did today,” Combat declared. “The killers of the regime have reminded us of its true nature. The students have proved that to overthrow it it must be defeated by violence. They have shown us this is possible.” These bold words are all the more surprising because for the first week of the disturbances the revolting students were sneered at and abused as troublemakers by the great bulk of the Press, by most politicians and by the Communist Party itself. But as the insurgency gained importance everyone tried to get in on the act. At the heart of the revolt stood Daniel Cohn-Bendit – a French student of German-Jewish origin – who, at the Paris University annexe of Nanterre, leads an extreme left-wing, anarcho-Maoist movement. His target has always been to bring the university squarely into politics, to forge a revolutionary instrument which will shake authority everywhere. Until a month ago, Cohn-Bendit (known as “Danny le Rouge”) was a fly buzzing ineffectually in a cloying spiderweb of student docility. Authority must blame itself if today he has united the great majority of the young, if not half the nation, against it. De Gaulle surrenders to students by Patrick Searle and Maureen McConville and datelined Paris, 11 May, was published on page one of the Observer on 12 May 1968