If you care about what the Brexiters are doing to our country, then vote on 23 May. All that matters is that on 24 May, Nigel Farage and his allies on the far right of the Conservative party cannot claim they speak for Britain. Politics is not an exact science. After the vote, there will be a ledger. On one side will be hard or no-deal Brexit with Farage and the Tory fellow travellers. On the other will be those who want an end to Brexit and those who believe that, after this degree of mess and on a decision of this magnitude, the final say should be with the people. The most important thing to remember is that with the knowledge of these election results parliament will take its decision. MPs will scrutinise the ledger as if their future depends on it. So, the big message: vote. Because your vote will affect their vote. Who to vote for if you’re on the anti-Farage side of the ledger. There are unequivocal remain parties – Liberal Democrats, Change UK, Greens, SNP and Plaid Cymru. If, because of Labour’s equivocation, you simply won’t vote Labour, then vote for them. If, like me, despite everything, you can vote Labour, then vote Labour. But whatever you do, vote! This is not a vote to choose a prime minister or a government. It is a vote for the Farage Brexit – or against it. I will vote Labour, because I believe ultimately that Labour will be counted on the anti-Farage side of the ledger. The bulk of Labour party members, MPs and voters are against Brexit and certainly against that Brexit advocated by the Brexit party and its fellow travellers in the Conservative party. Tom Watson, Labour’s deputy leader, has advocated a people’s vote. Most of Labour’s candidates are strongly remain and the voting system in the EU elections – proportional representation by region – means effectively that a bigger Labour vote means more remain MEPs, especially since the three avowedly remain parties are not under one banner. But Labour should never have put itself in such a position of destructive indecision. The local elections were terrible for the Conservatives but, on any rational analysis, devastating for Labour. This is a government not in a state of disarray but of profound dysfunction. No one of any age or any political experience can remember anything like it. We are almost 10 years into austerity, with the public realm – Labour’s political sweet spot – in disrepair. Yet Labour could not even win the local elections. Despite Keir Starmer’s best efforts, the leadership’s ambiguity on Brexit has brought it confusion, not shelter from principled decision on the most vital question of national interest. But leave aside principle. Even as a piece of political strategy, it was doomed to fail. Of course, there are Labour seats that voted strongly leave and who feel Labour should deliver Brexit, though, according to some MPs in these former Labour heartlands, it is concern over the Corbyn leadership as much as Brexit that is driving voters away. But equally, there are seats where for Labour to support Brexit would also be fatal. As Theresa May has discovered, the country is irredeemably split on the issue of whether Brexit is good or bad. Any strategy that tries to face both ways just ends up looking indecisive or unprincipled or both. Every vote against the Brexit extremism is important and Labour is a vote against that What Labour should have done – from the beginning – is to argue that we accept the referendum result but that once any negotiation concludes we should be entitled to compare the future European relationship with what we have now and, if that negotiated outcome is unsatisfactory, reserve the right to give the people the final say. We could have explained the central dilemma between hard Brexit and soft and critiqued the shambles of the negotiation’s failure to resolve it. We could have mounted a proper attack on the nonsensical Brexit negotiating strategy of “cake and eat it”, instead of having our own version of the same strategy. We could have dismantled the Tories over the distractive effect of Brexit, an argument that would have grown in power over time as the political energy of the entire government got subsumed by Brexit. We could have made the correct case as to why Brexit is not the answer to anything – the degradation of the NHS, failures in schools, rising crime and social disintegration, the inequalities in our society or, indeed, the climate challenge. We could have given leadership to the Labour Brexit vote, instead of which we tried to follow it while simultaneously trying to appeal to the anti-Brexit Labour vote. Result? We pleased no one and, most of all, let down the country. The European elections should have been the occasion for a large, unified anti-Brexit vote. Instead, many Labour supporters are genuinely conflicted about voting Labour. But the big picture remains clear: if you’re in the position of voting Labour or nothing, then still vote, because the reality is on 24May every vote against the Brexit extremism is important and Labour is a vote against that. There will be a time for examination of Labour’s role in the Brexit debacle, but for the moment stopping the Brexiters is the priority. A year ago, if we had known that we would knock out the 29 March deadline and fight the European elections, we would have been upbeat. It’s only the weirdness of a campaign without a leader, or a single party to vote for, that is in danger of disorienting us. But our orientation should be plain: on 24 May, the Brexiters must have lost. Then the bigger battle can be won.