General practices support patients through every stage of their life. They are the heart of their communities and the gateway to our NHS. Every day, around a million GP consultations take place in English practices. We should rightly be very proud of our system of primary care. But it isn’t perfect. As data published this week shows, patient demand for general practice services is increasing while the number of GPs is actually falling – according to the survey, one in 10 GPs are in contact with 60 or more patients a day, which is double the safe limit. At a time when people are living longer, and health problems are becoming more complex, the government has spectacularly failed to deliver its promise of an extra 5,000 GPs. Not enough medics want to be GPs, and too many doctors leave general practice too early. Simple changes might make things better for staff working in primary care, and for patients. When the NHS was founded in 1948, hospitals were brought into public ownership and general practice was left in the private sector, where, mostly, it has remained. Most of the time your GP doesn’t get a salary. They have contracts with the NHS and local authority for a variety of services and they take home the “profit” that they make. While some think the partnership model is more productive than being employed like hospital colleagues, it is not right for everyone. Increasingly, GPs do not want to become partners because of the levels of responsibility and financial risk involved. Evidence suggests that many GPs would be open to moving to a salaried model. At the same time, there are many other staff who work in primary care who would like more influence over the organisation they work for. Public satisfaction with general practice remains relatively high, but not all practices work as well as they should for their patients. In many practices you can see a doctor on the same day, but in the area I represent as an MP, in March 4,437 people had to wait more than 28 days between making an appointment and having a consultation. In some parts of my constituency, poor access to a GP is the biggest issue that people contact me about. As a health service leader, I was astounded by the number of times practices wouldn’t take on work that was clearly beneficial to their patients, because it wasn’t in their business interest. I have battled with GPs who told me that they weren’t paid enough to do annual health checks for adults with learning disabilities (they get more than £100 per check), wouldn’t take student nurses on placement because the profits weren’t large enough, and wouldn’t offer appointments in early mornings or evenings because it was “optional”. That clearly isn’t right or fair to their patients. Our health services should be designed around need. The places with the oldest people and the highest levels of deprivation should get the greatest resources. The inverse care law tells us that in the real world the opposite happens. Practices emerge where doctors want them to be, rather than where public health needs assessment tells us they should be. Culture and leadership are always more important than organisational structure, but a new ownership model for primary care would create an environment that facilitates happy staff and healthier patients. Employee-led mutuals should be created within the NHS with nurses, doctors, pharmacists, therapists, managers and patients all having a say in how the organisation is run. These new organisations – instilled with a progressive and innovative culture – would be much better working environments for staff, with improved career pathways for nurses and more incentives to invest in people. As they would be within the NHS, there would be no profit motive. Crucially, they wouldn’t be able to pick and choose which services to offer to their patients. Struggling practices could receive investment to bring them up to the level of the best. This model would enable a strategic shift from reactive and hospital-based care to preventive community care – without the NHS having to pay a premium price that includes GP profit. All existing GPs should be offered salaried employment within these organisations. Those that wish to retain their existing contractual arrangements should be allowed to do so. This is likely to be particularly important in rural communities. Groups of general practices are already coming together into primary care networks. This is a step in the right direction. Why not give them the option to go one step further, become NHS primary and community care organisations, and complete Nye Bevan’s NHS? • Dr Paul Williams is a GP and the Labour MP for Stockton South