Tens of thousands of people are expected to march in Glasgow on Saturday afternoon in the largest show of support for Scottish independence since Nicola Sturgeon said she would introduce legislation to hold a second independence referendum. The All Under One Banner event, which will be led by a single flag-bearer and a pipe band, will leave Kelvingrove Park at 1.30pm, following a route west to east through the city centre, before ending with a rally at Glasgow Green. Police Scotland estimated that last year’s event attracted about 35,000 people. Scotland’s first minister and the Scottish National party leader, Nicola Sturgeon, announced at the end of April that a second independence referendum must be held by May 2021 if Brexit goes ahead, but stopped short of naming a date or repeating her call for the UK government to hold one, which frustrated some hardline campaigners. All Under One Banner, which describes itself as “open to everyone who desires an independent Scotland”, has marches planned across Scotland throughout the summer, culminating in Edinburgh on 5 October. Writing in the National on Friday, organisers alerted attendees to the possible presence of counter-demonstrations along the route, suggesting: “Marchers can either ignore the counter-demonstrators or smile and wave … our movement doesn’t need any negative publicity.” Traffic Scotland warned drivers to plan ahead, as access to the M8 motorway would be shut off through the city centre. Meanwhile, across the country, SNP activists will distribute half a million “STOP BREXIT” flyers on the first of three campaign Saturdays in the run-up to the European elections. The party’s spring conference, held in Edinburgh last weekend, called on voters to use the EU elections as an opportunity to reinforce Scotland’s support for remaining in the EU, as two polls, by YouGov and Panelbase, suggested the SNP will win three or four or Scotland’s six seats, reducing Labour and the Tories to one each. YouGov showed the SNP has 40% of the vote for a European election. Addressing activists in Edinburgh, Sturgeon said: “As voters go to the polls for the European elections on May 23, our message will be clear and direct. And unlike Labour’s, it will be unambiguous: Scotland’s not for Brexit, Scotland’s for Europe.”