Your story “Electric vehicle drivers at risk by charging from home mains supply” (theguardian.com, 30 May) shows why it is vital that the government provides the right charging infrastructure. After 100 years of incremental change, we are on the cusp of a revolution. The age of the internal combustion engine is being consigned to history. But all too slowly. Today, vehicles contribute to 80% of air pollution breaches in the UK. The National Infrastructure Commission (NIC), in its first published assessment of the UK’s needs to 2050, called for sales of new cars and vans to be all electric from 2030. That will only be achieved with the introduction of a truly national, visible charging network. More direct and ambitious action is needed to jump-start the change. That means meeting the need where the market will not deliver in the short term; getting local authorities to identify where chargers could most usefully be provided and making the spaces available for them; subsidising the provision of rapid charging points in remote areas by 2022; and it means Ofgem removing barriers to connecting to the network. These are all recommendations to the government in the NIC’s first assessment of the UK’s needs to 2050. We await the chancellor’s response. He needs to charge up Britain.Bridget RosewellCommissioner at the National Infrastructure Commission and chair of the Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency (DVSA) • The news that “70,971 vehicles rolled off the production lines in April, down 44.5% from 127,970 in the same month of last year” should be welcomed (Report, 30 May). Every petrol and diesel engine car that rolls off the production line is a 10-year, minimum, investment in an energy source that is destroying our planet and our children’s future. The human “we” cannot begin soon enough reducing our production of, addiction to, and use of such vehicles. It’s good news and should be presented as such.Bob PikeSaint-Cyr-sur-Loire, France • Julian Baggini (A blunt tax on meat won’t save the planet or improve health, Journal, 29 May) calls for “fiscal sticks and carrots” that would not hit the poor hardest. Quite right. But we don’t need to speculate or invent. We can just look at the Green party policy on climate change. Green party policy calls for a carbon tax on all emissions. That includes farm emissions and emissions embedded in our imports. Imports include washing machines from China, cars from Germany and soya from Brazil. This comprehensive tax would discourage consumers and businesses from buying high-carbon goods. And more specifically it would encourage livestock farmers to cut their emissions. There are many ways of doing this provided the economics require them. To protect the poor, a substantial part of the tax should be distributed equally to all as a carbon dividend. The result would be less consumption of meat, especially beef and lamb, better health and a big fall in carbon emissions. What’s not to like?David FlintLondon • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition