Naomi Wolf has said she “stands by” her latest book and denied that the presence of errors had undermined her wider argument, after historians called into question her claim that dozens of Victorian men were executed for sodomy. The errors in Outrages were first identified this week on BBC Radio 3, when the historian Dr Matthew Sweet challenged Wolf on air when she said she had found “several dozen executions” of men accused of having sex with other men. In the book, Wolf argues that in 1857 there was a brutal turn against consensual sex between men, with an increase in executions influencing the lives of Victorian poets such as John Addington Symonds. “I don’t think you’re right about this,” Sweet told Wolf on Thursday, identifying the case of one Thomas Silver in her book. Aged 14 when he was convicted, his sentence was noted as “Death recorded”, which Wolf interpreted as meaning that Silver had been executed. Historians including Sweet have since pointed out that the label actually meant judges could abstain from an execution in cases where they intended to recommend a pardon from the death sentence. Wolf told an audience at the Hay festival on Saturday afternoon: “Some of you may have seen that there has been a healthy debate about two errors I did make in this book, and they’re on page 71 and 72. Hang on to your copies because it will be a collectors’ item because it will not [be] in the next printing.” She said the mistake had been corrected after the interview with Sweet: “I thanked him and immediately corrected the future editions. But here’s what happened. ‘Death recorded’ in those two cases, the Old Bailey record which would have been reported in major newspapers that Symonds was reading … ‘death recorded’ was the most severe penalty, but Dr Sweet pointed out that ‘death recorded’ didn’t necessarily mean that an execution had taken place and I had misinterpreted the phrase.” However, Wolf stressed that she did “stand by my report of these accounts” and that she believed they affected Symonds. “As today, if a doctor in Alabama who performs abortions is arrested or a journalist at the New York Times is arrested, it is the arrest that gets all the press. And if there is a sentence, that gets the national press. If there is a plea bargain or reduced sentence or parole, that isn’t usually in the press. And that was the case for Symonds, reading these terrifying sentences, and it absolutely led him, in my argument, to seek out alternative worlds where he could visualise freedom and love.” The journalist Matthew D’Ancona, who was chairing the event, claimed there was a “gendered dimension” to the criticism of Wolf; she distanced herself from that position. “I approach the information about the correction with a great appreciation and a sense of humility,” she said: “It’s such an important story and I welcome the chance to correct these two out of hundreds of citations and make it perfect.” After Thursday’s BBC Radio interview, Sweet said he felt the error did call Wolf’s central argument into question. “I think her assumptions about ‘death recorded’ have led her to the view … that ‘dozens and dozens’ of Victorian men were executed … I have yet to see evidence that one man in Victorian Britain was executed for sodomy,” he said, while the historian Richard Ward said it was a “pretty basic error”.