“Bare-faced” beauty is huge. But even for the celestial creatures seen at Miu Miu (see above), glowy skin doesn’t just “happen”. It’s astute highlighting: much more subtle than the social media kind that makes you look like you’ve been dipped in liquid foil. (Somebody make it stop). Blend your highlighter with serum/moisturisers/foundation and apply. Ridiculously simple, supremely effective. Oh, and a good glow begins with a good exfoliator. Forego this and not even a 100W bulb will shine through those dead skin cells. 1. Charlotte Tilbury Glowgasm Face Palette £60, selfridges.com 2. Hourglass Unreal High Shine Lip Gloss £28, spacenk.com 3. Illamasqua Nude Revolution Beyond Powder in Dare £34, illamasqua.com 4. Becca Skin Love Glow Elixir £34, johnlewis.com 5. Huda NYMPH highlighter in Aphrodite £40, cultbeauty.co.uk Primers are supposed to make your makeup look better and last longer. In theory. In reality, I rarely come across any that I can really hang my hat on. Many suck the life out of your skin so it looks flat, matt and lifeless. Which then makes your makeup flat, matt and… You get the gist. Others disturb the balance of your serums and start to ‘pill’ so your face looks like a bobbly jumper. Hence, I’m so-so about primers. This one, however, is epic. Two words attracted me to it. ‘Hydro’ (the hydration levels in this makes a huge difference to your skin) and ‘grip’. That sounds a bit vice-like, but it’s what you need to stop your makeup falling apart. It is filled with moisture-boosting ingredients: an antioxidant-rich cannabis extract (no, it won’t make you high, it just hydrates and plumps the skin), hyaluronic acid, aloe water and various vitamins. The stuff that actually grips your makeup is a blue agave extract. It locks everything in place. The cool gel texture – free of oil, silicone and parabens – goes on beautifully. It is not sticky, doesn’t dull the skin, doesn’t interfere with your skincare and you don’t have to wait a lifetime before applying your makeup on top. I put mine on straightaway and, 12 hours later, it is all still intact, which, when you have oily skin, is nothing short of a miracle. So now I’m sold. It’s easily the best primer I have used.Milk Hydro Grip primer, £27, cultbeauty.co.uk Pout for charity MAC’s Viva Glam campaign began 25 years ago with a mission to end HIV and Aids. This year it’s extended its reach to support reproductive health and and equal rights for all. Viva Glam Lipstick, £17.50, maccosmetics. co.uk Just for you Searching for a unique scent? Head to the Experimental Perfume Club Perfumer’s Nest counter and create your own fragrance. And it’s refillable: great for your purse, better for the planet. From £90, harveynichols.com Box clever I am obsessed with Sunday Riley’s innovative, super-charged skincare formulas. Try the brilliant hero products at half price with a limited-edition box. Mintd x Sunday Riley, from £70, mintdbox.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.