Marc-Andre ter Stegen 8 Brought authority to a nervous defence. Produced a fine stop from Salah, and two from Milner, to preserve an important clean sheet. Sergi Roberto 7 Troubled by the pace of Mané and Robertson on the overlap. Far more effective when shifted forwards with Semedo to cover. Gerard Piqué 7 Almost conceded an early penalty with a push on Mane. The 32-year-old remains dominant in the air and ever alert, however. Clement Lenglet 7 Several last ditch blocks could not disguise his discomfort against Salah. Booked for hauling back the forward when beaten again. Jordi Alba 8 A class act, albeit at the occasional expense of his defensive duties. Delivered a glorious cross for Suárez’s opener. Arturo Vidal 8 Chosen ahead of Arthur for his quality on the ball and switched play to telling effect. Also fearsome in the tackle. Sergio Busquets 8 His importance to Barcelona is undiminished. Brave and tidy in possession and hugely effective in breaking Liverpool’s attacking rhythm. Ivan Rakitic 7 Posed an early threat only for Henderson to occupy him with more defensive work. Made a superb goalline clearance from Firmino. Philippe Coutinho 6 Gave a glimpse of his old Liverpool self early on before fading. Whistled by the home crowd when replaced. Lionel Messi 9 Klopp was right, he is the greatest. Simply unplayable at times and his 600th goal for Barcelona will live long in the memory. Possibly settled the tie too. Luis Suarez 8 He remains what Liverpool used to savour – a world class wind-up merchant and goalscorer. Booked for dissent late on but could have been sooner. Subs: Semedo (for Coutinho 60) 7, Dembele (for Suarez 90) 3, Alena (for Roberto 90) 4 Alisson 6 Little chance with the Barcelona goals, even the third from distance. Grateful for Dembélé’s dreadful late miss. Joe Gomez 7 Given a first start since 5 December due to his “fresh legs” but Alba prospered down his flank. Improved after the break. Joel Matip 6 Given the runaround at times by Messi and yet his awareness produced timely interceptions against Rakitic and Coutinho. Virgil van Dijk 7 His highly-anticipated duel with Messi had looked balanced until the great Argentinian stepped up a level and he was unable to respond. Andy Robertson 8 Relished the double demand of tracking Messi inside while supporting the attack. The pinpoint delivery was, for once, lacking. James Milner 6 Switched to the left of the midfield three after Keïta’s exit where his close attentions on Messi injected some bad blood into the tie. Fabinho 6 Often bypassed by Messi’s quick feet and outnumbered in the midfield battle. Unfortunate for the second goal but this was not his night. Naby Keïta 5 Made a dynamic and dangerous start only for a groin injury to curtail his night after 21 minutes. Mohamed Salah 6 Could have changed the complexion of the tie but summed up Liverpool’s wasteful night by striking a post. Dangerous but no end product. Georginio Wijnaldum 6 Stationed at centre forward to lead the high press on Barcelona’s worried defenders. A huge surprise that did not pay off. Sadio Mané 6 Escaped Pique and Roberto several times with his pace but unable to make it count. Missed a great chance from Henderson’s exquisite pass. Subs: Henderson (for Keita 24) 7, Firmino (for Wijnaldum 78) 6, Origi (for Milner 84) 5