Warning: this article contains spoilers. Do not read on unless you have watched the Game of Thrones finale, The Iron Throne. Game of Thrones has shown itself to have more than a spot of performance anxiety over the last few weeks. So I’m sure they felt absolutely no pressure at all in the build-up to this last ever episode, which had to justify every single thing the show had done up to this point and wrap up years of emotional investment for a massive audience all around the world. Don’t worry, they’ve got this! There is some irony in the fact that this season – which has proved so unpopular among a certain group of fans that over a million of them signed a petition to have it done again differently – ended with an episode that felt, at times, like it had the spirit of a fan-made YouTube compilation, showcasing our favourites’ best bits. From the moment the bell, smashed and covered in ash, lingered in the corner of an early shot, the signs were there that this was never going to be subtle. But even so, the series went out in a blaze of corn. Samwell’s presentation of A Song of Ice and Fire – a moment akin to the famous “something Picasso” scene in Titanic – was GoT at its cheesiest. Perhaps, after the harrowing devastation we’ve experienced during season eight, we deserved a little lightness of touch when it came to the final farewell. In a world where Bran the Broken is the ruler we’ve been building up to – the memes are already sharper than that particular twist – some non-lethal resolution was inevitable, even kindly. The Bells laid waste to the decency of characters many had come to love, so The Iron Throne went as far as it could to reinstate hope where it could find it, which meant satisfactory send-offs, of sorts, for the surviving Starks. Arya may not have closed any green eyes, as foreseen and then forgotten, but she got to be Dora the Explorer, and if there’s ever a present-time spin-off, I’d like to see the adventures of this particular stealthy cartographer-assassin. Sansa (in this episode, called Sonsa and Sarnsa, depending who you asked) became the queen she deserved to be, abstaining from any international claptrap in order to preside over her own independent state, and nobody could begrudge her that. And Jon, whom I thought, for a while, might spend the entire hour and 15 minutes shooting sassy side-eye at the Unsullied, finally got to pet Ghost, as he did not do in episode four. Feelgood montage done; Game of Thrones over. The problem with feeding fans ‘what they want’ is that fans have evolved into a far more sophisticated machine than any showrunners can even begin to anticipate. And what they want is rarely as straightforward as a happy ending, if you can call building up from the scorched rubble of King’s Landing a happy ending. For viewers used to sharp shocks, the lack of brutality in this episode was unusual, and even unearned (the death of Daenerys aside, because, oddly and unforgivably, it felt like that was over and done with before the episode really got going). It is a relief that more favourites did not either die or turn into power-crazed dictators with genocidal instincts, of course, but it also felt like a rush to move away from the viciousness that had defined eight years of Game of Thrones. Up until the last few moments, I realised I had been waiting for a twist, and it was one that never came. Like many viewers, I was left with questions. How did the Dothraki hear Daenerys calling for the breaking of the wheel from so far away, over all that din? Why was Tyrion allowed to tell everyone to choose a ruler and how to do so, when he was still a prisoner, and Grey Worm was entirely not in the mood for any of his nonsense? Where can I get a doorbell that’s a dragon? Showrunners Benioff and Weiss may not have been able to tie up every loose end, despite giving over a full 30 minutes to admin, but a few would have been nice. Game of Thrones has always been as maddening as it is gratifying, and the finale was no different. Part of the show’s appeal has become the enormous discussion around it, the fact that each decision and development is now unpicked with forensic attention to detail by people who know the story intimately. Even if you think that making a whole series about who’s going to sit on the Iron Throne and then melting said throne at the end is a bold move, it’s hard to deny how involving it has been for the last eight years. Was the finale ample reward for that? Perhaps not, but neither does it scorch the episodes before it, and if we’ve learned anything from this episode, mercy, it seems, was the name of the game.