Three tries in the final six minutes gave Bath a bonus point victory that took them to sixth in the table and left them on course for a place in the European Champions Cup, but this was a muddle of a match that highlighted why two of the Premiership’s heavier weights have been closer to the bottom than the top this year. Wasps were 17-10 ahead when they took off their captain, Joe Launchbury, who had injured an ankle, after 62 minutes. The England second row had been the glue that held his side together, twice involved in the move of the match just before the break that saw Josh Bassett denied a try on review because of a pass that was not obviously forward. Bath seized the initiative in Launchbury’s absence. They had taken a lead after three minutes with a move from a lineout when Jamie Roberts rumbled over the gainline and Jonathan Joseph danced through a gap between Nizaam Carr and Gaby Lovobalavu that was so big it would have been exploited by players far less nimble of foot, but spent much of the next hour cheaply coughing up possession. The considerable threat of Joe Cokanasiga on the left wing was largely muted until the final minutes. He made one rampaging run in the first half, running from one 22 to the other and treating defenders like skittles, but Bath struggled to get the ball to him. They made 204 passes in the match, but only four were to a wing who bristles with menace. It was the final home match in charge for Bath’s director of rugby Todd Blackadder, who is leaving for Japan with a year on his contract to run. At the start of the week he made his players watch a rerun of the previous round’s 6-3 defeat at Sale, an evening when they rarely passed the ball, and a frustration in his three years here has been a general skill level lower than he is used to in New Zealand. As Bath were dropping passes or being turned over at the breakdown, although Anthony Watson showed up in his second match back, Lovobalavu was making up for his earlier defensive lapse. He created his side’s equalising try after 13 minutes, making something out of a nothing pass by seeking out space and stepping out of two tackles before giving a scoring pass to Carr. Wasps should have taken the lead after another Lovobalavu break, but Will Rowlands, a late replacement for James Gaskell, who injured his back in the warm-up, knocked on a metre out. The Fijian centre, who was last week released by Wasps, then fooled Sam Underhill by looking at Rob Miller, who was looping behind him, and passing to the flatter Nathan Hughes who had an unimpeded 25-metre run to the line. Freddie Burns and Miller exchanged penalties to make it 17-10 to Wasps at the break, but Bassett’s ruled-out try depressed the visitors’ lead. “It was a definite try,” said their director of rugby, Dai Young. “The decision was made by the television match official but let’s have the referee making the call. I am not saying it cost us the match, but it didn’t help.” Blackadder said: “I have seen tries awarded after passes more forward than that. Wasps were unlucky.” There was no further score until the 74th minute. When a period of Bath pressure ended with Wasps repelling a five-metre scrum and winning a penalty before Hughes held up Zach Mercer on the line, the visitors looked the stronger team mentally. Then Launchbury, who had been everywhere, went off and his side started to concede penalties regularly. Jacques van Rooyen was held up over the line but so sustained was the Bath pressure now that it appeared a question of when they would score. Soon was the answer. Mercer finished off a forward manoeuvre and two minutes later, with the scores level, the ball found its way to Cokanasiga on the left. Willie le Roux gambled on an interception close to his line and when he clutched only air, the England wing was in. Time was up when Bath were awarded another penalty. They could have kicked for goal to deny Wasps, one of their rivals for a Champions Cup slot, a losing bonus point but went for a fourth try and kicked to touch, setting up a maul that ended with Mercer’s second try. “It showed massive character,” said Blackadder, but much more than that is needed in European club rugby’s premier tournament.