I used to think that cooking with children – at least younger ones – must involve a foolproof plan that absolutely cannot be deviated from. Since having my own children, I’ve realised how wrong I was. Hands-on, messy and creative environments are a natural habitat for little hands and imaginative minds. The best thing to do is give children a platform to work from, allowing them to decorate, dot, splatter and layer as they please (aprons and old T-shirts are highly advisable). This creates a sense of ownership and accomplishment, making kids more inclined to eat what they’ve made. These are loved by adults and kids alike, as a snack or party food. Feel free to make them your own by using your own choice of herbs, vegetables and cheese. And leave out the chorizo if you want to keep it meat-free, or substitute with other cured meats. Prep 20 minCook 1 hrMakes 12 1 round sheet puff pastry, roughly 30cm in diameter (230g)4 tomatoes, roughly grated and skins discarded (250g net weight)2 tbsp tomato paste1½ tsp dried oregano2 garlic cloves, peeled and crushedSalt and black pepper100g mozzarella block, roughly grated30g parmesan, finely grated80g dried chorizo, chopped into 1cm cubes 4 tbsp basil leaves, thinly sliced Lay a sheet of greaseproof paper slightly larger than the puff pastry on a work surface and place the pastry on top. In a small bowl, combine 50g grated tomato (about a quarter) with the tomato paste, oregano, half the garlic, an eighth of a teaspoon of salt and a good grind of pepper. Spread this evenly over the puff pastry, leaving a 1½cm rim all around the edge. Sprinkle the sauce evenly with the mozzarella, two-thirds of the parmesan, the chorizo and three-quarters of the basil. Gently roll up the puff pastry, so you end up with a long, compact, sausage-shaped roll. Lift up the greaseproof paper base, transfer the roll to the fridge and chill for 20 minutes, to firm up slightly. Meanwhile, heat the oven to 185C (175C fan)/385F/gas 5½. Trim off and discard 1½cm from each end of the roll, then cut the “sausage” into 12 even slices about 1½-2cm thick. Carefully transfer the slices to a large baking tray lined with greaseproof paper, keeping them well apart, then press down gently on each slice with the palm of your hand. Sprinkle over the remaining parmesan, and bake for 20 minutes, or until golden. Meanwhile, in a small bowl mix the remaining grated tomato with the rest of the garlic and basil, a quarter-teaspoon of salt and a good grind of pepper. Eat the pinwheels warm or at room temperature, with the fresh tomato sauce alongside. The inspiration for this snack is the American seven-layer dip. It allows children to make their own combination in individual glasses or bowls, leaving out any dreaded – “yucky” – vegetables. Prep 30 minCook 30 minServes 8 as a snack For the black beans60ml olive oil1 tomato, roughly chopped (100g)1 tsp ground cumin1 tsp garlic granules 1 tsp onion granules2 x 400g tins black beans, drained (480g net weight)Salt and pepperFor the guacamole2 ripe avocados, skins and pip removed (220g)1-2 tbsp coriander leaves, roughly chopped2 tbsp lime juiceSalt and pepper For the yoghurt150g Greek-style yoghurt1 tbsp lime juiceSalt For the toppings2 tomatoes, finely chopped½ red onion, finely chopped 1 small orange pepper, finely chopped1 small yellow pepper, finely chopped150g feta, finely crumbled1-2 tbsp coriander leaves, roughly chopped3 spring onions, trimmed and finely chopped¾ tsp ground cuminCorn tortilla chips (blue or yellow), to serve Put all the bean ingredients in a medium saucepan with 150ml water, three-quarters of a teaspoon of salt and a good grind of pepper. On a medium-high heat, bring to a boil, then cook for seven minutes, stirring often, until the tomato has completely broken down and the liquid has reduced by half. Remove from the heat and use a whisk to break down the beans into a coarse mash. Transfer to a bowl. Make the guacamole by mashing together the avocado, coriander, lime juice, a third of a teaspoon of salt and a good grind of pepper in a medium bowl. Use a fork to create a smooth mash. In a small bowl, whisk the yoghurt, lime juice and an eighth of a teaspoon of salt. Put all the toppings in separate bowls. Assemble in glasses or bowls, starting with a layer of bean dip and building it as you wish, adding the guacamole, yoghurt and any of the toppings (or not). Serve with the tortilla chips to dip in. Brigadeiros are Brazilian condensed-milk sweets that are served at parties and special occasions. They’re a super treat to make, and it’s easy to get little people involved in stirring and rolling the sweets in the toppings. Here, I’ve added some crushed-up biscuits to give them more texture and a dangerously moreish appeal. Prep 5 minChill 90 minCook 30 minMakes 18 75g petit beurre biscuits (ie about 9 biscuits), roughly broken in half 1 x 397g tin condensed milk 4 tbsp unsweetened cocoa powder 20g unsalted butter2½ tbsp water¾ tsp flaked sea salt For the toppings15g cocoa powder20g rainbow sprinkles 20g chocolate sprinkles40g pistachios, finely chopped Put the biscuits in a sandwich bag and use a rolling pin lightly to bash them into a coarse crumble. Put the condensed milk, cocoa powder, butter, water and salt in a medium saucepan and cook on a medium-high heat, whisking continuously, until the mixture begins to bubble. Turn down the heat to medium-low and carry on cooking for 10-12 minutes, stirring continuously with a spatula, until the mixture is thick, glossy and pulling away from the sides of the pan. Remove from the heat and stir in the crushed biscuits. Quickly transfer to a shallow dish, leave to cool slightly, then refrigerate to set for at least 90 minutes. Use a small spoon to scoop out some of the mixture, then roll it into small balls with your hands, roughly 20-25g in size; you should end up with 18 in total. Put all the toppings into individual little bowls, then roll the balls into each of the different toppings, to coat. Eat at room temperature or refrigerate for later.