The tree-lined Malahide Cricket Club sits just 12 miles north of Dublin and given fair weather plus some last-minute walk-ups it should provide a fine setting for Friday’s one-off ODI against Ireland that heralds the start of England’s World Cup run-in. To date, however, it remains a slightly murky place for English cricket. While they won here in 2013, two years later came a particularly grim episode. The heavens opened, only 18 overs were possible and Peter Moores learned of his removal as head coach via the media after some ham-fisted work by the head honchos. Since that sorry affair – a response to the dismal World Cup campaign in Australia and New Zealand – England have experienced a quite remarkable renaissance, their flint-eyed captain, Eoin Morgan, having overseen a rise to No 1 in the rankings and the status of favourites for this summer’s tournament. Nevertheless they have still pitched up on the banks of the Broadmeadow estuary this time in a state of slight disarray. Three new caps are due to be handed out – Dawid Malan, Ben Foakes and Jofra Archer the recipients – and yet as the players darted between rain showers for practice, the talk was chiefly of Alex Hales, recreational drugs and Monday’s high‑profile defenestration. Morgan was in no mood to muck about, using the first question on the subject to launch a detailed explanation as to why Hales – previously the embodiment of the side’s batting power given his status as first reserve – could no longer remain part of a setup that clearly feels badly let down by his actions. One of the England captain’s many strengths during the four-year revolution has been his demeanour; when the ball is flying to all parts the bowlers have looked to Morgan for reassurance and invariably been met with a face that refused to betray emotions and thus allows them to mentally reset themselves. But here, despite a week to take it all in, Morgan was visibly angered by events. An astonishing innings of 171 from 126 balls by David Wiese almost carried Sussex to an improbable win against Hampshire at the Ageas Bowl. The all-rounder hit 14 fours and nine sixes and rescued his side from 103 for five in pursuit of a victory target of 356. Wiese added 232 for the sixth wicket with Ben Brown to bring the target down to 21 off 18 balls but when Brown was out for 64, Wiese followed in the next over and Sussex ended up all out for 346. Earlier Tom Alsop (124) and Aiden Markram (130) put on 184 for the second wicket to help Hampshire to a total that proved to be just enough. Kent climbed off the bottom of the South Group, overtaking their hosts in the process, with an eight-wicket defeat of Surrey at the Oval. Surrey collapsed to 127 all out, despite an unbeaten 62 from Dean Elgar, with Matt Milnes taking three for 37. Kent knocked off the runs in 28 overs, Daniel Bell-Drummond making 41 before Matt Renshaw (32no) and Heino Kuhn (36no) saw their side home. Lancashire climbed to second in the North Group with a 30-run victory over Derbyshire at Old Trafford in a match reduced by rain to 38 overs per side. Keaton Jennings hit 84 and Jake Lehmann made an unbeaten 77 on debut as Lancashire finished on 239 for six. Derbyshire fell short at 209 for seven despite a quickfire 52 off 39 balls by Anuj Dal. England’s one-day team rode out the storm of the Bangladesh tour in 2016 that he and Hales opted against, and somehow stayed on course after the 2017 street fight in Bristol that might have torn other dressing rooms apart. But once again, just weeks away from a home World Cup that will ultimately define the whole project, when all looked relatively rosy in the garden, he and the head coach, Trevor Bayliss, must devote time and energy to matters off the field. What they desperately need is for the sun to shine over Malahide and, on a green pitch that may first need assessing, a professional performance against an Ireland side that, by the admission of their captain (and Morgan’s close friend), Will Porterfield, is still transitioning from the golden generation that for three successive World Cups enjoyed upsetting the big boys. For individuals there is plenty at stake. The resting of Ben Stokes, Jos Buttler, Moeen Ali, Chris Woakes and Jonny Bairstow (four of whom were consulted over the exile of Hales), an injury to Jason Roy and wise caution over Mark Wood mean some fresh faces get their chance. Malan and Foakes probably require injuries to crack the final World Cup squad on 23 May but Joe Denly, set to win his first cap in the format for 10 years, and James Vince, down to play here and against Pakistan, must keep it this way. Of the debutants, Archer is clearly different. While they may deny it publicly, England ultimately changed their qualification rules to bring in the Barbados-born British passport holder. Should he impress here and against Pakistan, the 24-year-old has every chance of leapfrogging incumbents. The Hales storm has helped him, too, stealing a touch of the spotlight that would otherwise have been trained on this electric but inexperienced Twenty20 talent. Certainly Morgan, once the Hales issue was negotiated, appeared excited by the prospect of getting his new toy out of the box and has few fears over Archer’s integration into the squad. Some mischievous recent headlines suggested he may be viewed a cuckoo in the seam bowling nest but in reality, the captain appeared unconcerned. “We’ve spoken about the quotes that came out and they were taken a little bit out of context,” said Morgan. “There’s no malice towards anybody coming in. Part of what we do is creating a healthy culture and environment that is extremely welcoming. “There’s a huge amount of expectation on us as a team, never mind individuals. I think that’s part and parcel of being the No 1 side in the world. It creates a level of expectation and it’s quite cool because we’ve created that. It’s not just come out of blowing smoke – it’s through performance. It’s actually made us strive to continue to be better and hopefully that does that for him.” Morgan was wisely complimentary about the country he once represented and offered up last summer’s shock defeat to Scotland – ranked one place lower in 13th place – as a reason to be wary. After a challenging week off the field, it would be a very handy time to make some happier memories in Malahide.