Born in London, Redknapp, 72, became a professional footballer for West Ham in 1966. He went on to become a manager, guiding Portsmouth to their FA Cup final win in 2008 and taking Tottenham Hotspur from relegation to Uefa Champions League qualification. In 2018 he was crowned king of the jungle in ITV’s I’m A Celebrity… Get Me Out of Here! He is currently selling jam roly-polys online to raise money for homeless charity Hope Housing. He lives in Dorset and is married with two sons. When were you happiest? When I met [my wife] Sandra. I was coming up 17. We met at the Two Puddings, a dance hall in Stratford. What is your greatest fear? Something happening to Sandra. What is your earliest memory?My mum and my nan getting me a KitKat or Mars bar at the sweetshop on the ration book. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself? I am pretty useless around the house. I am clumsy, I can make a mess anywhere and I am very disorganised. What is the trait you most deplore in others? Bad-mannered people – it costs nothing to be nice. Treat everybody the same. What was your most embarrassing moment? When I gave Fleur [East] the soap after I had it down my shorts in the jungle. What is your most treasured possession? There are probably cup final medals in my sock drawer somewhere, but I am not one for worrying about things like that. What would your super power be? To make people happy. What makes you unhappy?Backing too many losers on the horses. What is your most unappealing habit? Sandra says it’s blowing my nose when I am out for dinner. What is your guiltiest pleasure? Marks & Spencer Fruit Gums: I buy 20 packets at a time. To whom would you most like to say sorry, and why? To any of the players I may have fallen out with during my time in management. What was the best kiss of your life? Sandra – I’m not kissing anyone else. What has been your biggest disappointment? That my mum and dad didn’t move to live by the sea, where we live, before they died. If you could edit your past, what would you change? I was probably too cheeky to chairmen over the years. If you could go back in time, where would you go? The old East End: it was a great place to be brought up. What is the closest you’ve come to death? A car accident in Italy in 1990. Four people got killed. I was lucky, I got thrown out. What single thing would improve the quality of your life? The body of a 20-year-old. What do you consider your greatest achievement? Pulling Sandra. What keeps you awake at night? It used to be worrying about football results. How would you like to be remembered? As someone who had time for everybody.