A healthy league position is not the only indicator of a happy rugby club. Exeter may be top of the Gallagher Premiership, nine points clear of Saturday’s opponents Saracens, but it is the Chiefs’ off-field tightness that sets them apart. There cannot be many professional sides in England whose players not only choose to live next door to each other but take turns to put out their teammates’ rubbish bins. Pity any unsuspecting burglars who stray into the quiet Devon village where England’s Luke Cowan-Dickie and Jack Nowell and their club captain, Jack Yeandle, all reside in adjoining houses. Cowan-Dickie occupies the first of them, with Yeandle in the middle and Nowell down the end. “My garden’s absolutely spotless … I normally get Yeandle to do it for me,” Cowan-Dickie jokes. “We all take each other’s bins out, though it can be a bit annoying because I’ve only got one bin and they’ve got two. Sometimes you’ll see Yeandle carrying four bins and trying to pick mine up at the same time.” Aside from Cowan-Dickie knocking on the others’ doors to steal some milk “when I can’t be bothered to pop to the shop” it seems the cheek-by-jowl arrangement suits all involved. It matters not that Yeandle and his hyphenated neighbour are vying for the same starting jersey, nor that they see each other from dawn to dusk at the club anyway. On a recent day off, rather than opting for peace and solitude, the majority of the squad headed off to Bath races. We don’t want to talk about ‘matching’ teams. If you talk about matching a team you’re never going to better them Nowell and Cowan-Dickie, furthermore, have been firm friends since their earliest mini-rugby days in Penzance; both are sons of deep-sea fishermen and struck up an almost immediate bond. The on-field benefits of this ocean of mutual regard are there for all to see. If the Chiefs score at least one try at Allianz Park this weekend it will be the 73rd consecutive Premiership game – a record – in which they have done so. Win and they will remain on course to break the all-time record of 87 points – set by Saracens five years ago – for any team in a Premiership season. It is also an opportunity for a psychological nudge or two, collectively and individually, even though Saracens are opting to rest many of their leading lights. In the reverse fixture in December, Exeter trounced their rivals 31-13, scoring four tries to one, and a “double” whammy, regardless of the absent big names, might cause a few to revise their opinion that this season’s title is bound for north London. While Saracens may be involved in next Saturday’s Champions Cup final, Exeter have beaten them in six of their past seven meetings in all competitions. The defending champions are definitely not regarded as invincible in the West Country. Ask Cowan-Dickie, for example, whether he and his fellow Chiefs forwards think they can match the London club and the question is instantly dispatched straight back over the bowler’s head. “We don’t want to talk about ‘matching’ teams. If you talk about matching a team you’re never going to better them. Here, we always strive to be the best pack in the Prem. We’ve still got loads to work on but, judging by the league table, we’re on the right track.” Cowan-Dickie’s confidence is a sign of the times. All of his 11 England caps to date have come off the bench but, with the Rugby World Cup looming, the Cornishman’s career is back on an upward curve with Dylan Hartley sidelined. With Hartley due back shortly for Northampton and Jamie George rested this weekend, this match would not be the worst moment to remind Eddie Jones of his qualities. I would absolutely love to start for England but that’s for the coaches to decide In the pre-Christmas fixture against Saracens, the 25-year-old was at his effervescent, spiky and dynamic best; Jones, as a combative ex-hooker himself, is a fan of all those qualities. If Cowan-Dickie can keep improving his set-piece consistency, a first start could well materialise during England’s August warm-up games. “Eddie wants you to be yourself but the main thing for me is set-piece. As a hooker and a front-row forward, set-piece is key. That’s the main area where you’re looked at; everything else is a bonus. I would absolutely love to start for England but that’s for the coaches to decide. Hopefully if I perform well enough in certain games I might get the nod.” If nothing else, he is far less anxious on the eve of battle nowadays than was the case earlier in his career. “I’m way more relaxed before big games than I used to be. Before I’d be saying to myself: ‘I really need to nail this first lineout or this first scrum.’ Now I can’t think like that. I’ve done so much work during the week it gives you more confidence going into the weekend. You’ve no nerves and you’re ready.” The same, he reckons, will be true of Exeter when the serious knockout action kicks off later this month: “The vibe we’ve got here shows on the pitch. I’ve said for years we play our best in the biggest games. In knockout games we fight for our lives and traditionally we perform well. Some clubs might be sitting there, resting on their laurels, thinking they’ve made it. We’re just looking to keep driving. No matter which team we’re playing we’re looking to go hard.” Having recently confirmed a new two-year deal to remain at Chiefs, Cowan-Dickie is also aware nothing less than his best will be good enough to inch him ahead of his good friend Yeandle. “The harder I train and the more consistently I perform every single week the better chance I have of starting here, which is my main aim. If I get international selections from that, that’s just a bonus. I still feel I’ve got some great years in me. Each year I’m involved with Exeter and knocking on the door with England is going to improve me as a player. Hopefully, if I’m injury free, we’ll see that over the next few years.” And having reached the last three consecutive Premiership finals it is equally clear the band of brothers from Devon are itching for another high-profile trip up to the Big Smoke. Cowan-Dickie is not a fan of picking and choosing his matches – “I normally just try and go flat out every time” - but seeking to outsmart Saracens at this time of year is increasingly Exeter’s favourite game.