When Liverpool lost their Champions League final in Kiev a year ago it appeared their immediate reaction was to go out and spend £40m on a defensive midfielder from Monaco as a statement of intent for the following season. In fact the deal to sign Fabinho had been brokered by the time the game against Real Madrid kicked off, so the Brazilian was able to watch the final knowing he would soon be a member of Jürgen Klopp’s team. “I watched it as a fan,” the 25-year-old admits. “I could have been thinking of what my position might be or how I could help the team, but I just wanted Liverpool to win. I wasn’t really focusing on tactics; what made a bigger impression on me was the passion of the fans. I didn’t know then that we would all be back for another final a year later, but I am pleased to have the chance.” If there was any part of Fabinho that secretly wanted Liverpool to struggle so that he might come in and improve the side he hides it very well. He knew he was joining an excellent team who were overachieving and he did not expect to be a success straight away. That proved to be the case as Klopp eased him in gently. There were some indifferent performances at first, and some questions as to why Liverpool needed to strengthen in an area of the pitch where they had several options, though by December Fabinho was hitting his stride and in the second half of the season he proved invaluable. Alisson Goalkeeper Season apps 50 The great-grandson of an amateur goalkeeper in his hometown, the Brazil No 1 replaced his brother, Muriel, at Internacional. Trent Alexander-Arnold Right-back Season apps 40 Goals 1 When Liverpool last won the Champions League in 2005, he had just signed for the club as a six-year-old. Andy Robertson Left-back Apps 51 Goals 0 Released by Celtic aged 15, he worked at M&S in Glasgow while playing as an amateur for Queen’s Park. Has never lost a Liverpool game at Anfield. Virgil van Dijk Centre-back Apps 53 Goals 6 World’s most expensive defender at £75m. Worked as a dishwasher at the Oncle Jean restaurant in Breda when he was 16. Joël Matip Centre-back Apps 30 Goals 1 Born in Bochum, he represented his father’s country, Cameroon, before retiring from international duty in 2015. Dejan Lovren Centre-back Apps 18 Goals 1 Said he should be recognised as “one of the best defenders in the world” after helping Croatia to the World Cup final. His family escaped to Germany during the Bosnian war. Joe Gomez Centre-backApps 24 Goals 0 The versatile defender joined Liverpool from Charlton, where he made his first-team debut aged 17. Has represented England at every level. Georginio Wijnaldum MidfielderApps 46 Goals 5 His double against Barcelona sent Liverpool to the final. Started his career at Sparta Rotterdam, where his younger brother, Giliano, plays. Fabinho Midfielder Apps 40 Goals 1 Before joining Monaco, the Brazilian had a spell on loan at Real Madrid from Rio Ave in 2013, making one appearance. Jordan Henderson Midfielder Apps 45 Goals 1 Given his England debut by Fabio Capello. The only English player to miss in the World Cup shootout against Colombia. James Milner MidfielderApps 44 Goals 7 Last season, his nine assists broke the record for a single Champions League campaign. He is England’s most-capped under-21 international. Mohamed Salah Forward Apps 51 Goals 26 Was excused military service in Egypt to focus on football. The fastest Liverpool player to score 50 Premier League goals, taking 69 matches. Roberto Firmino Forward Apps 47 Goals 16 He used to help his father in the family business selling water bottles. Was the Bundesliga’s 2013-14 breakthrough player of the year. Sadio Mané Forward Apps 49 Goals 26 Scored the fastest Premier League hat-trick for Southampton against Aston Villa in 2015 in two minutes and 56 seconds. Divock Origi Forward Apps 20 Goals 6 His father played 120 times for Kenya. His double against Barcelona was the first time he'd scored in the Champions League. Xherdan Shaqiri ForwardApps 30 Goals 6 The only player in the Liverpool squad to have won the Champions League. Harry Vavasour “I knew it would be difficult settling in and that there would be times when I was out of the team, and in terms of adapting there was a lot of preparation and hard work,” he says. “It took a little while but by the time we played Arsenal at the Emirates I felt I was beginning to understand the speed of the Premier League and the attention to detail that is required, and the stand-out game in terms of building my confidence was when we beat Manchester United at Anfield. It was probably one of the best performances of the season. I kept up with the rhythm and pace and even managed to get an assist in one of the goals. We were superior that day, and I felt at home in the Premier League.” Fabinho never doubted that he would rise to the challenge of playing in a new league, and had been warned that Klopp is not in the habit of regarding even £40m acquisitions as automatic first-team selections, but what came as a surprise when he did begin to play regularly was the relentless physicality of the English game. “I was aware of the pace of English football before I came, of course – I think everybody is,” he says. “Once you are playing in the Premier League though what strikes you most is the intensity and high quality of every team you come up against. It was difficult for me at first to get used to having so little recovery time between games – they seemed to come around too quickly – but that’s an area I have improved on and I feel more comfortable now.” Ironically Fabinho and his teammates have just had an absurdly long three weeks of rest in which to prepare for the last game of the season, though so have Tottenham. At least fatigue should not be an issue in Madrid, when a fully rested and prepared Fabinho will be attempting to coax another towering midfield performance from his deceptively slight frame. He smiles at the suggestion he looks bigger on the pitch than he does in real life; he has obviously heard it before. “I may not appear that strong and powerful, but I know how to use my body and strength,” he says. “If you can read the game well and anticipate plays, it helps a lot.”