Bayern Munich stumbled to a goalless draw at RB Leipzig, missing their chance to seal the Bundesliga title as Borussia Dortmund kept their hopes alive with a frenzied win that closed the gap to two points with one game left. Bayern, who needed a win to make sure of a record-extending seventh consecutive league title, lead the table with 75 points. They play Eintracht Frankfurt in next week’s season finale and their superior goal difference means a draw will be enough to clinch the title. They came agonisingly close to a late winner at Leipzig when Franck Ribéry’s shot drew an instinctive save from Peter Gulacsi before Robert Lewandowski, pouncing on the rebound, was denied by a last-ditch block by Amadou Haidara, who had been on the pitch a matter of seconds. Earlier in the second half Leon Goretzka hit the net with a spectacular scissor-kick volley only for it to be ruled out for a marginal offside after a VAR check. The draw secures Champions League football next season for third-placed Leipzig. “We want to win this thing next week,” said Bayern’s Thomas Mueller. “We have battled back from nine points behind. We are very greedy.” Dortmund, meanwhile, overcame Fortuna Düsseldorf 3-2. Christian Pulisic, who will be at Chelsea next season, opened the scoring in his final home game for the hosts but an error from Dortmund’s keeper, Marwin Hitz, allowed Oliver Fink to draw Düsseldorf level just after the break. Thomas Delaney then restored Dortmund’s lead and, on the hour mark, the Watford loanee Dodi Lukebakio won a penalty – Hitz bringing him down – which he then put wide. Adam Bodzek was shortly sent off for a heavy challenge on Jadon Sancho before Mario Götze extended Dortmund’s lead in stoppage time. There was still time for Dawid Kownacki to pull another goal back for the visitors but in the end Dortmund held on for a win that leaves them on 73 points going into their final game, against Borussia Mönchengladbach, next week. “Now we have hope,” said Dortmund’s manager, Lucien Favre. “We now have to beat Gladbach and we will wait for a miracle by Eintracht in Munich.” Hanover 96 and Nuremberg were relegated due to VfB Stuttgart’s 3-0 win against Wolfsburg, which ensured them a 16th-place finish and a relegation/promotion play-off with the third-placed team from the second tier. In Italy Atalanta saw off Genoa 2-1 to consolidate their bid for a Champions League place. They are third in Serie A, three points clear of fifth place, and have two games to play. Elsewhere the former Liverpool midfielder Luis Alberto kept Lazio in distant contention for the final Champions League place by scoring one goal and setting up another in his side’s 2-1 win at Cagliari. Milan took themselves to within a point of fourth-placed Internazionale with a tight victory over Fiorentina, Hakan Calhanoglu’s first-half header the difference between the two teams. Serie A’s other 14 teams play on Sunday and Monday.