Exeter have come in for a fair bit of criticism in the last week or two for their supposedly “boring” style of play but I don’t believe it’s justified and I use WWF (as it was known when I was growing up) to demonstrate why. Back then every single wrestler – the Big Show, the Rock, Stone Cold Steve Austin, the Undertaker – was not known for their wrestling style, they were known for their finishing moves. I see Exeter’s “finishing move” as their ability to score tries from driving lineouts five metres from the opposition’s line and that is what they have become most famous for. But just as the Rock did so much more than the Rock Bottom, so Exeter do so much more. There’s a process that got them to that place to be able to finish their opponent off and I think everyone forgets just how good their approach play is. For anyone doubting them I would recommend going back and watching their victory against Leicester at Welford Road earlier this year. That was as clinical an attacking performance as I have seen from anyone this season. They were brilliant, scoring tries from right across the pitch. You had back-rows offloading in the wide channels, centres tearing holes in the middles of the pitch, tries scored off first phase as well as their traditional “finishing move” from five metres out. It was all-court attacking brilliance and it showed they have the weaponry to finish teams off in so many different ways but you look at any predator in any form of life and they will always go back to what they know when they need to because it’s the most efficient way of getting the job done, and that is what Exeter do. I look at why Exeter have been tarred with the “boring” brush over the last year or two and to me it boils down to the fact that it’s the only stick to beat them with. When it comes to Saracens’ dominance, that stick is salary cap suspicion but with Exeter, everyone seems to love so much about them. The trip down to Sandy Park, the pasties, the hospitality is amazing and so are their fans. We love their owner, we love their coaches, we love the way they’ve kept rising and rising, we love the Devonian mindset and they all seem like fantastic guys. As a result of that, the only stick to beat them with when they are so dominant is that it is “boring” but that is simply because teams do not know how to defend against them. With Saracens there’s a suspicion that creeps in – how come they’ve got so many good players? – and you start to throw a bit of mud. With Exeter, they have something in their armoury that no one else can do yet it’s a stick that people want to beat them with. There is a bit of jealousy to it as well – of course there is going to be when these two sides are contesting the final for the third time in four years – but I guarantee that throwing mud is not going to end the dominance of Exeter and Saracens. The way to change it and bridge the gap is learning from their styles of play, or developing your own “finishing move”. So can Exeter avenge last year’s final? It says something about Saracens that Exeter had their feet up by round 17 of the season because they had cruised into the top two but still they go to Twickenham as underdogs. I look back to last year’s final because it seems to be the main motivating factor and they can harness that emotion. I honestly think that if Exeter could have cherry-picked one team to be playing against on Saturday it would be Saracens. When I was fortunate enough to win the Premiership in 2012 with Harlequins the one team I wanted to play was Leicester because there would be no doubting if we deserved it. They rocked up at the Stoop a month before and beat us there convincingly. We wanted to play them again, we wanted to be the ultimate champions and the only way to do that was beat the ultimate team at that time and that was Leicester. At the moment, Saracens are the ultimate team in the Premiership and if Exeter can beat them it would be the sweetest feeling. It was a similar situation with Saracens in the Champions Cup. Having spoken to a couple of the players, I know that Leinster was the final they wanted – it had been brewing for a few years. Exeter had a few regrets last year. They felt like they were not able to turn to plan B or plan C when plan A was not working. I would be looking more towards the players than the coaching staff for that but I do think they have learned a lot from defeat. I do expect that this year they will be able to turn to plan B or plan C, but whether they are able to execute in the face of Saracens’ ruthless defence it is a different matter.