André Onana 6/10 Two excellent point-blank saves but erred on Lucas’s second and endured a couple of flaps. Noussair Mazraoui 6 Preferred to Joël Veltman for his pace against Son Heung-min, he was beaten a few times. Moved into midfield. Matthijs de Ligt 8 Put his team in early control with firm header. Monstrous physical presence in one-on-one battles. Daley Blind 7 Uncomfortable against Lucas’ pace but generally sound. Easy on the ball. Nicolás Tagliafico 6 Gave no quarter in the challenge but not his best match from a defensive point of view. Lasse Schöne 6 Got into dreadful tangle with Onana for second Moura goal. First Ajax player subbed. Frenkie de Jong 7 Ran the show in the first half with Spurs unable to get near him. Less influential after break. Hakim Ziyech 8 Beautifully balanced. Roaming threat. Made difficult chance look easy for goal. Should have had more. Donny van de Beek 7 Lovely touches in tight spaces, plus eye-catching flicks. Snapped at Spurs’ heels. Faded in second-half. Dusan Tadic 7 Set up Ajax’s second goal and might have had two himself before that. Moved up front. Dangerous. Kasper Dolberg 5 Late inclusion owing to David Neres’ injury, he gave Ajax physical focal point. Well shackled. Joël Veltman (for Schöne 60) 5 Daley Sinkgraven (for Dolberg 67) 5 Lisandro Magallán (for Van de Beek 90) n/a Hugo Lloris 7 Fine saves from Tadic and Ziyech, got away with one when he spilled a De Ligt shot. Powerless for goals. Kieran Trippier 5 Awful start, compounded when he let De Ligt go for Ajax’s first goal. Showed guts to keep fighting. Toby Alderweireld 8 Beaten too easily by Tadic once, otherwise impressive. Stood tall in the duels. Jan Vertonghen 7 Not easy to play in protective mask but got his bearings. Hit bar when ought to have scored. Danny Rose 8 Showed personality at 2-0 to help Spurs on to front foot. Nutmeg on De Ligt a highlight. Fighting display. Moussa Sissoko 7 Grew into game as Spurs pushed in second half. Ajax did not like it when he stormed forward. Victor Wanyama 4 Wobbled against the press. Found wanting on technical level. Put out of misery at half-time. Christian Eriksen 7 Blew a decent first-half chance. Linked up positively on more than one occasion with Dele Alli. Dele Alli 8 Some lovely moments. Made things happen, especially for first and third goals. Calm in crunch towards end. Son Heung-min 7 Hit post early on. Scared Ajax with his pace. Nearly but not quite in terms of making things happen. Lucas Moura 9 Came alive when moved to right wing. Stretched defence with pace. Predatory brilliance. Utterly heroic. Fernando Llorente (for Wanyama ht) 7. Erik Lamela (for Trippier 81) 6 Ben Davies (for Rose 86) 6