The Manchester United manager Ole Gunnar Solskjær has said David de Gea will not be dropped at Huddersfield despite his poor recent form – although he added that his deputy, Sergio Romero, is injured. The 28-year-old has made a serious of high-profile blunders as talk about his future continues, with last weekend’s gaffe allowing Chelsea an equaliser in a 1-1 draw that was a blow to United’s top-four hopes. It has led to widespread debate about whether the Spanish goalkeeper should start at Huddersfield, but Solskjær confirmed that the Spaniard will play this weekend, as Romero has a knee problem. “I would think so, yeah – or he will play,” Solskjær said. “Sergio was injured yesterday so he didn’t train. He tweaked his knee and David’s been training well this week.” “Of course we trust [David], he’s been fantastic this season. Towards the end now he’s been in the headlines maybe for the wrong reasons, but, as I’ve said so many times, he has to deal with that.” “The goalkeeping department are a fantastic group together, with Emilio [Álvarez, goalkeeping coach], Sergio, Lee [Grant] and David. They’ve been such a tight-knit group, so they’ve experienced better times obviously than just now but he’s ready for Sunday.” Asked if Romero would have started at Huddersfield if he had been fit, Solskjær replies: “Ifs and buts and hypothetical questions. Sergio knows how highly I rate him.” The Manchester United manager has plenty of injury worries for the trip to West Yorkshire. Paul Pogba, Romelu Lukaku and Jesse Lingard were absent from Wednesday’s partly open training session, but forward Marcus Rashford was involved after overcoming a shoulder problem. Eric Bailly will miss Sunday’s game due to a season-ending medial ligament injury, while Solskjær also ruled out teenager Mason Greenwood with an issue of his own. “We’ve got a few niggles and a few injuries,” said Solskjær. “We’ve still got two days, today and tomorrow, to see who gets on the pitch. We missed a few last week.” United desperately need a result at the John Smith’s Stadium after losing seven of their last 10 matches in all competitions. They are sixth, three points off the top four with two games remaining, and facing the prospect of trying to attract elite players without Champions League football next term. “In the long-term planning, we have to think about we might be in the Champions League next year because we’ve got a chance,” Solskjær said. “If it’s a season without the Champions League, who knows? But players still want to come to Manchester United. You would be surprised how many agents have been touting their players ... not touting, that’s not the best word, is it? “It’s just like telling us that their players, their clients, would love to be a part of Manchester United in the future. They know, with the potential here, the size of the club, that we will get back to good days. “We’re having a tough time at the moment. We’ve had a few seasons that we’ve not got up to the standards we expect. But that’s up to me, up to the club that we change it as quick as possible”. Noise around transfers is increasing as the summer edges closer – as is talk around United’s search for a technical director, with Rio Ferdinand among the names reportedly being considered. “I’ll have a final say if players come in or go out, and we’ve got regular meetings,” Solskjær said. “I’m happy with the way it’s going.” “We’re supposed to sign 250 players because you are all writing about players that we should sign,” he added. “Hopefully we can get players in that you haven’t written about as well, you never know.”