In a double blow for Team Ineos in the space of a few hours, their Giro d’Italia leader, Egan Bernal, was forced to withdraw after sustaining a broken collarbone in training in his native Colombia, while in the Tour de Yorkshire the British squad were unable to take full advantage of superior numbers in the lead group with their sprinter Chris Lawless ruing a tactical slip-up in a windswept finale here. With Geraint Thomas determined to defend his Tour de France title in July – the Welshman lies fourth overall going into the final time trial at the Tour de Romandie, suggesting his best form is not far off – the loss of Bernal may mean one of the team’s promising youngsters is made to step up; the recent form of the Russian Pavel Sivakov and the Londoner Tao Geoghegan-Hart may put them in the box seat when the first stage starts in Bologna on 11 May. Lawless is another promising young rider but he was gutted after the finish here, where he was narrowly outsprinted by the 25-year-old Dane Alexander Kamp of Riwal in spite of the fact that he had Chris Froome and three other riders in support. After his teammate Ian Stannard and a quartet from Riwal took the initiative to split the race high on the North York Moors, Lawless said he regretted not “rushing” the gap in the finale, in other words hanging back so that he used his lead-out man’s slipstream to greater effect. The Wigan rider does at least hold the race leader’s jersey going into Sunday’s hilly final stage, but the course from Halifax to Leeds over five stiff climbs will suit his teammates Froome, who is 10sec off the lead, and Eddy Dunbar of Ireland, with last year’s winner, Greg Van Avermaet of Belgium, also well placed 6sec behind Lawless after finishing third on the stage here. Earlier in the day, the Women’s Tour de Yorkshire fell to the most successful women’s road racer of all time, Marianne Vos, who forged the winning three-woman escape in the blistering northerly gale which wreaked havoc with both races, and took the finish sprint on Scarborough’s Royal Albert Drive to seal the overall standings in her first attempt at the two-day race. After winning three world road race championships and the London Olympic Games, Vos is now entering her 30s, but after enduring a couple of tricky seasons due to over-training and injury, the Dutchwoman remains as doughty a competitor as ever, although a new generation of women such as her compatriot Anna van der Breggen, the world champion, has emerged to challenge her. Van der Breggen made a daring, dangerous-looking early move near Robin Hood’s Bay but then faded into the headwind along with the home favourite Lizzie Deignan. The 2015 world champion conceded afterwards that she had “burnt too many matches” early on pursuing Van de Breggen, but remained happy with her weekend, eight months after the birth of her daughter, Orla. The lengthy run north up the coast from Bridlington, past the finish and up almost to the border with Cleveland meant the riders spent much of the 80 miles battling a brutal headwind that had them reduced to touring pace at times, and after passing through Whitby and up on to the moors above Sandsend, a right turn southwards abruptly changed the nature of the challenge, with a howling tailwind sending the riders flying home. This was an organisational challenge. The finish line had to be moved 500m short, due to fears of waves coming over the promenade, while the wind was so strong that advertising boards could not be placed on the exposed side of the barriers in case they might blow over. In the final kilometre around the headland to North Bay, the men’s lead group were almost drenched by a breaking wave, while the women’s lead trio were forced almost to a halt by the wind blowing in their faces. With the race pattern constantly evolving as sleet and hail showers assailed the field, Vos used all her experience to make the key moves, bridging to Spain’s Mavi García with the Italian Soraya Paladin on the final climb up to the moors above Grosmont. García had attacked before the Lythe Bank climb, more than 50km from the finish, and after Vos and Paladin joined her, a chasing trio of Hannah Barnes, Christine Majerus and Amanda Spratt emerged but never quite got on terms. The 2012 Olympic champion had taken out some insurance the previous day by winning a 3sec time bonus on stage one into Bedale but she knew the finish would decide the overall standings. “I knew the other two girls quite well, but after a race like that you never know how the sprint will go, and with the overall going to the stage winner, that got me nervous,” said Vos.