Artist Laure Prouvost is officially representing France at the Venice Biennale, the world’s most prestigious art gathering, which opens to the public on Saturday. But she is married to a Briton, lived in London for 18 years and won the 2013 Turner prize. And, though she is currently based in Antwerp, she considers herself “British. I feel totally belonging to Britain,” she said. Which is why she is digging a tunnel from underneath the elegant, pillared French pavilion in Venice’s public gardens, the Giardini, to the grandiose British pavilion just next to it. “Every evening I’ve been doing it, without telling the British, and without asking the French Institute for permission,” she said, referring to the state cultural organisation that is presenting her exhibition. “They would have said no, the building’s going to collapse or something. So I just did it overnight. At 8pm we have been meeting up, me and just random people, and digging a bit further after all the visitors have gone. “I’m so sad with Brexit myself,” she said. “You want to say, ‘Why not stay together?’ That’s the idea with my tunnel. You British can always get to France if you need to escape or vice versa.” It is a typically playful-but-serious gesture from Prouvost, who combines film-making with sculptural installations, often referring to her own life in a quixotically fictionalised manner. Her new work – one of the hits of the Biennale, with guests for the hectic preview days forming long queues to see it – is titled, in its English version, Deep See Blue Surrounding You. The unidiomatic, punning English of the title is deliberate – Prouvost enjoys awkward linguistic slippages. “There is a strength and a power in being a foreigner – in the new language you create, which isn’t perfect English or perfect French, but it has its poetry and it has its mistakes which makes the language more interesting,” she said. The work’s centrepiece is an allusive, joyfully eccentric film in which a group of characters – a mixture of ages, races and genders – set out on a road trip, at times in a battered old car, at times galloping on horseback, as if in a kind of western. It starts in Nanterre on the outskirts of Paris and continues to the northern city of Roubaix, where Prouvost was born in 1978. It pauses at Le Palais Idéal du Facteur Cheval, a remarkable amateur architectural creation, part giant grotto, part fantasy palace, built by a postman in the 19th century. The travellers on this circuitous, surreal journey include Kader, a magician of Moroccan origin, who makes tables levitate and has doves burst out of paintings. Eventually the characters reach Venice – but there is a sense that the real object of the journey is an idealised, unreachable place. And that it is not so much that ground has been covered, but that the depths of the imagination and subconscious have been plumbed. It is a journey that also might remind the viewer of the migration of peoples from south to north – as Prouvost put it, “the sad and terrible stories of people trying to get a better life”. “I am a foreigner in my own country because I lived in England for 18 years, and a foreigner in England because I wasn’t born there,” she said. “I’m an immigrant – but Europeans don’t think of themselves, weirdly, as immigrants.” To reach the artwork visitors must go on a circuitous journey of their own. Instead of entering through the pavilion’s front door, you are directed around the side, down a winding path thick with undergrowth. Passing Prouvost’s nascent tunnel, you climb up into a room that appears to be half underwater, strewn with detritus. For the preview the magician Kader had also brought some of his real doves – one of which lay in an apparent hypnotised trance. Visitors then enter the room in which the film is screened, fitted up to resemble the interior of an octopus’s body. Around 80% of the film, Prouvost said, was shot on her iPhone. As for the British response to her tunnel, she said: “I spoke to Cathy [Wilkes, the artist representing Britain] and said, dig from your side too, we need to meet in the middle. She said ‘Yes, we’re on it.’”