The career of the comedian and singer Freddie Starr, who has died aged 76, was defined less by any particular performance than by two sets of tabloid newspaper headlines, spanning the popular press spectrum from ridiculous to ruinous. The Sun’s 13 March 1986 splash, Freddie Starr ate my hamster, which claimed that the performer had satisfied post-gig hunger by snacking on his host’s rodent, is so well-remembered among front pages that the Sun evoked it in its headline announcing his death: Freddie Starr joins his hamster. Irrespective of rational or theological objections to this scenario, it was factually incorrect, as it was established that Starr’s sensational supper never happened: the late publicist Max Clifford admitted to making it up. It was a clever invention, because, whereas readers would have found it hard to believe that, say, Des O’Connor ate pets, the anecdote seemed plausible, given Starr’s dangerous, impulsive performing persona. The far-from-spoof headlines that gave Starr a second burst of media notoriety came in 2012, with the news that he was under investigation by Operation Yewtree, the police unit set up after the revelation of Jimmy Savile’s crimes, for alleged inappropriate touching of a 15-year-old in Savile’s BBC dressing room. However, while Yewtree led to the imprisonment of some showbiz figures – including Clifford – there was insufficient evidence to charge Starr. The comedian might have left matters there. But, in what could be seen as another example of his recklessness, Starr chose to sue his accuser for libel. He lost, with the judge suggesting that the allegation was credible, leaving the performer in reputational limbo and facing large legal costs that led to downsized final years in exile in Spain. It was a notable fall for a man who had once been so wealthy, from various primetime ITV shows with his name in the title, that he owned the horse that won the 1994 Grand National. Having his public standing compromised not by external prosecution but through a failed defamation case against his accuser gave Starr his only parallel with Oscar Wilde. Certainly, their wit could never be compared. Starr – the fate-nudging stage surname that replaced his real one, Fowell – relied on broad punchlines and silly slapstick. His greatest skill was as an impressionist and he was a star of the ITV sketch show Who Do You Do? (1972-76). His ear was so acute that he could discomfort chatshow hosts by impeccably echoing their introductions to him line by line. His rise was helped by the fact that most celebrities during this period, as now, were white men – well within his range. Elvis Presley was a speciality, allowing Starr to take advantage of a musical facility that had given him his first career, on the Merseyside club circuit during the Beatles era, and, later, a Top 10 hit. But whereas some take-off contemporaries, such as the BBC’s Mike Yarwood, went into semi-retirement when the emergence of Margaret Thatcher and the future Princess Diana made things more difficult for male impressionists, Starr continued to do whomever he wanted to. A signature shtick was an impression of the blind African-American soul singer Ray Charles. Even Starr understood that it would be unwise to colour his skin, but he donned dark glasses and approximated the singer’s southern delivery. During these sketches he would, for example, fail to realise that he had his back to the audience, or accidentally hit his head with the microphone. Another notable moment was a bizarre appearance on O’Connor’s chatshow. To the visible terror of the host, Starr came on wearing a Nazi hat and a Hitler moustache, with the costume bottomed-out by a pair of bloomers decorated with swastikas. If challenged on such skits, Starr would invoke Charlie Chaplin’s Hitler spoof, The Great Dictator, and his claim of German Jewish blood on his mother’s side. Even more so than with most performers, the base identity of impressionists can be blurred. “And this is me,” Yarwood used to say, not entirely convincingly, coming out of character at the end of his show. Who Freddie Starr was became confused by the showbiz personality he adopted, which in many ways was misleading. The hamster accusation, fuelled by his apparently omnivorous appetites, particularly stuck in his craw because he was a vegetarian, long before it became fashionable. His mishaps and pranks were often attributed to drinking, but he was mostly teetotal as a result of childhood violence inflicted by his father, an alcoholic. This did not mean, though, that he was always in control of himself on and off stage. Long-time overreliance on prescription tranquillisers, perhaps an attempt to still a manic temperament, encouraged a reputation for unreliability that reduced his later opportunities in television and theatre, although he was awarded the modern celebrity compensation-pension of an appearance on the fame-rehab show I’m a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! in 2011. Smart enough to feel disappointment at ending up famous mainly for a false accusation of rodent snackery, Starr should be remembered as a talented but troubled performer who, counterintuitively for an impressionist, was a genuine one-off.