Thirty-six years after Kapil Dev’s India – 66-1 outsiders – lifted their first World Cup, at Lord’s, they enter the 2019 tournament as joint favourites with England. Leading them this time is a man who has been part of two successful World Cup campaigns – the under-19 edition in 2008 (as captain) and the grown-up version in 2011 (as the youngest player in the squad). Now the senior captain, his reputation forged in the cauldron of epic run chases, Virat Kohli regards pressure not so much as a mere acquaintance, but a long-lost friend. In a tournament likely to feature placid 300-plus wickets as often as candy floss at a summer fete, India’s captain boasts the most successful conversion rate of fifties to hundreds of any batsman with at least 5,000 one-day international runs: he has turned 41 of his 90 half-centuries into three figures. His record in successful chases also borders on the ridiculous: in 84 matches, Kohli averages over 95 with 21 hundreds. No defence is safe until he’s out. Led by the world’s No 1 ranked bowler – Jasprit Bumrah – India’s attack is regarded as their best ever, not just in terms of the pace of Bumrah, Mohammed Shami and Bhuvneshwar Kumar, but the variations of the left-arm wrist-spinner Kuldeep Yadav and leg-spinner Yuzvendra Chahal. With four all-rounders, this is a side high on confidence and second in the ICC rankings, just behind the hosts. Yet, because of their huge diaspora, India regard England as a home away from home. IndiaICC world ranking 2 (as of 6 May)Captain Virat KohliCoach Ravi ShastriWorld Cup best Winners 1983, 2011 Fixtures (all matches start at 10.30am BST) 5 June v South Africa, Southampton9 June v Australia, The Oval13 June v New Zealand, Trent Bridge16 June v Pakistan, Old Trafford22 June v Afghanistan, Southampton27 June v West Indies, Old Trafford30 June v England, Edgbaston2 July v Bangladesh, Edgbaston6 July v Sri Lanka, Headingley But – and it’s a big but – this will be one of their toughest World Cup assignments. After only two warm-up games against New Zealand and Bangladesh, and no one-day internationals since they lost a series at home to Australia in March, India’s first three matches will be against South Africa, Australia and New Zealand in just over a week. That’s quite an introduction to the tournament. If, say, two of those games don’t go their way, it leaves them vulnerable for their fourth match – against Pakistan, a hyper-intense contest that will have given players and management many sleepless nights already. India have just emerged from a divisive general election, with nationalist sentiment at its peak: victory against Pakistan is non-negotiable. On the plus side, India have won all six of their World Cup games against their most bitter rivals. India’s batting relies too heavily on the experience of their top three – Rohit Sharma, Shikhar Dhawan and Kohli. While Dhoni may be India’s greatest ever finisher, with an average of 105 in successful chases (better even than Kohli), there are concerns he’s not quite as prolific at pursuing the big totals as in his heyday. And if the recent England-Pakistan series was anything to go by, there will be some very big totals indeed. Finally, there is the burden of expectation – only England will have to contend with more pressure than India, the most supported team in all sport. Until they lost at home to Australia recently, their only bilateral one-day series defeat since January 2016 was in England last summer. But, knowing Kohli, that will be just the motivation his inner bloodhound requires. While India, thanks to Kohli, are now masters of the chase, they are just as adept at setting targets. This means they can unleash Sharma – the most prolific six-hitter since the last World Cup – when batting first, and Kohli when chasing. As far as the bowling goes, Bumrah’s economy rate of 4.51, Kumar’s ability to swing the ball both ways and Yadav’s capacity to fox the best in the business – he took six for 25 at Trent Bridge last summer against England – will be their key weapons. In what is set to be a run fest of a tournament, dot balls will be like gold dust. With his unconventional action, uncompromising accuracy and bullet-like yorkers, Bumrah is a captain’s dream, especially at the death. But it’s his cool temperament – recently on display during the tight IPL final between Mumbai Indians and Chennai Super Kings – that will be India’s biggest asset. During the penultimate over, the wicketkeeper Quinton de Kock let a rising delivery from Bumrah go through his gloves for four byes. Any bowler in that situation would be excused for mouthing a few expletives. Bumrah’s response? An arm around De Kock’s shoulder – and a wry smile. While this is the most unforgiving format since the 1992 World Cup, with just 10 teams in the fray, no separate groups and no easy entry into the knockout stages, it would be a shock if India do not make the semi-finals. After that, of course, it’s anybody’s game. As the 2017 Champions Trophy final between India and Pakistan proved, one stupendous performance – in this case, Fakhar Zaman’s hundred – can settle the matter, despite the pre-match expectations. India will be keen to ensure they aren’t ambushed once more. Anjali Doshi is the editor of Tendulkar in Wisden