The share price of the company that owns the Daily Mail has risen more than 9% after a strong performance from Mail Online more than offset a decline in newspaper advertising revenues. Daily Mail and General Trust (DMGT) reported a 25% year-on-year increase in ad revenues to £76m at Mail Online in the six months to the end of March, a period in which print ad revenues fell 12% to £57m at the Daily Mail and Mail on Sunday. Mail Online has bounced back after revenue growth dropped to 2% during the first half of last year, following a move by Facebook to deprioritise news appearing on users’ timelines. Since then, Mail Online’s average daily global unique browser numbers have fallen from 15m to 12.7m, including another 7% decline in the latest financial reporting period. DMGT said: “Mail Online continues to focus on attracting traffic directly to its homepages on desktop and mobile, or its apps. The direct audience accounted for 78% of minutes spent, reflecting continued growing engagement with the direct audience.” Despite the digital audience setback, the company’s consumer division, which includes the free weekday newspaper Metro and the DailyMailTV service in the US, raised its outlook for the year, prompting the share price growth from enthusiastic investors. DMGT shares closed up more than 9% at 740p. Paul Zwillenberg, the company’s chief executive, said: “Consumer media delivered a particularly strong performance. Advertising in the first half was stronger than expected but we remain cautious about the remainder of the year.” Shareholders had expected a further deterioration in the newspaper market, which has been losing readers and ad spend to digital media sources, a situation exacerbated by advertisers holding back budgets to cover business costs associated with the protracted Brexit process. Revenues at the Daily Mail and Mail on Sunday, including income from newspaper sales, fell 5% to £208m. Mail Online’s performance helped push the revenues of the combined print and online DMGT businesses up 1% to £284m. The Metro reported a 12% rise in ad revenues to £41m, benefiting from the integration of its previously standalone advertising operation into that of its stablemates. Ian Whittaker, an analyst at Liberum, said: “Advertising, particularly at Mail Online, looks to be holding up better than expected. “[It] is not what we expected when we downgraded DMGT to ‘sell’ in April, when we thought Brexit issues would impact advertising numbers and we had concerns over Mail Online’s advertising growth. “What is possibly happening is that advertising is being concentrated in the stronger brand titles at the expense of weaker and less important brands.” In November, DMGT reported Mail Online ad revenues had overtaken those of the Daily Mail and Mail on Sunday for the first time.