Taz Richardson is studying music production. “But it’s a tough business to break into. So it’s rubber cocks for me at the moment.” As heir to his father Tim’s two sex shops in Brighton, Taz is – reluctantly – being groomed to take over. He has the 1,000-yard stare of a man who has seen too much, and, after staff meetings at which his mother reports on the new sex-toy stock she has been road-testing, heard too much, too. “I don’t understand,” he says at one point, when a pulsating “milking machine” is unboxed. “What does it milk?” “Spunk!” roars Nancy. “It’s every young man’s worst nightmare,” he later says to camera. He doesn’t move, but you can feel his soul shudder. The tension between a father’s dreams and a son’s wish never to hear his parents discuss sexual aids is one of two conflicts at the heart of this documentary, A Very British Sex Shop (Channel 4). The other is the relationship between Nancy, Taz’s mother and the ex-wife of Tim, and Calandra, a former retail assistant and a terrific piece of trouble straight from central casting, who says she was determined to have Tim as soon as she saw him. Or, as Nancy puts it: “He decided to run off with the Saturday girl. I think he would have liked it to be an affair I never knew about. But I found out.” Whenever the subject comes up, Tim has a stare of his own. About 500 yards at the moment, but I bet you three pig-gimp masks it will elongate over the years. Everyone who passes through the two shops – whether tempted by the novelty mugs and naughty knickers in the window of Lust, or on the hunt for a stainless-steel enema kit in the more hardcore branch, Taboo – is determinedly jolly or joylessly matter-of-fact about their purchases of cock rings and whips. Anything, God forbid, but enthusiastic or sexy. It’s all very British. The fact that sex was involved appeared to discombobulate the makers to the extent that they were unable to decide whether they were making a cheery romp (the voiceover included the line “Once a week, Nancy and Calandra COME together to discuss toys”) or drawing out the family’s problems beneath the surface. It ended up doing neither satisfactorily. We swung wildly (“Not like THAT!” the voiceover to this piece might add) between different moods – swerving away from the abyss that opened up at the sight of long-term customer Scott ordering his latest bespoke £1,200 sex doll (brown eyes, fixed vagina, he’s going to call her Julietta), towards the family’s attempt to drum up sales via “Sexy Bingo” in the street outside. And it skated over a potentially heartbreaking scene between Taz and Tim by the beach, as they discuss the son’s future in the business. “You have to be a certain type of man to like selling secondhand DVDs to smelly old fuckers,” says Taz, with the unwitting cruelty of the young. You could see the naked pain on Tim’s face as all sorts of awful knowledge fell on him. He rallied, as Taz touchingly went on to express how grateful he was to his dad for creating the business, and told him just to have a think about it. Then we were back to the problem of finding a venue that could hold the unknown number of people willing to buy tickets for the latex fashion show that was being flung together in just 10 days. It ended up being a triumph, in a “local latex for local people” kind of way. It was one of many moments that raised the question any programme beginning “A Very British …” eventually begs – what would the American equivalents have done with this? And could we hire them? The other outstanding question was – what is the difference between a fixed and a removable vagina and, if it’s the obvious, wouldn’t you want the latter for hygiene purposes? We might as well have Brexit if no one’s thought to regulate this. I do not want the pandemic that wipes out humanity to have arisen from a sex doll’s unscrubbable crevices. We don’t deserve much. But we deserve better than that. None of A Very British Sex Shop’s emotional moments was ever followed up. The tone remained uneven throughout. We pivoted from moment to moment without one ever illuminating the other or a perspective ever being established. Although it did leave you with a hunger for the brilliant comedy-drama it could make. Phoebe Waller-Bridge can write it (that’s statutory law now), Taz could score it and Nancy could be the whip consultant. Larry Lamb can play Tim and the real one can stay in the shop doing what he does best – persuading people to buy his stuff. As he so rightly says, those dildos aren’t going to shift themselves.