The news that Simon Armitage is the new poet laureate is both good for him and good for poetry. I’ve known Simon almost since he began to publish poems. He is a particularly brilliant choice for the post in that he has always had the remarkable capacity to take on whatever he encounters in the world, and then to fashion it into very good poetry. Most poets, no matter how good they are, have special areas of subject interest. By contrast Simon has an octopus-armed ability to grapple with almost anything and everything that comes his way and to see what is poetic about it. This facility has something to do with his technical skills, which are formidable. But it is as much to do with the way that he finds everything in the world interesting. More specifically in a poetical sense, the way he finds everything in the world worth wondering about. His poems are full of ideas and attitudes, but the primary impulse of his work is to express wonder about the world in its multiple forms. The position entails a lot of getting up early to go on the Today programme – Simon will be extremely good at all that Back in 1999, I was the first poet laureate to say I would hold the position for only 10 years and I am pleased that timescale has become standard practice. A turnover in these things is always a good idea. Another one of my modernising ambitions was to ensure that whoever held the position could effectively add poetry to the million other conversations the world is having at any time. In practice that entails a lot of getting up early to go on the Today programme and to visit schools, and Simon will be extremely good at all that. The way he writes poems, his personality, and fact he has been around long enough to know where the heffalump traps are, also make him exceptionally well suited to deal with the pressures that come with the job. Over the years these pressures have changed, and I think that people today know more clearly what a modern laureate is going to be like and what they are expected to do. Maybe a bit less of the royal stuff and rather more about access and having a wider poetic conversation. Early in my tenure, when I chose not to write poems linked to the royal calendar, there was a lot of squawking in newspapers. There is now less squawking, as people have come to see that the job is perhaps more usefully carried out when it is directed towards other things. The only piece of advice I would offer Simon is something that I know he already understands very well. Too often the laureate is subtly, or not so subtly, encouraged to write poems that go into a subject through the front door. But sometimes it is better to go round the back, or through a window or down the chimney rather than use the front door. So when the call comes from the Today programme asking for a poem about mad cow disease, one that is clearly a poem about mad cow disease, in 24 hours, I know his natural instinct for poems is going to stand him in very good stead. Sometimes there are better ways to approach a subject than the people who have commissioned it think will be good for the poem. I’m sure there will be other things that will prove tricky, and I am equally sure that if anyone can deal with them then he can. This is a fine appointment and I am delighted for him and for us. I now very much look forward to seeing what he will do, and what he will write. Good luck, Simon. • Andrew Motion was poet laureate from 1999-2009.