Julia Armfield is the sort to describe The Texas Chain Saw Massacre as “beautiful and weird”. This strange choice makes more sense when you read her debut short-story collection, Salt Slow, which could easily have those words on the back cover. “We burned what we could of Simon Phillips in a pit at the end of the garden,” opens her story The Collectibles, in which a trio of female flatmates scavenge bits of men’s bodies while drinking and ordering pizza. It is beautiful, and also weird. Salt Slow’s stories are both mesmerising and terrifying, in which your sleep can take on a wraith-like form and step out of your body (this story, The Great Awake, won the 2018 White Review short story prize); where a teenage girl transforms into a preying mantis as she goes through puberty; and a girl group that inspires such rage in their female fans that everywhere they tour, men seem to end up dead. Armfield, a 28-year-old whose thesis was on the subject of “teeth, hair and nails in the Victorian imagination”, has a clear taste for the macabre. (The heroine in the story Mantis watches her own pearly whites fall out.) She describes her stories as “not, not horror writing” – her main preoccupation is “bodies, and the way that they kind of contain us and betray us. And it’s definitely about women.” Puberty, often a preoccupation in horror films, appears in several of her stories. Armfield cites the 2000 Canadian teen flick Ginger Snaps: “It’s tacky, but it basically equates going through puberty with becoming a werewolf. There’s that weird thing of this unfair sense of the monstrous being equated to being a woman. The entire point of so much good horror is the overcoming of patriarchal monsters, essentially.” Queerness, also explored in horror, is found in Armfield’s collection, too: in After Cassandra, a woman’s girlfriend returns from the dead and turns up at her house covered in grave dirt. I won’t spoil the story by revealing why she has returned, but the ending is quietly devastating. That’s not to say that there aren’t flashes of humour: Is this a haunting? I asked her and she looked at me as if surprised. No, she said, turning the radio down, not technically. More like a manifestation. I accused her of quibbling over semantics and she accused me of being incapable of nuance. We argued and it all felt very much as it used to, except for the way her bones showed through her skin. “The queer character has been so traditionally coded and designated as the monstrous,” says Armfield. “And I think I was trying to reclaim that monster. There’s freedom in the monster being the norm and not the other.” Armfield grew up in Cobham, Surrey, with a father who worked in the City, a stage manager mother and her brother, who is now an actor with the RSC. She has always written, but didn’t always want to be a short-story writer, and only started producing them about two years ago when she gave up on yet another novel. “I just kept slapping up against the wall and losing interest,” she says. “It would always be about 10,000 words and then I’d start inventing something else, I’d want to be with other characters, and that happened over and over again. I started writing short stories just because I clearly needed the self-validation of finishing something.” Working full-time as an education manager at London’s Inner Temple, she wrote most of Salt Slow in her lunch breaks and before and after work. When she was longlisted for the Deborah Rogers prize in April 2018, one of the judges quickly became her agent. She won the White Review prize the following month, while her collection was already on submission. At the auction, she chose Picador, having been asked to come up with a pitch for a novel in a hurry while sat on a train between Clapham and Balham. “I think that short-story collections are definitely having a moment,” she says, “but I think there is still a sense that people probably aren’t going to take you entirely seriously if you aren’t also planning a novel.” Harking back to writers such as Angela Carter and Isabelle Allende, there’s a current boom in feminist writing with magical or mythological elements, including Carmen Maria Machado’s Her Body and Other Parties, Daisy Johnson’s Fen and an upcoming feminist horror collection from Kirsty Logan – all neatly dovetailing with the #MeToo and Time’s Up movements. Armfield’s collection shows a similarly sharp awareness of women’s relationships with men, how it feels to live in a sexist world. Would she call it feminist? “I guess, inasmuch as every single voice is female and that’s just what I’m interested in. I’m just not that interested in male voices. They have their space, that’s great. I very seldom read new literature by men. That’s not an active choice, it’ll just never be the thing that first occurs to me.” We laugh; it’s funny hearing this sentiment reversed, after decades of male authors saying the same about female writers. “I don’t think it’ll be unpalatable to men,” she says, of her book. “It’s just that a lot of men die in it.” • Julia Armfield’s Salt Slow is published by Picador. To order a copy, go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on orders over £15.