The 2015 general election belongs to a different political universe from the Brexit-dominated one we now inhabit. Yet it is only four years since David Cameron, in the middle of the election campaign and on the verge of winning an outright Conservative majority, announced he would not be leading his party in what was then expected to be the 2020 contest. If Cameron had won the Brexit referendum in 2016, this summer of 2019 would have been his swansong. The Tory party would have been preparing to choose a new leader to succeed him. We would be awash with Tory leadership speculation. Ambitious ministers would be jostling and calculating. The Boris Johnson bandwagon would be rolling. Funny, that. The more things change, the more they stay the same. Except that, in this other 2019 Tory leadership contest – the one that never happened – Cameron had a succession plan that isn’t on the cards this time. He had intended, after winning the European referendum, to reshuffle his cabinet for the remainder of his premiership. One of his moves would have been to confer a peerage on the Scottish Tory leader, Ruth Davidson, and make her defence secretary, sitting in the House of Lords. The aim was to help to position her to be Cameron’s chosen successor. At some point between then and Cameron’s departure, the plan went, Davidson would “do a Douglas-Home” and move to the Commons – as Harold Macmillan’s successor, the Earl of Home, had done in 1963. Davidson would remain in the government, renounce her peerage, and be fast-tracked into a safe Commons seat. There would be a byelection, and she would then be in the Commons, in a box seat to win the leadership – the best bet to stop Johnson, and all with Cameron’s backing. Who can say whether all this would in fact have occurred if events had not got in the way in 2016? Cameron’s track record on pulling off wizard political wheezes was never brilliant. Nor have I any idea whether Cameron had mentioned the plan to George Osborne, for instance, who might have had strong views about it, or indeed to Davidson herself. And who can say whether it would have achieved what Cameron hoped? It would have been a pretty desperate throw of the dice. All one can say is that the plan was there. And that it was a plan that – as we now beam ourselves back into the world as it actually is – addressed two questions that still matter in the party Cameron once led with a fair degree of success. Those questions are the future of pro-European one-nation Conservatism, and the viability of an electorally credible Conservative alternative to Brexiteers such as Johnson. Davidson is deeply important to both in the way that, to pick a name at random, Gavin Williamson assuredly is not. Today, after six months on maternity leave following the birth of her son, Davidson re-enters the political world. She does so not as a baroness or an MP, let alone as a possible successor to Theresa May, but as what she insists she wants to concentrate on being – the leader of the Scottish Tories, who have their party conference this weekend in Aberdeen. In retrospect, the past few months must have been a pretty good time to be on leave, given the damage that the Tory party has been doing to itself. She is still one of the Tory party’s most popular politicians, in spite of having been invisible for six months. Even readers of the pro-Brexit ConservativeHome website rank her above potential leadership candidates Sajid Javid and Michael Gove. In an interview before she had her baby, Davidson denied any prime ministerial ambitions in some of the most categorical terms imaginable. Sentences such as “I don’t want to be prime minister” and “I will not be a candidate” don’t leave much wriggle room. There is a political recognition there that the demise of the Cameron project, of which she was herself a key part, has redefined her own political role; and a personal recognition that, as a new mother living in Edinburgh, moving to London could simply be miserable. But this doesn’t mean she is not a player, let alone that she somehow does not matter much now. Davidson is younger than every member of the cabinet. She is one of the few Tories with some cut-through to younger voters and non-Tories. She is more popular with millennials than her colleagues are; far more socially liberal than much of her party; pro-European in a party that has slewed increasingly heavily against it; just about the only Conservative with wide appeal in Scotland; and one of the most articulate defenders of the union in a thin field. She is also coming back into politics at an important time for Scotland. The SNP is again flirting with the second independence referendum that many of its activists crave. The run-up to the Holyrood elections of 2021 – in which, with Labour shrivelling, the Tories dream of mounting a serious Scotland-wide challenge to the SNP – is about to begin. But the Tory party may be on the verge of electing a UK leader, Johnson above all, who is widely assumed to be electoral poison for Scottish Tories. Davidson will be a key voice in that party contest, and in any future anti-independence campaign. The SNP will be desperate to discredit her. Very few politicians possess the magic touch. Davidson is good, but she is no exception to the rule. Cameron was wrong to imagine that an audacious top-down fix would solve his party’s deepening problems. Nevertheless, Davidson stands for a lot of things without which the increasingly English-nationalist Tory party will shrivel, and deserves to shrivel, even more than it is already doing. The question that greets her return to politics is whether her party is in fact past caring. •Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnist