Cody Walker will not sing the Australian national anthem before next week’s State of Origin opener in Brisbane, but says the decision is “just my opinion” and not intended to spark a wider movement. Walker, who is set to make his New South Wales debut at Suncorp Stadium on Wednesday, was one of several players who remained tight-lipped during a rendition of Advance Australia Fairat the Indigenous All-Stars game in Melbourne earlier this year. The South Sydney star insisted he did not want to invite controversy, but confirmed he would again stay quiet when the teams line up before the biggest game of rugby league so far this season – and arguably of his career. “I’m not pushing my views on anyone, it’s just how me and my family have grown up and how I feel,” Walker told Fairfax. “I’ve already voiced my opinion, and I want to reiterate it’s just my opinion.” Walker, 29, found support from former Queensland great Johnathan Thurston, who said an opportunity was missed when the issue was not properly discussed following February’s All Stars game. “The stand the team took on not singing the national anthem ... it was like it was just brushed over,” Thurston told Fairfax. “They did that and there wasn’t really any discussion to come out of that, even though it was a stand they took for themselves and their family. “I thought it was great leadership by the team. Cody Walker came out after the game and said the national anthem doesn’t represent him or his family. We made a decision based on that and that was pretty much the end of it. I can’t remember anyone from the game coming out and having a further discussion about it.” Walker’s protest has echoes of Colin Kaepernick’s refusal to stand for the US national anthem before NFL games. The San Francisco 49ers quarterback took a stand in 2016 over racial injustice, saying: “I am not going to stand up to show pride in a flag for a country that oppresses black people and people of color.” Walker’s stance has not ruffled any feathers inside the Blues camp ahead of their bid to retain the State of Origin trophy they won for the second time in 13 years in 2018. Coach Brad Fittler said he had no problem with Walker’s decision, although he added: “I’ll be singing it.” After the All Stars game, Walker explained why he felt so strongly about the anthem, saying, “It just brings back so many memories from what’s happened [in Australia’s past]. It sort of doesn’t represent myself and my family. “I think it’s something that everyone as a group, and everyone in Australia, needs to work something out.”