A former business manager of the late comic books author Stan Lee was arrested on Saturday, on charges of elder abuse. Lee died in November, at the age of 95. He was a co-creator of characters including Iron Man, the Fantastic Four, Spider-Man, Daredevil and the X-Men, which have populated a film series that has grossed more than $11bn worldwide. At his death, Lee’s own net worth was about $80m. Authorities say business manager Keya Morgan sought to capitalize on Lee’s wealth and exert influence over him even though he had no authority to act on his behalf. Charged by Los Angeles county prosecutors earlier this month, Morgan was taken into custody on Saturday in Arizona on an outstanding arrest warrant. On Sunday he appeared in Maricopa county superior court, on a charge of being a fugitive of justice. Court documents show Los Angeles police alerted authorities in a Phoenix suburb that Morgan’s cellphone was being used in north Scottsdale. The 43-year-old was found in a house with his mother and arrested without incident, police said. It was unclear when he would be extradited to California. Morgan faces felony charges including theft, embezzlement, forgery or fraud against an elder adult, and false imprisonment of an elder adult. A misdemeanor count also alleges elder abuse. Police say Morgan pocketed more than $262,000 from autograph signing sessions Lee did in May 2018. Authorities say Morgan at one point also took Lee from his Hollywood Hills home to a Beverly Hills condominium “where Morgan had more control over Lee”. Lee’s daughter said in a request for a restraining order last year that Morgan was manipulating the mentally declining Lee, preventing him from seeing family and friends, and trying to take control of his money and business affairs. Attorney Alex Kessel has said Morgan has never abused or taken advantage of Lee. Kessel said in an email on Saturday he had been in contact with prosecutors to arrange for Morgan to surrender on Tuesday. “It is unfortunate that the DA and police did not honor our commitment to surrender next week and arrested him,” Kessel said in an email. Morgan’s bail has been set at $300,000. He will eventually be extradited to Los Angeles to face the charges.