On Saturday the UFC will return Rio de Janeiro for UFC 237. The event, which features a handful of former champions such as Anderson Silva and Jose Aldo, will mark the promotion’s second pay-per-view event since announcing an exclusive deal to host their PPV shows on ESPN’s new streaming service, ESPN+. The deal means that fight fans in the United States are required to have ESPN+ subscriptions in order to then purchase the UFC’s tentpole shows. Although the exclusive deal emphasizes ESPN’s confidence in the UFC product, there are still several risks associated with their investment. In May 2018, the UFC and Disney, in conjunction with ESPN, signed an exclusive five-year media rights and distribution deal for live UFC content across all ESPN platforms. The entire rights package would cost ESPN $1.5bn over five years. The inaugural show took place in January 2019 and featured a champion v champion fight between TJ Dillashaw and Henry Cejudo. According to ESPN, the event resulted in 568,000 new subscribers, including 525,000 who signed up on the day of the fight alone. Two months later, the UFC extended its deal with ESPN until 2025 and announced that their PPV events would be purchased directly on ESPN+. However, while the event was a financial success and an impressive start to the partnership, it wasn’t without its fair share of controversy. The UFC and ESPN endured staunch criticism from the media ahead of the inaugural show due to the promotion’s decision to include former NFL defensive end Greg Hardy — a man once convicted for assaulting his ex-girlfriend — in the co-main event spot. To make matters worse, Hardy was featured on the same card as Rachel Ostovich, who suffered a broken orbital bone after being assaulted by her husband. Hardy went on to a disqualification loss but returned last month – also in a co-main event slot – and scored a knockout victory. While Hardy likely won’t fight again for several months, the UFC is set to spotlight another alleged domestic abuser on their upcoming UFC 237 event. The preliminary portion of the event will feature BJ Penn, the promotion’s first two-division champion and arguably one of the greatest fighters in the history of MMA. Penn recently made headlines when his estranged girlfriend filed a restraining order against him, alleging years of physical and sexual abuse. Penn is also under an active police investigation after allegedly threatening another man with a machete in a trespassing dispute. Despite this, Penn is still scheduled to compete on the UFC 237 PPV. The decision to promote Hardy on two separate occasions, as well as lack of foresight to remove Penn from their upcoming card underscores the UFC’s tone-deaf approach to handling domestic violence. It also highlights ESPN’s willingness to overlook controversy in exchange for new subscribers to its streaming platform, especially considering the channel’s well-documented financial troubles. Over the past five years, ESPN has lost more than 13 million subscribers. This steady erosion of paying customers is a problem for all traditional broadcasters and is due to the “cord-cutting” trend of viewers cancelling their TV packages and cable subscriptions in favor of internet-based media such as Netflix and Amazon Prime. As a result, the company underwent significant changes, which included laying off 150 employees in 2017. In March 2018, Walt Disney Co, which owns 80% of ESPN, hired James Pitaro, the former head of media at Yahoo, to serve as president of the sports network. One month later, ESPN unveiled its ESPN+ streaming service and announced its partnership with the UFC. The UFC reportedly has the youngest fan base among major US sports properties, comprised of a high percentage of millennials and adults in the 18-34 demographic. A large proportion of UFC fans are also heavy internet users and are used to using digital services such as Fight Pass, the UFC’s own streaming service, to watch fights. Theoretically, this should be a good fit for ESPN, a company which is looking to build a young consumer base to anchor its subscription service. However, when you factor in the declining TV ratings and PPV sales in 2018, it becomes clear that both entities will be under immense pressure to ensure the deal is successful. While ESPN still has 86 million subscribers as of the final quarter of 2018, they continue to lose roughly two million viewers with each passing year, which has greatly affected profit margins, as well as parent company Walt Disney’s stock value. As a result, ESPN is under a lot of pressure with its newfound investment in UFC, which in turn, places pressure on the UFC to match its media partners’ expectations. Despite that pressure, the UFC and ESPN have plenty of reasons to be optimistic about the deal. The UFC 234 prelims drew 1.34 million viewers on ESPN and became the most-watched preliminary card leading up to a UFC PPV in more than two years. UFC 235 topped that figure with a total of 1.48 million viewers. However, the UFC 236 prelims saw a significant drop, averaging 893,000 viewers. It was later reported in the Wrestling Observer Newsletter that UFC 236 drew fewer than 100,000 PPV buys on ESPN+, which is unsurprising given the sudden change of platform. Another complicated facet of the UFC-ESPN deal is the decision to make ESPN+ the exclusive provider of UFC PPVs. While the financial details have not been disclosed, it is believed the UFC will receive a guaranteed revenue stream from ESPN in exchange for exclusivity. The added security gives the UFC leverage when negotiating with its top stars. For example, Brock Lesnar was supposed to make his long-awaited return from WWE to fight Daniel Cormier for the heavyweight title. When Lesnar attempted to negotiate a flat fee with the UFC to compete under the new ESPN+ PPV deal, he was turned down by the promotion. Instead, with guaranteed money from ESPN behind it, the UFC booked a rematch between Cormier and Stipe Miocic — a fight that will draw fewer viewers than Lesnar’s return but will involve fighters demanding far less money. This newfound leverage will likely also impact UFC’s relationship with its most valuable star, Conor McGregor. The Irishman has headlined four of the five highest selling UFC PPVs and, despite losing his most recent fight, remains the biggest draw in the promotion’s history. Yet despite McGregor’s status, the ESPN+ deal places him at a significant disadvantage during the negotiation process. The UFC’s primary goal is no longer to sell PPVs but to create regular content that will draw new subscribers to ESPN+, something they can arguably achieve without McGregor. There is also a case to be made that McGregor’s recent brushes with the law make him an even more unappealing commodity for the UFC. While the UFC arguably no longer needs McGregor, ESPN can still profit from his presence on their streaming service, especially if he is able to draw in a casual audience to ESPN+. ESPN’s agreement with the UFC is the network’s first major deal under Pitaro’s helm and he will want to ensure that it is a successful venture. McGregor could be useful in that regard, even if only for a single fight. Therefore it is still possible that the promotion will reach an eventual agreement with the former champion. The UFC-ESPN agreement is an example of how sports organizations that rely heavily on individual talent and star power can be beneficial to a broadcaster looking to reestablish itself through new distribution channels. Nevertheless, in order to eventually recoup their hefty investment in the UFC’s media rights, ESPN will likely have to put aside their progressive ethos and UFC unseemly side, such as the decision to promote questionable athletes like Hardy, Penn and McGregor. • ESPN and the UFC declined to comment on this article when contacted by the Guardian. 