African Americans are incarcerated at more than five times the rate of white Americans, and the negative impact of a criminal record is much greater for African American job applicants. How do black Americans navigate such a grossly unfair system, and maintain their dignity? Tayari Jones deals with these issues wisely and sensitively in An American Marriage, shortlisted for this year’s Women’s prize for fiction. Her previous books have garnered praise across the US, but this latest one hit new heights when it was named as a favourite by both Oprah Winfrey and Barack Obama; Oprah is in talks to make it into a film. Roy Othaniel Hamilton is a young southern black man who is going places: after college, he landed himself a good job and a wonderful wife named Celestial Gloriana, no less. He is affable, slightly pompous, fond of rules and regulations – a man who knows his own mind. But his life runs violently off the rails when he is convicted of a rape he didn’t commit. Jones portrays the fallout first as a two-hander, with the narration shifting between husband and wife, and subsequently as a three-hander when another figure enters the picture, upsetting Celestial and Roy’s delicate balancing act. Like its UK cousin, Diana Evans’s excellent Ordinary People, also on the shortlist, the novel probes the way cultural expectations influence and clash with personal aspirations for the black middle classes. An American Marriage is as much an exploration of modern gender roles as it is an inquiry into social justice, particularly the male burden. “I did my best to be the real man [my mama] had in mind,” reflects Roy. Real men don’t leave, Mama tells him, they stick around – but how can they, when the system is skewed towards locking them away? He expects his wife to stay loyal, a Penelope to his Odysseus, but she, too, has appetites – for success, for fulfilment, for love. Roy believes his job is to “sit his wife down”, meaning to earn enough that she needn’t go out to work. Celestial, though, prefers to stand. This is a marvellous feat of storytelling, told with the type of light touch that can only be achieved through hard work. Any reader will warm to the characters’ southern lilt, with its gentle formality, a courtliness that has all but vanished from any other English-speaking part of the world. • An American Marriage is published by Oneworld (£8.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.