I flew with easyJet to Geneva and back from Bristol and bought a standard hold luggage allowance of 23 kg. I had no issues flying out, but on the return, when I plonked my exactly 23 kg bag onto the bag drop station at Geneva airport, the check-in staff insisted I pay 65 Swiss francs as I had “sports equipment”. The luggage did, indeed, contain a pair of skis, but it was within the specified weight and dimensions for hold luggage. EasyJet pointed me to its terms and conditions which specify some items that can’t be included in hold luggage but skis are not one of them. It does charge a fee for sports equipment but for items that exceed the hold baggage dimension rule. AR, Exeter EasyJet appears to be making up the rules as it goes along. The section on its website covering fees for sports equipment only alludes to items that are packed separately in the hold. It makes no mention of charges if they are contained within the hold luggage allowance. Other airlines, such as BA, Virgin Atlantic and Lufthansa, specify that sports stuff carries no extra cost if part of the permissible hold baggage. When contacted by the Observer easyJet first declared that you had to pay the fee because your skis had to be processed and loaded separately. When reminded that they were inside your prepaid luggage, it claimed that a bag containing skis would have exceeded the maximum size of 275 cm so incurred a fee. But your skis were short and the bag was only 230 cm so it changed its tune again and declared that sporting equipment is chargeable regardless of the measurements. This rule is not mentioned in the terms and conditions. The airline eventually agreed to refund the fee, but insisted it was as a “goodwill gesture” because you were not charged on the outward journey. Other skiers may save money by booking on rival airlines who are transparent about their policy. If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions