Ole Gunnar Solskjær put a brave face on Manchester United’s latest disappointment, but accepted his side had not been good enough to put away chances against a dispirited and disorganised Huddersfield that would have kept hopes of a Champions League finish alive. “We played some good stuff for half an hour but when we created opportunities we didn’t take them,” Solskjær said. “We didn’t capitalise when we were on top and then we became sloppy. We didn’t perform to the required level, and though we are all disappointed not to be in the Champions League next season the Europa League is probably the right place for us at the moment. “We have been inconsistent over the season but also within games, and where we are now is possibly a true reflection of what we deserve. The league table does not lie, we’ve had plenty of opportunities to grab third or fourth place but we were not able to do it.” Alexis Sánchez picked up another injury and left the field in the second half, and though Solskjær refused to discuss the possibility that this might be his last appearance in a United shirt he did indicate that some players might be moved out in the summer. “This is not a time to single out individuals,” he said. “The players haven’t let me down, we’re a team, but a tired one in the end. You can keep going when you are winning but it’s hard when results are going against you. The effort and attitude of the players was not the problem today, we just weren’t good enough to hold on to a winning position. The goal we conceded was a bit of a gift to Huddersfield, I’ve seen us do that too often from corner kicks of our own and it’s something we will be working to rectify over summer.” Though Huddersfield could have been well beaten – Paul Pogba hit the bar twice – few begrudged the Terriers a creditable draw at the end of a gruelling season. “We need to keep believing,” the manager, Jan Siewert, said as he prepared for life in the Championship. “Today we showed what is possible against a really tough opponent – we matched a good team.”