The UK will be forced into a general election that will obliterate the Conservative party if a new leader pushes for the UK to leave the EU with no deal in October, Jeremy Hunt has said. Having written in a Telegraph article that a no-deal Brexit would be “political suicide”, Hunt said on Tuesday he did not believe parliament would allow the UK to leave with no deal on 31 October and would force an early election. “I’m making this argument because I want to solve the Brexit crisis we are in and I’m worried if we don’t solve it we will face a political crisis that is far bigger than our legal relationship with the EU; it could lead to the destruction of our party system and the end of my own party,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “The biggest risk to Brexit now is not an issue of getting a majority, challenging as that is; the biggest risk is a general election, because the Labour party is now changing its position to a second-referendum party.” The foreign secretary said he believed the result of a general election would be catastrophic for the Conservatives. “As we’ve learned from the local elections and the European elections, we must not go back to the electorate asking for their mandate until we have delivered what we said we’d deliver last time.” Hunt, one of the frontrunners for the Tory leadership, who has previously been bullish about a no-deal exit, said he believed it was still possible to renegotiate the withdrawal agreement, despite the EU having said it would not do so. The environment secretary is to pitch himself as a “unity candidate” capable of attracting leavers and remainers, as he formally declared his candidacy saying: “I believe that I’m ready to unite the Conservative and Unionist party, ready to deliver Brexit and ready to lead this great country.” But robust Brexiters in particular dislike the fact that he stayed loyal even in the final days of the crumbling May regime. The health secretary remains a relative outsider, but the longer the race goes on, the more he gains ground for the seemingly basic virtues of being apparently competent and broadly similar to a normal human being, albeit a particularly energetic one. A concerted effort would probably require an image consultant. Fears that the foreign secretary would be another overly woolly compromise choice were hardly assuaged when after a set-piece speech he seemed unable to outline why his brand of Conservatism might appeal to voters. The home secretary still has the same weaknesses: he is an uninspiring speaker and some worry he is too fond of headline-grabbing, illiberal political gestures. But he is almost as ubiquitous as Liz Truss, and clearly believes this is his time. The out-and-out favourite, so popular with the Tory grassroots that it would be hard for MPs to not make Johnson one of the final two. He has been relatively quiet recently, beyond his regular Telegraph column, but this is very deliberate. The former House of Commons leader, who left Theresa May as the last candidate standing when she pulled out of the previous leadership race in 2016, has decided to have another tilt at the top job, saying she has the “experience and confidence” to “lead this country into a brighter future”. But even with her staunch Brexiter tendencies, she would be seen as an outsider. The housing minister is credited as the convener of both Conservative leavers and remainers to develop a compromise on May’s withdrawal agreement. He said there was a “yearning for change”. The 52-year-old is a former deputy mayor of London and entered the Commons in 2015 when David Cameron’s Conservatives won a majority. His name was given to the “Malthouse compromise” – a proposal drawn up by backbenchers from leave and remain wings of the Tory party, which would have implemented May’s Brexit deal with the backstop replaced by alternative arrangements. The former work and pensions secretary, who quit last year over May’s Brexit plans, has launched her own in-party campaign group/leadership vehicle called Blue Collar Conservatism, promising to make the party more amenable to voters in deprived communities – mainly through a promise to deliver a strong Brexit and policies such as diverting much of the foreign aid budget to schools and police. Few things say “would-be leader in waiting” like a kitchen photoshoot with your spouse, and the former Brexit secretary duly obliged with this imageawash with tasteful pastel hues. He formally launched his bid in the Mail on Sunday. Among the more core constituency of Conservative MPs, Raab has been pushing hard, as has his semi-official “Ready for Raab” Twitter feed. The cabinet’s most recent arrival – Mordaunt’s promotion to defence led to Stewart becoming international development secretary – certainly has the necessary ambition and self-belief, plus a privileged if unorthodox backstory covering Eton, Oxford, a senior role in postwar Iraq and a bestselling book about walking across Afghanistan. He remains an outsider, not least because of his remain tendencies and slightly 2010 view of compassionate Conservatism. Sir Graham Brady, Penny Mordaunt and James Brokenshire are yet to declare their intentions. Liz Truss and Amber Rudd have ruled themselves out. Among other senior figures not expected to run are Brandon Lewis, Chris Grayling and Philip Hammond. Gavin Williamson’s recent sacking after the Huawei leak inquiry will also surely rule him out as an option this time around. “We need to have a new negotiating team, with someone from the Democratic Unionist party, the [Tory hardline Brexit] European Research Group, someone from Scotland and Wales so that the union side of these issues is properly thought through,” he said. He said the Labour party should not be involved because it had showed it was “not prepared to do this in good faith”. However, Hunt said he had not asked the DUP or the ERG whether they would be willing to join negotiations led by him. The justice secretary, David Gauke, who has ruled himself out of the race, hinted on Tuesday that he could back Hunt’s campaign and agreed with him about the risks of no deal. “I think if we were to try to pursue a no-deal Brexit … then I think there are real risks for the country most importantly of all, but I don’t think that’s the right position for the Conservative party to be on. We have to be responsible,” he told Today. Gauke said he had worked closely with the health secretary, Matt Hancock, and the international development secretary, Rory Stewart, who he said had been “very impressive so far”, and that he was encouraged by what Hunt was saying. The housing minister Kit Malthouse became the 10th leadership contender on Monday night, telling the Sun he had seen his compromise proposal on the Northern Irish backstop cited by many leadership contenders which led him to believe he was the best to deliver it. The “Malthouse compromise” of replacing the backstop with alternative arrangements, or negotiating a longer-term transition to a no-deal exit, has been backed by leavers and remainers in the Conservatives but was rejected as unworkable by Downing Street. Malthouse, who entered the Commons in 2015, said he believed the new prime minister should come from the next generation. “This leadership campaign cannot be about the same old faces, scarred by wars that have split the Tory party over three years,” he said. “We need to end the Brexit paralysis, and while I voted to leave the EU, I know that without unity across the UK, we cannot get a deal over the line. It’s time for a new generation to lead the charge into our future with boldness and vision.” Other candidates who have declared in recent days include the environment secretary, Michael Gove, and the home secretary, Sajid Javid. Gove is understood to be unveiling a pledge on Tuesday to get rid of citizenship fees for all non-British EU citizens living in the UK before the referendum – around 3 million people. Hancock wrote in the Mail on Tuesday that the next general election battle should be over the economy, once Brexit had been delivered, and that the Tories should stand on a platform of low tax and a higher living wage. Stewart, who spent Monday visiting remain and leave areas of London and challenging voters to talk to him about his campaign, was endorsed overnight by the veteran MP and grandson of Winston Churchill, Nicholas Soames. This whole day - whether in “remain” areas or “leave” areas is just a reminder that we have far more in common than divides us. #letscometogether pic.twitter.com/JJs3Xtze6S Stewart said he believed many Tory colleagues were “taking the party to the right … I think a no-deal Brexit would divide the country, divide the party. “You can’t threaten someone in negotiation with something you can’t deliver. I’ve negotiated in Iraq and in Afghanistan and the lesson I’ve taken from that is the key thing is to get agreement on what shared future you want together.” Stewart said he would take any proposed deal to a citizens’ assembly. He said it would be a “jury of 500 ordinary people, we would go out to them and they would sit and take evidence in public, sitting seven days a week, and they would talk about the detailed issues of Brexit, hearing from the experts and … they would make the recommendations back to parliament”. He pointed out that a similar process was used to find a solution to the issue of abortion in Ireland. “Look how well it worked in Ireland. I think it would work here too.”