What’s the best way to use up week-old veg that isn’t soup?Oliver, Exeter Veg-drawer soup is a staple round mine, too, but there’s no getting around the fact that it often looks like sludge – in various hues of brown or green, depending on the season – and can get a bit boring when it’s tea for three nights running. So what else to do with past-its-best veg that doesn’t yet merit a one-way ticket to the compost bin? Simple – ferment it. Don’t look so alarmed at the back there: it’s nowhere near as scary or complicated as it sounds. This is one of the oldest methods of preservation known to humanity, and we’d have ditched it long ago if it was a proper faff. It’s not all about pickles and kraut, either. Cheese, bread, wine, cured meat and fish: many of our most popular everyday foodstuffs rely to some degree or other on the magic of fermentation (it also fits right in with the current nutritionally aware, low-calorie zeitgeist). But when applied to veg, it “requires no particular kind of climate, no cooking and so no expenditure of fuel: just a container… and perhaps some salt or seawater”, as Harold McGee puts it in On Food & Cooking. Glyn Gordon swapped the chef’s life (he worked with Simon Rogan for years) to rub salt into veg for a living when he set up fermented goods outfit Eaten Alive in 2016 with fellow ex-chef Pat Bingley, after the pair ditched plans to open a fermentation-themed restaurant. “All you need to get started is a board, a knife, a bowl and salt,” Gordon says. Peel, wash and cut your veg to a roughly uniform size – “so it ferments at the same speed” – massage in 2% salt by weight to get a brine going, pack into a container, cover and wait. “That’s the basic blueprint,” Gordon says, adding that you can chuck in alliums, herbs, spices, all sorts: “Experiment to suit your tastes, which is what all home cooking is about anyway.” Swap some of the salt for soy or fish sauce, say, or even mashed-up anchovies, but keep to that minimum 2% ratio, to prevent unwelcome microbes propagating (the higher the salt content, the slower the fermentation will be, and the longer it will keep). Once the veg is nicely tangy (again, to taste), pack into a jar, weigh it down to keep it submerged in the juices, seal and pop in the fridge, where it will happily keep fermenting, albeit at a slower rate. “All ferments produce CO2, so open the jar daily to release it,” warns Gordon, who recalls one unfortunate altercation with a 60kg barrel of sauerkraut. It’s also worth noting that ferments have a potent aroma, brassicas especially. “They smell like farts,” Gordon giggles, “and cauliflower like really bad ones.” It’s OK if the veg is a bit floppy, though Korean-American chef Judy Joo says “it shouldn’t be totally limp, because fermentation needs the vegetable’s natural sugars for the process to work”. Once you’ve got the hang of all that, it’s but a short step to the likes of sauerkraut and kimchi, though if you go for the latter, “use gloves, or your hands will tingle from the chillies, and the odour lingers on the skin”, says Joo, who runs restaurants in London and Hong Kong. You don’t even have to go to any real effort at all. Olia Hercules’ debut book Mamushka has one recipe that could not be easier if it tried. Toss a heaped teaspoon of sea salt into half a kilo of grated carrot, leave to steep for an hour, then add a tablespoon each of caster sugar and red-wine vinegar, and two cloves of crushed garlic. Sweat half a finely sliced onion in sunflower oil with a teaspoon each of ground fennel and coriander seeds and half a teaspoon of cayenne pepper, until soft and slightly caramelised, leave to cool, then massage into the carrots. Pack into a clean jar, put in the fridge and they’ll keep happily for at least a month – assuming they last that long, because you’ll soon be having them with everything, from Sunday roast to sandwiches. Even if you don’t call them “crack carrots” like a certain youth of my acquaintance… • Do you have a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.com