Asked for his immediate thoughts on Liverpool’s astonishing Champions League semi-final victory over Barcelona at an ecstatic Anfield, the club’s German manager, Jürgen Klopp, beamed his gleaming smile and said breathlessly: “It’s the best face of football, eh?” Liverpool achieved a victory Klopp had told his players was impossible but for an elemental effort, overturning a 3-0 first leg defeat by one of Europe’s stellar clubs, winning 4-0 back home at Anfield. With his players still on the pitch hugging each other or themselves in dazed disbelief, and supporters in the stadium’s Kop end singing Liverpool’s anthem, You’ll Never Walk Alone, Klopp said: “There are more important things in the world, but creating this kind of emotional atmosphere together is so special.” The morning after a historic football night, supporters of Liverpool, seasoned blokes in their 50s, were saying they hadn’t slept, they had been emotionally overcome, in tears. The club’s own marketing campaign, We Are Liverpool: This Means More, risks irking people whose support for other clubs is also a matter of lifelong loyalty, woven into their identity and family life, and football itself, as Klopp acknowledged, is not all good. Yet there is a sense that special feelings are being stirred by the revival at Anfield. At its heart is a reconnection, between past decades of football greatness in the 1960s, 70s and 80s, whose foundations were famously built with the clenched fists of Scottish manager Bill Shankly, and the return of success now with Klopp, after some difficult and terrible years. It is deepened by the traumas of Hillsborough, where 96 people were killed in a crush supporting Liverpool at the 1989 FA Cup semi-final against Nottingham Forest and the 30-year campaign for justice which has followed. At the new inquests in 2014-16 in Warrington, the love the victims and their families had for football, and for Liverpool, shone through in personal statements made about the 96. David Hughes, who was only 17 when his father Eric, then 42, was killed, spoke of how they had travelled all over watching Liverpool and said it was “like a religion to us, and we loved it, and we loved spending time together”. The comparison to religion overlays devotion to football. Shankly himself described Anfield as “a shrine”; Dan Davies, a journalist who survived the Hillsborough crush in 1989, wrote that the victory over Barcelona under the Anfield floodlights had been “a religious experience”. Adrian Tempany, another journalist and survivor of the terrible crush, said of the Kop: “The people around me were delirious, some were crying; we couldn’t believe what we’d seen the players do. I felt like I couldn’t even see when the fourth goal went in, it was like looking through one of those multicoloured kaleidoscopes you have as a kid. And the singing at the end wasn’t as raucous as it has been; it was respectful, of the players and the club – it was almost like a hymn.” The return of success to Liverpool is a remarkable phenomenon of modern football, between this deep emotional attachment and collective memory, and the owners, billionaire American hedge fund investors of the Fenway Sports Group, who bought the club in 2010. Owners of the Boston Red Sox baseball team and liberal Boston Globe newspaper, John Henry and his FSG co-investors took some time to find their method of stewardship, which is now becoming appreciated by supporters. The US approach to sports investment contrasts with their rivals for this season’s Premier League, Manchester City, whose rise has been fuelled by more than £1bn investment from Sheikh Mansour of the Abu Dhabi ruling family, and Chelsea, funded since 2003 by the Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich. But FSG’s approach is cast in an enviable light compared with that of the US owners of Manchester United, the Glazer family, whose 2005 takeover was leveraged with £525m debts, has cost the club more than £1bn and has seen a decline after they failed to plan for the succession to illustrious manager Sir Alex Ferguson. FSG have run Liverpool steadily after early missteps in the expensive recruitment of players and a landmark row with supporters, who organised a walkout of Anfield at the match against Sunderland in 2016, protesting about ticket price rises. Henry, the chairman Tom Werner and FSG president Mike Gordon quickly made an apologetic statement and reworked the pricing, and since then, with the appointment of the former Times journalist Tony Barrett as the head of club and supporter liaison, the club has been more sensitive and relations have improved. FSG have put money in, £110m in loans to build the new 20,500-seat Main Stand, which has increased Anfield’s capacity to 54,074 and boosted commercial revenues, while so far taking nothing out in dividends. Gordon, who has taken the most active role in the Liverpool rebuilding, was centrally involved in hiring the inspirational Klopp, formerly the successful manager of Borussia Dortmund in the German Bundesliga. FSG have backed him with ambitious but analytical player recruitment, overseen by a sporting director, Mike Edwards, which has brought a new high-quality squad to Anfield including striker Mohamed Salah, centre-half Virgil van Dijk and goalkeeper Alisson Becker. James McKenna, of the independent supporters’ trust Spirit of Shankly – so named to emphasise the importance of the values preached by the club’s former manager – says he believes FSG have learned, and reached an understanding of Liverpool. “It does feel like there is a new dawn,” McKenna said, “and nobody could have known how meaningful You’ll Never Walk Alone would be: we’ve walked through a storm, been through very difficult times, and now it feels like a golden sky is coming.”