North Korea has fired two suspected short-range missiles, South Korea’s military has said, its second weapons launch in five days and a possible warning that nuclear disarmament talks with Washington could be in danger. South Korea’s joint chiefs of staff said the weapons flew 420km (260 miles) and 270km (167 miles), respectively. It said it was working with the US to determine more details, such as the type of weapon that was fired. South Korea’s military said earlier that at least one projectile was launched from the Sino-ri area of North Pyongan province, an area known to have one of North Korea’s oldest missile bases and where a brigade operates mid-range Rodong missiles. It later said the launch was from the nearby town of Kusong, where North Korea conducted the first successful flight test of its Hwasong-12 intermediate range missile in May 2017. Kusong is also home to missile test facilities that were critical to the development of North Korea’s solid-fuel Pukguksong-2, which was successfully flight-tested for the first time in February 2017, in the North’s first missile test after Donald Trump took office. The launches came as the US special representative for North Korea, Stephen Biegun, was visiting South Korea, and hours after the North described the firing of rocket artillery and an apparent short-range ballistic missile on Saturday as a regular and defensive military exercise. North Korea also ridiculed South Korea for criticising those launches. South Korea’s presidential Blue House said in a statement that the North Korean launches on Thursday were “very concerning” and detrimental to efforts to improve inter-Korean ties and ease military tensions on the Korean peninsula. There was no immediate comment from the US. Some analysts have said that if North Korea resumes testing the kind of longer-range banned ballistic weapons it fired in unusually large numbers in 2017, when many feared a US-North Korea standoff could end in war, it may signal that Pyongyang is turning away from diplomacy. The tensions in 2017 were followed by a surprising diplomatic outreach by the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, in 2018, when he attended summits with the South Korean and Chinese presidents and with Trump. But North Korea has not received what it wants most from its summitry: relief from punitive sanctions imposed over its nuclear and missile programmes. A summit e this year between Trump and Kim ended in failure, with the US saying North Korea was not offering to take enough disarmament steps in return for the widespread sanctions relief it sought. Before the launches on Thursday, senior defence officials from South Korea, the US and Japan met in Seoul to discuss North Korea’s earlier launches and other security issues. Details from the meeting were not immediately announced. Experts who analysed photos from North Korean state media say the North tested a new solid-fuel missile on Saturday that appears to be modelled after Russia’s Iskander short-range ballistic missile system. With the consecutive weapons launches, North Korea is pressuring South Korea to turn away from the US and support its position more strongly, said Du Hyeogn Cha, a visiting scholar at the Asan Institute for Policy Studies in Seoul. After the collapse of the Trump-Kim meeting, North Korea demanded that South Korea proceed with joint economic projects that have been held back by US-led sanctions against the North. By firing weapons that directly threaten South Korea but not the US mainland or its Pacific territories, North Korea also appears to be testing how far Washington will tolerate its bellicosity without actually allowing the nuclear negotiations to collapse, Cha said.