Leeds United can almost spy the play-off final after returning from their mission to Derby with a 1-0 win. Kemar Roofe’s sweetly taken goal in the 55th minute, following a gorgeous pass by Jack Harrison, gave Marcelo Bielsa’s team a deserved advantage going into Wednesday’s second leg at Elland Road. “I think it was a fair win,” said Bielsa. The Derby manager, Frank Lampard, agreed that the visitors had been the superior side but fumed at a curious incident in the second half in which the referee, Craig Pawson, awarded Derby a penalty following a tangle between Harrison and Jayden Bogle and then overturned his decision on the advice of an assistant. Lampard accused the referee of abdicating responsibility in a case of “VAR without the computer”. “I’m amazed that a referee in a game of this magnitude has decided to play second fiddle,” said Lampard. “The penalty is one that could go either way. The astounding thing is that once the referee gives it, as he’s the boss on the pitch, he then consults his linesman. You’d think there’d be some big information that the referee hasn’t seen but I don’t think that’s the case. [It was] VAR without the computer system. Human VAR. I’m not sure it was a penalty but once he’s given it, it’s strange to say the least. I’ve never seen a decision turn unless there’s something absolutely clear that hasn’t been seen and that certainly isn’t the case.” That incident was merely the latest controversy in a rivalry that has been infused with ill feeling following the espionage affair earlier this season, when Leeds were fined £200,000 for watching Derby training sessions on the sly. It is clear each club would take particular relish from ending the other’s promotion ambition while fuelling their own. Leeds beat Derby twice during the regular season and finished nine points and three places above them in the table but the loss of form that saw them drop out of the automatic promotion places, plus the absence of injured players such as Pontus Jansson and Ezgjan Alioski, meant Derby, who had finished the regular season strongly, came into this game with encouraging momentum. That translated into a good start, and Gaetano Berardi had to perform a convincing impression of Jansson to hurl himself in front of a shot by David Nugent in the eighth minute. But once Leeds found their passing rhythm, they took charge. Stuart Dallas served notice of Leeds’ menace with a curling shot from 20 yards that flew just over the bar. The visitors continually forced their hosts backwards, albeit without opening them up. Derby repelled a succession of corners but their strain became increasingly apparent. Leeds looked anything but jaded, although Adam Forshaw suffered an injury and had to be replaced in the 23rd minute by Jamie Shackleton, who, as it turned out, added extra thrust to their midfield. As the second half started the onus was on the home team to raise their game to make a breakthrough but they did not look up to the job. Soon Leeds showed them how. The referee deserves praise for allowing play to continue in the 55th minute after a crunching foul on Dallas by Tom Lawrence in midfield. Harrison kept running down the left before curling a delicious low pass into the path of Roofe, who slotted into the bottom corner of the net. “Stop crying, Frank Lampard,” sang the gleeful away fans. Kelle Roos made a good save to prevent Roofe from making it 2-0 moments later. With Derby looking ragged Leeds threatened again on the hour, only for Pablo Hernández to miscue in front of goal after a break down the right. Derby thought they had been given a route to an equaliser in the 77th minute when the referee pointed to the spot before consulting with his assistant and changing his mind. That triggered some unseemly flailing of arms by irate players. Leeds nearly compounded the home team’s anger by scoring again, but Roos plunged to his right to turn away a shot by Shackleton. “One-nil is an advantage,” concluded Bielsa. “But not a decisive one.”