Daylight is still streaming in through the stained glass of this secular cathedral at the top of north London when Kieran Hebden, known most often as Four Tet, starts triggering noises from his rig. The enduring light of late spring underscores how early it is by the standards of electronic music: not long after 8.30pm. And yet roughly 10,000 excited people are crammed in and around a large rectangular section at the centre of the hall, where dangling ropes of lightbulbs create an immersive 3D space. This is Four Tet’s renowned light show, designed by Squidsoup, lighting artists who have been working with him since 2015: a “30m x 30m volume of lights, over 40,000 individually addressable points”, they specify. As the set powers up with Planet, the biggest banger off Four Tet’s 2017 album, New Energy, the lights start to ripple: bioluminescence meets Tron. The gig is in the round, the better to indulge the lush surround-sound mix, where digital skitters can encircle the crowd like giant marbles going round a funfair wall of death. It’s really, really cool. At the centre, where the mixing desk might normally be found, is Hebden, his Anglepoise lamp and his jumble of kit. Only about 100 people can actually see him, because although Hebden is now officially a superstar DJ, slaying dancefloors at Coachella last month, topping bills in proper clubs and headlining nights at festivals, he eschews elevation where he can. Hebden has arrived at a particularly sweet spot. Tech has set Four Tet free. Tonight’s gig is very 'Insta-ready' This first of two sold-out nights at one of London’s biggest venues marks a fresh career high. Last year, Four Tet delivered a live set of New Energy over four nights in a substantially smaller London boîte, Village Underground, which dance-music bible Mixmag declared to be “the best live show in the world”.The context presumably included the over-the-top antics of EDM DJs, with their helmets, masks and arena-pop levels of crass production. Last October, Four Tet sold out four nights at the larger Brixton Academy, two live sets and two club all-nighters, all keenly priced (but without the light show). Now, with the follow-up album to New Energy not even released, Hebden is playing his strange, gentle UK garage pastorales and jazzy kora-core to somewhere between 18,000 and 20,000 people over two nights, again, at non-rip-off prices, but still. It is the triumph of an ultra-independent, internationally renowned DIY artist who has accreted a huge following without an iota of compromise or any hits in the meaningful sense of the word. Hebden makes eclectic world-club dream music without worrying about accessibility, or guests: the opposite of Diplo. Since Hebden amicably parted company with his record label, Domino, about a decade ago at contract’s end, he hasn’t quite run an electronic music empire off his phone but as near as dammit. There’s an agent and a manager. But Four Tet vinyl and remixes come out on Hebden’s label, Text, and fans buy digitally off his Bandcamp page. Hebden doesn’t do interviews any more. No photo agencies go to his gigs, the media doesn’t get in for free. None of this is done with any punk rock disdain; Hebden is just a fairly chilled operator who decided to do without the grief. In 2003, when he first came to wide renown with his third Four Tet album, Rounds, journalists labelled him “folktronica”; Hebden bristled at the reductivism. He may have come from indie rock – his previous band were a post-rock outfit called Fridge – but Hebden’s ears were so much wider than the times and the tag. The Four Tet moniker alluded to jazz (4Tet being jazz-speak for quartet) and Hebden soon found fellow rock-to-electronic travellers in Thom Yorke and Radiohead. Fast-forward through another half-dozen albums boasting a giddy array of themes – 2015’s Morning/Evening taking up Indian ragas, 2010’s There Is Love in You marrying psychedelics to London club culture – and Hebden has arrived at a particularly sweet spot. His interests of the past 20 years – saxophones, koras, gamelans, hip-hop, house, garage – are timely. Tech has set Four Tet free. Tonight’s gig is very “Insta-ready”. His Twitter keeps people abreast of events. In January, he announced new Four Tet music as part of an art exhibition. In February, an understated tweet spread the news that the Nelly Furtado sample on Hebden’s most celebrated club-only track of 2018, Only Human, had finally cleared. The track (under Hebden’s rave-ier moniker KH) was duly made available: a UK garage-derived rhythm, a recurring sample of a Furtado vocal from 2006 and, tonight, diversions into what sounds like 70s film soundtrack analogue. That Hebden is a low-key sophisticate is borne out by the broad strokes of his work. Committed to beauty, transcendence, succour and London sounds, it comes with dancefloor savvy, refined over a decade of serious DJ-ing, and a mastery of several notionally incompatible aesthetics. On one level, Hebden is a big psychedelic hippy with a borderline new-age bent, but his remixes for pop artists are emblematic of the way he keeps a toe in the mainstream. Crucially, the Spotify aesthetic that now dominates listening chimes well with Hebden’s own. There has been widespread hand-wringing that the gatekeeping power of Spotify playlists now makes for homogenised, non-offensive musical blandness, but Four Tet’s blithe excursions, while chiming with that zeitgeist, are so much more than chillout wallpaper. Tonight, Hebden plays a live set of his own tunes: you know this because there are gaps where one track ends and another begins. The punishing four-four boff of techno and the buoyant tsk-tsk of two-step come broken up by long, hazy passages filled with beatless analogue sound. He plays jungle. He goes as hard as Aphex Twin. He meanders. There are hand-holds, where you recognise a melody or the thrust of a tune in the evolving soundscape. Somewhere in the unfurling mix are the heady, lustrous arpeggiating strings of Two Thousand and Seventeen off New Energy. But such is the dazzle of the surround-sound and the kaleidoscopic ripples of light, it’s hard to tell whether Hebden at the top of his game plays any of the new album he hints he might soon release. Four Tet’s latest outing, Teenage Birdsong, comes near the end, like the dawn chorus breaking after waves of bass menace and the distant memory of Boards of Canada. It’s all over at about half-past 10.