Lloyds has appointed a former high court judge to run an independent review of its compensation scheme for victims of fraud that took place at an HBOS branch in Reading, amid claims that the scheme treated customers unfairly and worked in the bank’s own interests. The banking group announced on Friday that Sir Ross Cranston, now a law professor at the London School of Economics, would oversee the review, and pledged it would act on any recommendations. It came as Lloyds confirmed the closure of its £96m compensation scheme, which launched after the criminal trial of HBOS Reading bankers two years ago. Six people, including two former HBOS employees, were jailed in 2017 over a £245m loan scam perpetrated from the Reading branch, in which small firms were pushed under or damaged between 2003 and 2007 by being referred to a turnaround consultancy and loaded with unmanageable debts and fees. The fraudsters spent the proceeds on sex workers, superyachts and luxury holidays. Lloyds, which acquired HBOS at the height of the 2008 financial crisis, has been trying to draw a line under the scandal ever since. However, its efforts to compensate victims – in a programme run by Prof Russel Griggs – have been heavily criticised by victims, leading to the appointment of Cranston. The all-party parliamentary group on fair business banking said it had receivedseveral complaints from victims who went through the scheme. The complainants say Lloyds failed to offer fair compensation in light of the losses they suffered. Some also said the bank refused to discuss the methodology or basis for its decisions, without offering any opportunity for appeal. The only other option has been to pursue the bank through the courts, which is often prohibitively expensive. Legal advice by Jonathan Laidlaw QC, commissioned by victims’ group the SME Alliance last year, found the scheme was defective, based on flawed methodology and partial to the bank’s interests. “We look forward to seeing whether this is confirmed in the review led by Sir Ross,” the APPG said. Lloyds stressed that the Cranston review was not an opportunity for victims to appeal against the compensation decisions but was meant to provide a “robust” review that assured that its scheme “delivered fair and reasonable outcomes for customers”. The bank has made offers to 71 business customers, of which more than 98% have been accepted. It has meant paying out about £96m in compensation, with individuals offered packages ranging from less than £100,000 to more than £5m. The City minister, John Glen, announced the review last December, saying it would take place after the compensation scheme closed. He said it would “go above and beyond a normal ‘lessons learned’ exercise”. Nikki Turner, the director of the SME Alliance and a victim of the fraud, cautiously welcomed Cranston’s appointment. “We expect Sir Ross to take full notice of the assessment of the Griggs review by Jonathan Laidlaw QC … and so allow victims of HBOS Reading who were either excluded from the review, or received derisory settlements, a route to the ‘appropriate’ compensation promised by Lloyds Banking Group chief executive António Horta-Osório more than two years ago,” she said. Cranston, a former Labour MP, will begin his review this month and hopes to conclude it by October. He said he would release his methodology and timeline shortly. “It is vitally important that the assurance review be open, rigorous and fair, and that the Lloyds Banking Group act upon any recommendations made,” he said. “I look forward to consulting with all stakeholders and I encourage interested parties to submit evidence and engage fully with the process.”