When it comes to developing children’s palates, I have come to a few conclusions. The more you involve them in the cooking and seasoning of food, whether that’s a squeeze of lime or a sprinkling of herbs, the more interested they are. Exposing them to a range of tastes early on, and with the least fuss, means they are more prepared to try something new. And every child likes different things, which is fine; one of mine is a carb queen, one likes nothing more than a bowl of salad leaves, while the third loves meat. If you are largely cooking from scratch with whole, seasonal ingredients, your children will be eating well. The more you get children slicing, stirring and seasoning, the more likely they are to eat it all up. Prep 30 minCook 1 hrServes 8-12 4-6 large courgettes3 tbsp olive oil1 large onion, peeled and finely chopped2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely choppedSalt and black pepper40g pine nuts50g raisins400g minced lamb2 tsp ground cinnamon1 tsp allspice, ground2 ripe tomatoes, roughly chopped1 tbsp pomegranate molasses1 pinch sugar (if required)Seeds from ½ pomegranate, to serve1 handful each mint and parsley, roughly chopped, to serve For the garlic yoghurt1 small garlic clove400g Greek-style yoghurt3 tsp tahini Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/gas 6. Cut the courgettes in half lengthways, then run a knife around the inside edge of each one, leaving a 5mm border. Make small, crisscross cuts across the middle of the courgettes, then use a teaspoon to scoop out the flesh – children can help with this bit. Set the flesh aside for another use and put the boats on a baking tray. Put a saucepan over a medium heat and warm the oil. Add the onions, garlic and a pinch of salt, and fry gently for 10 minutes until soft. Add the pine nuts and raisins, then continue to fry for a few more minutes, to colour the nuts. Turn the heat up to medium-high, add the lamb and spices, then season. Saute until the meat is nicely browned. Add the chopped tomatoes. Take off the heat and stir through the pomegranate molasses. Get your helpers to taste and adjust the seasoning with a dash more molasses and a pinch of sugar or salt. Spoon into the courgette boats and roast for 30‑35 minutes, until they are golden and tender. Meanwhile, make the garlic yoghurt. Bash the garlic clove with something heavy to release the skin (children love doing this), then crush with a pinch of salt. Add to a bowl with the yoghurt, tahini and a few splashes of water to loosen, and mix. Drizzle the yoghurt mix over the boats, scatter with pomegranate seeds and herbs, and serve with nutty brown or red rice. The minced lamb is delicious with flatbreads. For a weekend lunch, serve alongside a chopped cucumber and onion salad, and juicy ripe tomatoes seasoned with plenty of za’atar, red-wine vinegar and olive oil.