What were you hoping for?A fun evening: I was excited to meet someone new. First impressions?We were both trying our best to talk and find some common ground, but it took a while. What did you talk about?What we think of Tony Blair, Nicolas Cage and my “upper- middle-class bubble”. Any awkward moments?See above. Good table manners?I don’t recall. Best thing about Saffron?Good chat. I like a bit of a debate, and Saffron was definitely up for it. Would you introduce her to your friends?I think she’d get on with them, so yes. Describe Saffron in three wordsFunny, smart, brash. What do you think she made of you?She seemed to think I was a bit out of touch, but maybe also lovable, in an eye-rolling kind of way. Did you go on somewhere?We went on for some margaritas. And... did you kiss?We had an obligatory snog outside the pub. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I actually think the whole thing went much better than expected. Marks out of 10?10. Would you meet again?I don’t think we necessarily had a romantic connection, but I’d go for a drink again as friends. What were you hoping for?A fun evening with good food and great company. Failing that, a good anecdote. First impressions?He looked nice. He also had a chocolate chicken out on the table. What did you talk about?Food, music, his dreams of working on a cheese farm in France. Any awkward moments?I was 20 minutes late and almost fell over on my way to the table. Good table manners?Perfect. Best thing about Adam?He’s really easy to talk to. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes. Describe Adam in three words?Funny, intelligent, interesting. What do you think he made of you?I think I grew on him. Did you go on somewhere?Yes. A French pub in Soho, then a pub, and then a sort of Latin bar with a dance floor. And... did you kiss?Yes. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I would have charged my phone beforehand so we didn’t have to share an Uber costing £45. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?Yes. • Adam and Saffron ate at Orient, London W1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comIf you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.