After the darkness of the past three seasons perhaps there is finally light at the end of the tunnel for Sunderland’s long-suffering supporters. Faced with a vociferous Portsmouth crowd baying for blood with one fan ejected after appearing to aim a kick and a punch at the defender Luke O’Nien when he fell into the crowd in the first half, Jack Ross’s side stood firm to seal their place in the League One play-off final against Charlton or Doncaster with a performance of real maturity. It was no less than they deserved against opponents who never really offered enough of a threat going forward in a performance that was most uncharacteristic of a side managed by Kenny Jackett. This was the fifth time these two sides have met this season, with Portsmouth’s victory in the Checkatrade Trophy final still fresh in the memory of the 30,000 Sunderland supporters who made the trip to Wembley at the end of March. A fractious affair in the first leg, when Chris Maguire scored the only goal of the game, added to the needle on a sunny spring evening on the south coast and the home supporters were out in numbers in the hope of sealing a swift return to the site of their previous triumph. Indeed Sunderland’s win last week was their first over these opponents since they beat them 2-0 at the Stadium of Light back in 2008 thanks to two goals from Kieran Richardson. Yet with several players who suffered the pain of successive relegations from the Premier League and then the Championship still on their books, they certainly had plenty of experience in their line-up as they sought revenge for the penalty shoot-out defeat at Wembley. A crunching challenge from Gareth Evans within the first five minutes that left Lee Cattermole writhing in agony set the tone for a frantic first half when neither side held anything back. When Tom Naylor launched the ball at Maguire after a scuffle it was another sign that this would be a long evening for the referee, Peter Bankes. One supporter seemed to take things too far when he clashed with O’Nien following a challenge from Tom Naylor. Cattermole had to be held back after he tried to confront the fan, who was later ejected by stewards having attempted at one stage to get on to the pitch. “It was just a bit of handbags, nothing to worry about,” said O’Nien, who declined to press charges after being asked whether he would like to by local police. “It’s happened and it’s something silly. I’ve seen my little cousin hit harder than that.” Ross added: “The fourth official said someone swung an arm at him, which is obviously not good.” Rather than fighting in the stands plenty of goals have been a feature of this year’s play-offs and it seemed likely that this match could follow suit when George Honeyman headed wide inside the first 10 minutes. Despite dominating possession, Portsmouth struggled to create much in the final third up against a defence led by Alim Ozturk, who had his red card ban from the first leg overturned on appeal. Evans finally tested Jon McLaughlin on the stroke of half-time when Oli Hawkins picked him out in front of goal, but the goalkeeper made a brilliant save to deny his header from point blank range. Portsmouth’s revival under Jackett has been building steadily and they finished three points ahead of Sunderland in fourth place in the regular season. He threw on his top scorer, Jamal Lowe, seven minutes after the break when the towering Hawkins called McLaughlin into action again with a header from Lee Brown’s deep cross. Sunderland, for their part, looked comfortable on the ball as they attempted to keep possession high up the field, although there was always a sense that they could be vulnerable on the break. That proved to be the case when Lowe wriggled free of his marker on the right and picked out Brett Pitman, whose high ball in was headed down by former Sunderland striker James Vaughan’s first touch and saved by McLoughlin with his feet. That, however, was the last real chance Portsmouth created in normal time as they were pressed back, with a lack of discipline also letting them down when it mattered most. The majority of the six minutes added time were spent defending a series of throw-ins in their own half as their opponents wound the clock down. “We got up a good end of steam but we couldn’t take our chances,” said a disappointed Jackett. It was not a pretty spectacle, though the travelling supporters behind McLoughlin’s goal did not seem to care as they celebrated long after the final whistle.