The letters by Alex Gallagher, Maureen Henry and Gerard Scott (30 April) show that the correspondents’ unswerving attachment to the union is clouding their appreciation of the facts. In most areas where the Scottish government has competence, Scotland outperforms the other nations of the UK. This is despite successive cuts to the Scottish block grant and the Scottish government spending in the region of £60m per year trying to mitigate austerity measures introduced by the Conservative-led government at Westminster. This is the reason for the SNP currently having a more than 20% lead over the second-placed party in polls in all three levels of government (Holyrood, Westminster and the EU); people recognise that they are doing a good job with limited resources and severe handicaps imposed by an external agency. An independent Scotland in full control of all of its finances, both raising and spending, would be able to do so much more for the people of this country than is currently possible.Liam CunninghamGlasgow • The answer for self-government for Scotland is simple for me. Apart from the outdated way in which Westminster operates, listening to the snide remarks by Theresa May to anyone who disagrees with her reinforces my decision to support independence for Scotland. It also makes sense to have your government closer to home. Having sat in on debates in the Scottish parliament, I am impressed by the forward-looking attitude of our MPs. Of course, no party or government is perfect, but Nicola Sturgeon as Scotland’s first minister is articulate. She has shown grit but also compassion, which is more than I can say for many Westminster MPs, especially those in the Tory party.Anne DalrympleEdinburgh • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition