In her fourth novel, The Heavens, the genre-defying American author Sandra Newman conjures one of the most captivating dreamers in fiction. Early on, young Persian-Hungarian artist Kate is characterised with a childhood anecdote from her friend Sabine: Kate would so dazzle their schoolmates with tales from an olde-worlde realm named Albion, a land of choirs and peacocks she visited in dreams, that they were inspired to draw Albion and speculate on its rules during sleepovers. When later turned upon for her “lies”, Kate refused to recant her belief that she wakes in another land. In fact, her conviction has only since grown, as Sabine warns Ben, a handsome Bangladeshi-American, after he falls for Kate at a boho Manhattan soiree in the summer of 2000. The ground is prepared for a heady onrush into how dreams and delusions intertwine in romantic love. From Aeschylus’s Cassandra onwards, Kate joins a line of literary soothsayers whose visions are disparaged by society at large. Society appears, belatedly, to be coming round to the possibility that a “delusion” is defined by whoever controls consensus reality: the 2013 edition of the psychiatric diagnostic manual DSM-5 demoted delusions from “false beliefs” to fixed beliefs unswayed by contradictory evidence. Delusions, it is tacitly acknowledged, may prove reality if new evidence emerges. Millennia ahead of the game, authors have, time and again, thrown their lot in with lone visionaries, and Newman proves no different. What if romance is a dream that spoils real life? Why put so much store in love when it can’t match the entropy of time? Kate’s nocturnal life intensifies when she is in love: “By stages, it ceased to be a dream. It was actual cold on her face, real morning light on her real eyelids”. At last she grasps her dream identity: Emilia Bassano, the mistress of a nobleman, preparing to flee a plague-stricken London in 1593. Fellow escapees include an actor she dubs “Sad Will” and after a few torrid rendezvous Emilia features as the “Dark Lady” in his sonnets. Kate remains subsumed in her alternative Elizabethan reality even after waking in modern New York, and while Ben is increasingly unnerved by her cognitive “anomalies, discrepancies, attacks of jamais vu”, he is unable to “yank her out of her fairytale”. Shuttling around a multiverse of variant dimensions, The Heavens overrides Ben’s anguished bewilderment with a validation of Kate’s perception of reality. Once elated by her dreaming, Kate begins to dread waking up in an America that is degrading exponentially, owing she believes to her mistakes back in 1593. While Sabine’s party occurred in a recognisable New York, the backdrop of the opening timeline was breezily utopian, most clearly evinced in the election of an eco-conscious female president. But the more Emilia gets waylaid from her hazily defined mission to avert the end of the world by Shakespeare, a fellow time-traveller bent on his own glory, the more modern America slides towards ruin. When Kate blames herself for the “butterfly effect” that causes the terrorist atrocity of 9/11, Ben can no longer stomach the solipsism of her delusions. No one is at Kate’s side as she voyages through time, apart from the reader. Some will balk at being asked to countenance such impossibilities, but more will be drawn into this uncanny dream of a story by Newman’s genius for summoning feeling. Ben compares his infatuation with Kate to “what magic had meant to him when he was a child, what he’d wanted when he’d dreamed about riding a dragon”. So Newman uses her off-kilter time-slipping plot to jump into the existential conundrums of love: what can we do when our beloved goes somewhere in their minds we cannot follow, what if romance is a dream-like figment that spoils real life by rendering it a poor shadow, why put so much store in love when it proves no match for the entropy of time? As The Heavens shows so movingly, there are no real answers to such questions, whether in our own time or any other. • The Heavens by Sandra Newman is published by Granta (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.