Ederson Superb. Yet again. Rushed out brilliantly to block Pereyra’s effort and later made one header from near centre-circle. The Brazilian ended the season in a flawless fashion. 9 Kyle Walker Showed initiative by running at Watford when he could – sometimes from his wrong flank along the left, the right-back was a fast-paced, muscular presence. 8 Vincent Kompany The captain came in for Nicolás Otamendi and was lucky not to concede a first-half penalty before entering cruise control as his team handed Watford a hiding. 8 Aymeric Laporte Had an early shot that was always rising and clipped Deeney but from then on was hardly troubled as has been the story for most of his season. 8 Oleksandr Zinchenko Ukrainian’s loose pass led to Pereyra’s early chance but this was the left-back’s sole aberration. Zinchenko ends the season as the rightful first-choice in the position. 7 Ilkay Gündogan His usual calm self, controlling proceedings from in front of the defence, the German was removed for what appeared an injury but can be proud of contribution. 8 Bernardo Silva Brilliant throughout. He was moved infield to partner David Silva and bombed in behind when could while also chipping to Jesus for latter’s goal. 9 David Silva Weight of pass was heavy at times but he will not forget his strike – a first of 2019, having not scored since 30 December. 8 Riyad Mahrez After scoring in title-winning game at Brighton the Algerian was given too much space to cause havoc along right but did not look happy to go off on 55 minutes. 7 Gabriel Jesus Was preferred by Guardiola to Sergio Agüero and what a day he had. Possibly had a goal denied by Sterling, created De Bruyne’s, then definitely scored. 9 Raheem Sterling Wow. Cute header into David Silva allowed the Spaniard’s goal and Sterling then went on to score at least twice and maybe thrice in a game he will never forget. 9 Substitutes Kevin De Bruyne for Mahrez 55. Was in the game instantly with cross then enjoyed a fine goal. 8 Leroy Sané for Gündogan 73. Will have enjoyed the on-field treble-celebration party. 6 John Stones for D Silva 79. Nearly scored at the close. 6 Heurelho Gomes Did his selection rather than No 1, Ben Foster, backfire? Yes. Dropped a Mahrez corner and though could do little about the opener he grasped only air for the second goal. 4 Kiko Femenía Outclassed. Was unlucky to deflect David Silva’s shot past Gomes but lost Jesus for the second and – like all teammates – ended well beaten and exhausted. 4 Adrian Mariappa Began by marshalling defence against City but, as so many find, they can only be resisted for so long. Will not wish to watch a re-run. 5 Craig Cathcart Distribution from back-to-front initially posed City questions yet, despite this, the Northern Irishman was one of a beleaguered rear-guard who became overrun. 5 José Holebas A day to forget. Had Mahrez to contain – not easy – but made horrendous mistake by failing to attack ball. What ensued was Kevin De Bruyne’s goal. 3 Will Hughes One error nearly led to Jesus chance and he and Capoue struggled – hardly surprisingly – to gain control from counterparts, the two scintillating Silvas. 5 Abdoulaye Doucouré Was booked after Kevin Friend turned down a penalty appeal when shot hit Kompany. Terrible mistake allowed City in and led to David Silva opener. 3 Étienne Capoue Gradually found matching up against City’s vaunted midfield daunting, here was an afternoon when, through no real fault of his own, he was thoroughly outclassed. 5 Roberto Pereyra Saw a gilt-edged opportunity attempt saved by Ederson and kept Walker honest throughout but was then left a spectator before being replaced on 65 minutes. 4 Gerard Deulofeu Following the Spaniard’s semi-final heroics he made some impact after the interval via one blazing run but missed a golden chance when clear in. Substituted. 5 Troy Deeney Captain was clobbered by Laporte and saw one ball bounce off him in area. Tried to be awkward to handle but problem was lack of chances. 5 Substitutes Andre Gray for Deulofeu 65. Could do nothing to make an impact. 5 Isaac Success for Pereyra 65. His 25 minutes passed him by. 5 Tom Cleverley for Hughes 73. Hardly came on at an ideal time. 5