As England prepare to head to Portugal for the Nations League finals, the Football Association has called for an end to the “embarrassing” behaviour that has blighted recent away matches. Much of the problematic activity is antisocial and distinct from the violent hooliganism that blighted England’s reputation during the 1970s and 80s. But 127 members have still been suspended from the England Supporters Travel Club (ESTC) in the past five years, with a further 237 of a total of 13,000 members having received a warning for their conduct. “It has been a great season for English football and England but we can’t ignore some of the antisocial and embarrassing behaviour that has crept back into the game,” said Martin Glenn, the FA’s chief executive. “There are thousands of brilliant supporters wherever our teams go, but there is an increasing problem that must be called out. We all have a responsibility to represent the country in the right way and that is what we are trying to highlight.” Before the Nations League, the governing body will launch an advertising campaign – featuring the slogan “Don’t Be That Idiot” – as they look to focus fans’ attention on their behaviour. “We have gone from the organised violence days to, more recently, a growing number who become involved in this antisocial behaviour. It is an easy tag to hang on it, but that is really what it is,” said Tony Conniford, teams and corporate security manager at the FA. “A lot of it is alcohol-fuelled and there almost becomes an acceptance that because you are at football, anything goes. I find that difficult to buy into and people need to have a look at themselves and start to think: ‘If my relatives, wife or children were here with me, would it be an enjoyable experience?’ And the answer is no.” As many as 18,000 fans, not all ESTC members, are expected to travel to Portugal next week, where England will play the Netherlands in Guimaraes on Thursday 6 June for a place in the final in Porto three days later. “If any member sees or any fan sees anyone behaving in a way that embarrasses the country and them as a football fan, we would welcome that being sent to us,” said Conniford. “If it’s someone I can deal with as a member then we will deal with them. If not, we’ll pass it on to the police.”