What were you hoping for?A fun evening, and the opportunity to get to know someone interesting. First impressions?He seemed really anxious. I thought he was having a bit of a nervous breakdown, so I tried to put him a bit more at ease by making a few jokes, which seemed to work. What did you talk about?Our backgrounds, jobs, dating experiences, music. Being two gay guys over 35, we’re both massive Madonna fans and had a thorough dissection of her new single. Any awkward moments?There was one point when he asked me my type and I mentioned I had a big thing for Spanish men. I hope he didn’t take that as a sign I wasn’t interested. Good table manners?Yes. Best thing about Chris?He was really inquisitive, has a great sense of humour and a spot-on taste in music. Would you introduce him to your friends? Yes. Describe Chris in three wordsFun. Easygoing. Cute ears. (OK, that’s more than three.) What do you think he made of you?He sent me a nice text afterwards saying he was interested in meeting again, so I guess he enjoyed the experience. Did you go on somewhere?No, by the time we finished dinner it was almost midnight. And... did you kiss?I never kiss and tell. Well, rarely. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Not a thing! Four hours flew by. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?I’m not sure there was a romantic spark, but I would be keen to meet up again. What were you hoping for?Not to look like Roald Dahl’s BFG in the picture. First impressions?Well-dressed, friendly, laid-back, my age (bonus). What did you talk about? Our mutual love of Arcade Fire (no one I date knows them and we discussed one song of theirs in some detail), the perils of dating apps, the lovely waitress. We did not tip her, which I am feeling some guilt about). Any awkward moments?Me arriving as a red, hot, sweaty mess and having some evident chest sweat. When I spilt red wine on my white top… fab! Good table manners? Perfect. Best thing about Rafael? He is really intelligent and funny – we had lots in common. Would you introduce him to your friends?Absolutely. Describe Rafael in three words?Intelligent, great company. What do you think he made of you? Northern, a waffler, a good laugh (I hope?). Did you go on somewhere?No, we were still gabbing at half eleven and it was a school night. And... did you kiss? No. Two manly, lovely hugs. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? That we had ordered more cocktails. Marks out of 10? 7.5. Would you meet again? Yes, as friends. • Rafael and Chris ate at Provisioners in the Dixon Hotel, London SE1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded visit soulmates.theguardian.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.