For Aston Villa, who are back in the big time, £170m richer and free from the demons that have tormented them ever since they lost in the play-off final 12 months ago, it was a day to remember. Prince William and John Carew hugged one another in the stands while Jack Grealish and his teammates celebrated wildly in front of the Villa fans, but the biggest and proudest smile belonged to the humble, down-to-earth man who has masterminded their return to the Premier League. Dean Smith, who grew up supporting Villa, was living the dream as he held aloft the trophy at the end of a long and emotional afternoon at Wembley. Appointed manager in October, and at a time when Villa were drifting along in mid-table, Smith presided over the club-record run of 10 successive league victories across March and April that propelled them into the play-offs. Now the 48-year-old has completed the job. It is a crying shame that Ron, his father who has dementia, could not enjoy the day as he would have in the past – the two would often go to Villa Park together in the 80s to watch their team – and it was hard not to think of that personal pain during those special scenes at the final whistle, when 40,000 supporters were singing Smith’s name. With so much at stake, this was always going to be a day of fine margins, yet it seemed as though Villa handled the tension around the occasion better than Derby, who never played with any real conviction until they were two goals down and chasing the game. Villa, as the Derby manager Frank Lampard ruefully reflected, scored those goals at crucial times, the first on the stroke of half-time through Anwar El Ghazi and the second shortly before the hour-mark, when Kelle Roos, the Derby goalkeeper, made one of those mistakes that tends to define matches. A ball that was hanging in the air should have been punched clear but Roos, who was standing on his six-yard line, tried to claim it with both hands. John McGinn, not for the first time this season, was in the right place at the right time and managed to get to the ball first and head it over the line. Villa tightened their grip on the game in the process. Lampard responded by introducing Jack Marriott, who had been expected to start after coming off the bench to score twice at Elland Road in the semi-final second leg win over Leeds, and the substitute had more than a helping hand in the goal that gave Derby late hope. Swivelling about 10 yards out, Marriott drilled a low shot that deflected off Martyn Waghorn, another Derby substitute, and beyond Jed Steer. With nine minutes to go and another seven of injury-time to be added – there was a long hold-up after Tyrone Mings had been unable to continue following a brilliantly timed tackle that the central defender made just before Derby’s goal – the opportunity was there for Lampard’s team to force extra time but Villa, to their credit, showed plenty of grit and resilience to hold on. Steer came to claim some important late crosses while at the other end Villa could have grabbed a third on the counterattack had Grealish been a bit more single-minded and elected to shoot instead of passing. Grealish, who managed to cut an eye when lifting the trophy at the end, was not at his influential best but there is no doubt that he embraces everything about playing in the Premier League. The Villa captain did have a small part in the opening goal, which was the best move of the first half by a distance, and ended with Conor Hourihane’s lofted pass releasing Albert Adomah in space on the right, where Ashley Cole, Derby’s 38-year-old left-back, was outnumbered. Adomah cut the ball back to Ahmed Elmohamady, who had so much time and space that he was able to take a touch before curling a lovely right-foot cross into the penalty area. Jayden Bogle, Derby’s right-back, was caught on his heels as El Ghazi, darting across his opponent, threw himself at a ball that went in off a shoulder. They all count – especially when it is the most lucrative game in world football. El Ghazi was also involved in Villa’s second, his shot looping up in the air after taking a deflection off Richard Keogh and leading to that moment when Roos, who really needed to be far more decisive, was beaten to the ball by McGinn, one of the smallest players on the pitch. Although Lampard’s three substitutions helped to shift the momentum a little and Derby’s late pressure was rewarded when Marriott’s shot flicked off Waghorn, nothing was going to spoil Villa’s day.