Tottenham have made a £53m bid for the Real Betis midfielder Giovani Lo Celso, whose impressive loan move to Andalucía from Paris Saint-Germain – with headline figures of 16 goals and six assists in 46 games in their midfield this season – was made permanent only last month. The Sevilla side have instantly rejected this meagre offer, and insist that his €100m (£88m) release clause must be met – which given that he was signed on 16 April for a mere €22m would land them a tidy €78m profit. According to our calculations should such a deal be concluded today Lo Celso would have made Betis around €1,231 for every minute they owned him. Spurs, meanwhile, will let Kieran Trippier leave for £30m and “Everton, Manchester United and Napoli are monitoring his situation”, according to the Mail, though the Sun insists he “will miss out on a summer move to Napoli” because the Italian club are “looking for a younger right-back”. Trippier is 28. In further profit-making news Bournemouth are interested in Liverpool’s Simon Mignolet, according to the Sun, which says that “the Reds are willing to let him go for £15m”. The phrase “willing to let him go” seems absurdly grudging in relation to a player who is six years older and in no way better than when Liverpool signed him in 2013, who played two games this season and lost them both and whose over-extended contract would otherwise be a drain on the club’s finances until 2021. The only surprising thing about this story is the fact that Mignolet’s performances over the six years since he arrived at Anfield have led someone in a position of responsibility to conclude that he is now worth £6m more than he was then. The Times, however, insists that Eddie Howe will instead put together a £30m deal for Stoke’s Jack Butland, which will see Asmir Begovic head the other way. The Cherries are expecting a call from Aston Villa about Tyrone Mings, who has been on loan at Villa Park, would cost about £15m and “was spotted at Bournemouth station yesterday still wearing his Villa kit and with his play-off medal around his neck”, according to the Times. Villa have also put £10m aside for Nottingham Forest’s Joe Lolley as they ramp up preparations for their Premier League return. Paul Pogba will take a €3m-a-year pay cut to get away from Manchester United and move instead to Real Madrid, according to veteran journalist Eduardo Inda on his Spanish TV programme, El Chiringuito de Jugones. Apparently the deal is “practically done” and will be announced shortly after Real’s other practically done deal, for Eden Hazard. Just last summer the Mill was full of tales of Sergej Milinkovic-Savic, Lazio’s Serb midfielder, but everything has fallen very quiet in Milinkovic-Savicworld over the past 10 months or so. Happily, he’s back! Today’s Gazzetta dello Sport says he could be off to Juventus for a tidy €60m. Staying in the same city, TuttoSport insists that Torino’s top summer transfer target is the Watford wideman Roberto Pereyra, who could thus be reunited with the former Watford manager Walter Mazzarri, now in the Turin dugout. And finally, Harry Wilson’s decision to follow his season on loan at Derby with a permanent move away from Liverpool has caused “interest from the Premier League, Bundesliga and La Liga”, according to the Mirror, with Crystal Palace apparently identifying him as “a possible replacement for Wilfried Zaha”.