Welcome to the World Cup. Thirteen years, seven England captains, assorted white‑ball revolutions and one frankly alarming opening ceremony in the making: England and Wales 2019 is finally up and running. On a lovely, soft, south-London day England and South Africa produced an absorbing game of cricket to complete the opening act of this seven-week, 50-over World Cup. England won, as most expected of this adrenal, bicep‑flexing, world No 1 team. Even better they won by grafting their way to a good total on a sticky pitch and reeling South Africa in with the ball. At 5.08pm, with the game narrowing towards its end we even got our News At Ten between‑the‑bongs moment. Perched out on the midwicket boundary Ben Stokes leapt, right arm raised at full extension, palm reversed, body twisted into a kind of no-look half-pike, and pulled out of the Oval air a flat hit from Andile Phehlukwayo just as the ball seemed to be flying into the crowd. It was both a moment of thrilling athleticism and a kind of cap on Stokes’s own progress to this point. The prep and practice down the decades, the ECB pathway years, the Bunbury nights with Rooty, the discipline issues on tour, the discipline issues at home. Here was a moment on day one of a home World Cup to add a layer of destiny to it all. Ben Stokes’s feat joins a long list of contenders for the title. Among English cricket’s other finest recent catches:Paul Collingwood England v Australia, third ODI, Jun 2005As Matthew Hayden produces a powerful cut, Collingwood soars high, arched back, and holds the ball tight. Hailed as one of the best catches of all time. Andrew StraussEngland v Australia, fourth Test, Aug 2005 Adam Gilchrist pushes at an Andrew Flintoff delivery, Strauss flings himself to his left and clings on. England win by three wickets and edge a stunning series 2-1. Sarah TaylorEngland v Australia, third ODI, Aug 2013 Wicketkeeper Taylor spots Jodie Fields attempting to reverse-sweep Dani Hazell and moves to right, sticking out a glove at full-stretch. A stunning take. Chris JordanWest Indies v England, first Test, April 2015 Having already taken one fine catch, Jordan throws himself to his right to take another off Darren Bravo when it appeared the ball had gone past him. Ben StokesEngland v Australia, fourth Test, Aug 2015 The moment that created the social media meme #Broadface. Stokes soars almost in slow motion to take a stunner. Bowler Stuart Broad is left astounded. James TaylorSouth Africa v England, third Test, Jan 2016Hashim Amla flicks a leg glance towards short-leg and Taylor, staying low, clings on just before the ball hits the ground. He takes another fine catch later on. Ben FoakesSri Lanka v England, second Test, Nov 2017 Short-leg Keaton Jennings anticipates batsman Adil Rashid’s flick behind square, dives to meet it one‑handed and parries it back towards Foakes. By the end this felt like the softest of landings for a tournament billed, in the usual style, as quiveringly vital to the future of the sport itself. Although it is worth noting that everything that worked here worked in a format the current ECB regime seems intent on pushing to the fringes – the longer white-ball game that has worked so brilliantly in this country over the past few years, and which the crowd (sorry: audience) clearly adore. But never mind logic or planning for now. The Oval was, as ever, a lovely stage for the big coming out. The stands were full, the crowd mixed, the mood one of basking pleasure. As England pulled the stitching out of the South African innings there were shouts and howls, a full-house entirely engrossed by the spectacle. Beneath all that, and no doubt just as vital to the sport’s ruling marketeers, this was another day of bravura consumption at the Oval. For most of the last century Surrey was the slightly dowdy south London cousin, known as the Working Men’s Club by the snobs of Lord’s. Its revenge has been expertly staged. Come city gents, affluent families and party-going crowds: the Oval is now English cricket’s great financial powerhouse, cash cow, and all-round leisure industry juggernaut. This is where London and its southern surrounds come to eat, drink, refill, eat again and generally bask in the fat of the urban land. At times on the big T20 nights the Oval can feel less like a sporting arena, more a vast state-of-the-art beer delivery system. Here it was in the flesh, a world of dirty burgers and buttermilk chicken, of twice-cooked duck‑fat chips, of ice cold rapid-pump lager; a world of men in straining polo shirts, scurrying kids tooled up with bats and flats, papoose-strapped toddlers and strolling gents with satchels. Get an audience, they said. Well, here’s one, ready-made. Around the Oval’s thoroughfares they paused and bathed in the sun. A pair of comedy-umpires in fake moustaches danced to disco music and bantered awkwardly with the crowd. Cricket-ball jugglers juggled cricket balls. A high-five machine invited you to high-five your team via a digital pressure pad. By the innings break the England pad had been high-fived by 5,563 passing hands, an excellent way of communicating not just fellowship and support but also colds, flu and any other kind of mild viral infection. The Oval is one extreme, cricket’s affluent, pre-converted heartland. But this works. People like the product. It can surely be replicated elsewhere, without the need to invent something new. The day had kicked off with a show of flags, some stirring music and a nice speech from Prince Harry about cultural diversity and every team feeling like they’re playing in front of a home crowd. Which is certainly a positive spin on 300 woozy people in green vests waving inflatable kangaroos and singing about Stuart Broad. There was a moment of double-take in the first over as Imran Tahir took out Jonny Bairstow. But Joe Root played beautifully for his fifty, as did Eoin Morgan, whose opening crunch through the cover gap brought the first gasps and purrs of the day. Trophy safely delivered ✅ #CWC19 pic.twitter.com/NYZ5zLOfIp England posted a workaday 311. They bowled with purpose in reply. Best of all Jofra Archer confirmed what was already clear, that he is a genuine sporting star – the kind of talent that seems to give off more light, more heat the bigger the stage. As Stokes took the final wicket the PA even tried to get a round of Three Lions (cricket version) going in the crowd, but nobody was really having it. Cricket’s coming home. A bit early for that old boy. But this was a fine start.