Allianz is to become the second biggest general insurer in Britain after taking over the general insurance businesses of Legal & General and LV= in transactions worth more than £800m. The deals will give the combined business 12 million general insurance customers in the UK, with a market share of 9% and putting Allianz behind only Aviva in size. The German insurer will pay £242m for the Legal & General business and £578m for a 51% stake in LV General Insurance Group (GIG) from the Liverpool Victoria Friendly Society (LVFS). In 2017 Allianz made its first major foray into the British insurance market, buying a 49% stake in LV’s general insurance business, to become the third biggest insurer in the market. Under the new deal, the Legal & General brand will be used for up to three years, during which time it will be combined into the LV GIG business, said Jon Dye, the chief executive of Allianz Insurance. The takeover will result in a total of 8,300 staff under the Allianz UK banner but Dye said it was too early to say whether there would be job cuts. “These businesses are complementary so it is certainly not a deal that is predicated on large numbers of job cuts but clearly it is far too early to say where this will all go,” he said. The transactions are due to be completed by the end of the year and will leave Allianz with a gross written premium income of £4bn. Legal & General has been focusing more heavily on its investment business and has been shedding non-core and overseas assets. It recently sold several of its international insurance and savings businesses, including those in Ireland and Germany. The bulk of the business being bought concerns home insurance, with a small book of pet insurance. The money from the sale will be reinvested into its core businesses, the company said. “Selling the general insurance business is the right decision for our customers and shareholders,” said the Legal & General chief executive, Nigel Wilson. “We continue to focus on delivering against our strategy, allocating shareholders’ capital rigorously.” Analysts said the deals appeared strategically sensible. “They show that Allianz is still deploying capital but perhaps without the grand ambitions that some were fearing last year,” said William Hawkins, an analyst at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods, in a note to clients.