I don’t remember being ordered to hug people when I was a child, but I remember being made to hold hands. Sweaty, papery, vice-like, limp – God, all the hands one has to hold as a child. It’s not a big deal. And of course it’s unavoidable, for safety, but I remember disliking it: the sense of obligation, and the fact you never knew what hand you would get. Long after the fact, there came a moment when I realised, merciful heaven, I didn’t have to hold any more hands. Hugs were different, a social necessity rather a safety measure, and in the 1970s and 80s (and probably 90s) they were also something from which you couldn’t opt out. Again, it didn’t seem like a big deal at the time. There were circumstances in which it was polite to offer a hug and polite to accept one. Weathering a bad hug meant standing still while someone crushed you vaguely to their midsection before wandering off to do something else. If you didn’t enjoy this, too bad. This isn’t the case now. These days there is something called bodily autonomy, which I know about thanks to a video. A friend sent it to me this week after a kerfuffle about hugging blew up with my kid. Hugs, in case you haven’t noticed, are the subject of a small but fiercely debated subsection of parenting that falls into the category of Things I Would Once Have Thought Ludicrous But About Which I Am Now Almost Entirely Deranged. Kids hug each other. And sometimes, in their exuberance, they knock each other down. Several years ago, a friend’s two-year-old was sent home from daycare with a note pointing out that he had hugged a friend and that the friend had felt “uncomfortable”. That was the language used, that of an HR investigation into mild sexual impropriety. My friend and I laughed and mocked the other mother for overreacting. It seemed part of the broader context in which people go around avoiding physical contact for fear of triggering a lawsuit. It seemed woefully precious. When an elderly friend asks my kids, in a wheedling fashion, “Do you have a hug for me?”, I don’t think it will kill them to oblige. That’s what I used to think. But then a kid hugged my kid and she didn’t like it. This happened several times. He asked to give her a kiss and she very rudely said no. A complaint came in from the kid’s parent that her rudeness had hurt his feelings. And off I went. My daughter was not put on this Earth to comfort your needy son, I thought, as if they were four-year-old players in some wild new chapter of #MeToo. I didn’t say this. I sent a measured response. She was protecting her son’s feelings and I was protecting my daughter’s, and this was a fuss over nothing. But it struck home more deeply than I might have anticipated. I showed my daughter the video about bodily autonomy and watched as she took it in. It was an animation showing kids how to politely decline unwanted physical contact. A lot of parenting culture is over-fussy, but this felt different: a new way of socialising – particularly girl children – to expand the range of what they can decently say no to. I was blindsided by how great it felt. • Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnist