Legal & General plans to build 3,000 retirement homes in city centres across the UK in the next five years in a radical move that could help counter the decline of the high street. The insurance and pensions group’s £2bn project is the first major push to bring purpose-built retirement homes to city centres, at a time when many high-street retailers are struggling to compete with online rivals and have gone out of business or been forced to shut stores. L&G has set up Guild Living, a development firm that will build thousands of one-, two- and three-bedroom apartments for older people across UK towns and cities, starting in Bath and Epsom in Surrey. A typical retirement village will have 200 apartments, mainly for sale, but with 10 to 20% of them earmarked as rentals. Sale prices will range from £250,000 to £1m. Phil Bayliss, the chairman of Guild Living and the chief executive of L&G’s Later Living division, said the company would take over poorly-performing retail sites in city centres and replace them with apartment blocks for the elderly. They will have shops, cafes and restaurants on the ground floor, as well as other facilities, including gyms, pools, GP surgeries and nurseries, all open to the local community. L&G wants to secure sites in cities including Edinburgh, Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol, Brighton and Hove, London, Cambridge and Oxford, Bayliss said. “Do we have a role in reviving high streets? Absolutely,” Bayliss said. “We will be bringing footfall back to cities, we will be bringing the elderly back.” He added the retirement villages would help counteract the growing problem of loneliness among older people. In Bath, L&G has bought a 2-hectare (4.5 hectare) site, with a Homebase store, near the city centre that it will knock down and replace with 250 apartments. A penthouse apartment is likely to cost £1m, but L&G said its homes would be affordable for 95% of homeowners in Bath. Its other, 1 hectare (3 acre) site in Epsom is located on disused hospital land, and its retirement village there will include flats for doctors and nurses working at the nearby hospital. The company hopes to start construction in Bath and Epsom early next year after getting planning permission, and to complete the developments by 2022. Currently, the vast majority of Britain’s purpose-built retirement communities are located in suburban areas or the countryside. A rare exception are LifeCare Residences’ luxury retirement villages opposite Battersea Park, in London, and in Dorchester, with another one planned in west Hampstead, London. L&G cited projections from the Office for National Statistics that indicate the number of people over the age of 85 living in the UK was set to double by 2041 and treble by 2066. By 2066 the number of people aged over 65 is predicted to increase by 8.6 million to 20.4 million and make up 26% of the British population. L&G has also been building retirement villages in leafy rural areas since acquiring Inspired Villages Group in 2017, and aims to construct 4,000 out-of-town retirement homes in the next five years.