Jofra Archer’s rapid rise was cemented on Tuesday morning when England’s selectors named the Barbados-born fast bowler in the 15-man squad for the Cricket World Cup. Archer’s impressive displays in his three ODI matches against Ireland and Pakistan have earned his call-up while David Willey is the unlucky player to miss out having been named in the provisional squad despite the experience garnered in collecting 46 caps in four years. Archer revealed how we got the news of his selection to Sky Sports News: “I got a call from Ed Smith yesterday, about 6pm or so. I was driving at the time and I felt the phone vibrate, I answered without looking and he introduced himself. It was really, really exciting to be part of a big summer for English cricket,” he said. “I had put it in my head that I would have to wait seven years and back in December they changed it. I was prepared to wait for however long it would have taken. I think I am ready, I have played a lot of cricket outside of 50 overs. I know how to deal with the pressure and crowds. “I probably have a bigger advantage over some of the other guys in our team, you play them twice a game in the IPL and you know their strengths and weaknesses and if they can run between the wickets. I think international cricket is the same intensity as IPL, all that has changed is the amount of overs. Everyone has welcomed me with open arms since the day that I got in. It is a great team to be a part of.” The national selector, Ed Smith, also announced that Hampshire’s Liam Dawson has made the squad as the back-up spinner in preference to Joe Denly. The third change from the preliminary squad sees James Vince take the place of Alex Hales, who was deselected after failing a second recreational drugs test. Smith described Archer as an “outstanding talent” and lamenting the fact England had more players than they could accommodate as he recounted telling Willey had had not made the cut. “We’ve seen Jofra Archer play against Pakistan and we’ve seen the skills he has,” Smith told Sky Sports News. “It’s pretty straightforward. He’s an outstanding talent, that’s clear to all of us. He has pace, bounce, skill.” Smith added: “I spoke to David, he’s an outstanding man. He’s very honest, dignified. He’s a very impressive man and cricketer. The new-ball area is strong and David Willey was unfortunate. He could easily have been in the World Cup squad, he deserved to be in. It was a very difficult situation we were in as a panel. We had more players than we were allowed.” Dawson has not been involved with England since sustaining a side strain during October’s limited-overs tour of Sri Lanka. The 29-year-old left-arm spinner has been selected off the back of his county form, claiming 18 wickets and averaging 45 with the bat during Hampshire’s run to the Royal London One-Day Cup final. Smith added that Dawson got the nod over Denly largely to cover for premier spinner Adil Rashid having a “little niggle”. “Hopefully he’ll be fine and he plays a full part in the competition, but that slightly tilts things towards spin bowling cover as a priority,” Smith said. Eoin Morgan (Middlesex, captain), Moeen Ali (Worcestershire), Jofra Archer (Sussex), Jonny Bairstow (Yorkshire), Jos Buttler (Lancashire), Tom Curran (Surrey), Liam Dawson (Hampshire), Liam Plunkett (Surrey), Adil Rashid (Yorkshire), Joe Root (Yorkshire), Jason Roy (Surrey), Ben Stokes (Durham), James Vince (Hampshire), Chris Woakes (Warwickshire), Mark Wood (Durham). 