Switzerland is partying, sequin-clad dancers whirling on a vast screen. Russia is staging an elaborate homage to Rembrandt. But between them – or rather between their national pavilions in the public gardens of Venice – Venezuela is deserted and padlocked shut. The Venice Biennale, the art world’s most celebrated international event, is due to open to the public on Saturday, and the venues have already thrown open their doors to curators, artists, museum directors, press and collectors. But not Venezuela’s pavilion. Winter leaves are piled up in the courtyard; discarded building materials and rubbish are heaped at the side. A spokeswoman from the Venice Biennale said that “because of the situation the Venezuelan team is still working on their set-up. They have asked us to say that they will probably open two days late on 13 May”. In the past two weeks Venezuela has experienced a series of political shocks, as supporters of Juan Guaidó, the head of the national assembly recognised by most western powers as the country’s rightful leader, failed to seize power from Nicolás Maduro’s socialist government. To open on 13 May would mean a particularly fast turnaround for the Venezuelan team. Most exhibitions at the Biennale take several weeks to install, not a handful of days. The planned exhibition, Metaphor of Three Windows, is due to be curated by the poet and editor Óscar Sottillo Meneses, Venezuela’s vice-minister for cultural identity and diversity. The participating artists have been announced as Natalie Rocha Capiello, Ricardo García, Gabriel López, Nelson Rangelosky. The artists and curator were contacted for comment. Rocha Capiello said that while she would be happy to speak about her work once it was on show, she was unable to comment officially “until the situation about Venezuela’s involvement on the Biennale is clear”. Speaking to the Venezuelan press last week, García spoke of his enthusiasm for the Venice Biennale, describing it as “it is a window through which the world can see what is happening right now in the world of art”. He said he would soon be departing for Italy. The Venezuelan pavilion is one of the most notable in the Venice Giardini, the main location of the Biennale. Standing prominently on the main avenue leading up to the British pavilion, it is an architectural masterpiece designed by the Venetian modernist Carlo Scarpa, dating from 1953-6.