In April, only a month before the World Cup, the Afghan cricket board decided to replace the eponymous national team captain, Asghar Afghan. Afghan had been the captain for all three formats for almost four years, leading them in 56 ODIs, 46 T20 internationals and their first two Tests – including their maiden victory over Ireland, his last game as a captain. His surprise replacement was the 28-year-old all-rounder Gulbadin Naib who has been in and out the side since he was 18 without cementing his place. This is not least because of constant comparisons with fellow all-rounder Karim Janat, the younger brother of the previous captain, in the past few years. Karim Janat, though, is now only on the reserves players list for the World Cup squad. Naib may enjoy bowling in English conditions given his usual line and length, plus his offcutters. He has also batted in almost every position and averages more than 22 at the crease. ACB officials were of the view that such a dramatic change just before a World Cup would be beneficial, but the decision was questioned by Afghanistan’s best-known players Rashid Khan and Mohammad Nabi – at least initially. As the tournament has grown closer, however, they have kept silent. ICC ODI ranking 10 (as of 6 May)Captain Gulbadin Naib, leftCoach Phil SimmonsWorld Cup best Group stage 2015 Fixtures (10.30am unless stated)1 June v Australia, Bristol (1.30pm)4 June v Sri Lanka, Cardiff8 June v New Zealand, Taunton (1.30pm)15 June v South Africa, Cardiff (1.30pm)18 June v England, Old Trafford22 June v India, Southampton24 June v Bangladesh, Southampton29 June v Pakistan, Headingley4 July v West Indies, Headingley Upon his appointment, Naib declared that he would listen to his team. But having never led any sort of senior side, taking on the full ODI team is a big leap. Indeed when Afghan was injured in March 2018, it was Rashid who was appointed captain in his absence for World Cup qualifiers in Zimbabwe. However, this seemed to destabilise Khan – he was well below his best and Afghanistan lost three games. When Afghan returned they went on a run of wins all the way to the final, beating West Indies twice. When asked about their aim for the World Cup, the chief selector, Dawlat Ahmadzai, said Afghanistan’s mission is to play inspirational cricket: “We hope to play great cricket without any fear and with a fighting spirit. I know there are strong teams but we will do our level best to achieve our goals.” Fearlessness, fighting spirt and, above all, Asian conditions helped Afghanistan achieve three major upsets last September, beating Bangladesh and Sri Lanka and securing a draw against India – all due to excellent spin bowling and playing all their allocated overs. In England they will also need fast bowlers to deliver and batsmen to click and play all 50 overs with a reasonable run rate – something they have struggled to manage outside Asia. Afghanistan have relied on a trio of spinners since the 2015 World Cup. Mujeeb or Nabi have even opened the bowling while Rashid – currently the world No1 ranked one-day allrounder – is the main weapon and the leading wicket taker for Afghanistan in this format. Some suggest that English conditions may not suit this strategy. Captain Naib will need at least two or three seamers. Accommodating all three spinners or going for an extra fast bowler is a headache for the Afghan team. English conditions may also prove hard for the Afghan batsmen. Rashid and Mujeb Rahman are playing for the first time in a World Cup for the senior team, but over the past two years they have played in almost all major T20 leagues around the world. Both of them are ranked in the top 10 ODI bowlers by the ICC. With bowling such a strength, the Afghan team’s ideal scenario would be to put runs on the board first and then restrict their opponents with their high-class spin attack. Rashid Khan is the key man for Afghanistan but they need some of their hard hitting batsmen to perform. The 21-year-old left-handed opening batsman, Hazratullah Zazai, is someone who has the potential to shine and give a good start to the Afghan team. Nicknamed “the Afghan Chris Gayle”, he is known for hitting huge sixes and in his short ODI career his strike rate is more than 100. In February he scored the second highest total at an international T20, by smashing 16 sixes in an unbeaten 162 against Ireland. If he clicks, he will be a revelation to many around the world. The Afghan battling line-up, explosive yet prone to collapse, will be bolstered by Rahmat Shah. This technically gifted and consistent batsman has the highest average among the Afghan players in both ODI and Test matches. Taking into account the English conditions, the team’s lack of experience and heavy reliance on spin bowling, Afghanistan may struggle to win more than the one game they managed to win in 2015. Afghanistan will target Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, but if their batsmen cope with English conditions, they are capable of giving a hard time to any team on their day. Emal Pasarly is the multimedia editor of the BBC News Afghan service and author of “History of Afghan Cricket” (in Pashto)