Should women with naturally elevated levels of testosterone be able to compete in women’s events? That’s the question with which athletics has been grappling over the past decade. Last week, the Court of Arbitration for Sport (Cas), international sport’s highest court, ruled that such athletes could be banned unless they took medication to reduce their testosterone levels. The Cas case had been brought by Caster Semenya, the South African Olympic champion, who, after winning her stunning 30th consecutive 800m victory in Doha on Friday, insisted that she would carry on racing in middle distance events, but would not take testosterone-reducing medication. From the moment she burst on to the international stage a decade ago, questions were raised about her sex. Semenya is hyperandrogenic – she has a much higher level of testosterone than most women. Most people accept the case for separate male and female categories in sporting events in which physical prowess matters The IAAF, the governing body of international athletics, defines athletes like her as having “a difference of sexual development (DSD)”. And last year, it introduced regulations forcing such athletes to reduce their testosterone levels if they wished to compete in certain events. Semenya challenged this in court. Cas described the rules as “discriminatory”. But, it added, such discrimination is “necessary, reasonable and proportionate”. If that sounds confused, it is. Most people accept the case for separate male and female categories in sporting events in which physical prowess matters. Defining who belongs to the two categories has, however, created much debate. Different methods have been adopted, from crude physical inspections to genetic tests. All have proved unsatisfactory. The latest dividing line is functional testosterone. Testosterone levels in women are, in most circumstances, lower than in men. So the IAAF decided to limit the testosterone level that makes women eligible for certain events. The trouble is, while all male elite athletes lie in the high testosterone band and most female athletes fall into the lower testosterone class, a few women, such as Semenya, have elevated levels that take them into the “male” category. The IAAF suggests that excluding such women, or forcing them to reduce testosterone levels, helps create a level playing field and protects the integrity of women’s sports. That’s why Cas accepted IAAF regulations as necessary, reasonable and proportionate, even if discriminatory. Elite sport, by definition, is an uneven playing field. The best athletes are not like the rest of us Testosterone certainly aids athletic performance, increasing muscle bulk and the number of red blood cells. Hyperandrogenic women have an advantage over athletes whose testosterone is in the “normal” range. But why is that unfair? Elite sport, by definition, is an uneven playing field. From Dina Asher-Smith to Lionel Messi, the best athletes are not like the rest of us. That difference is partly due to genetic traits. Why should Semenya not be able to take advantage of her genetic attributes, as every other athlete does? If the debate about hyperandrogenic athletes has caused controversy, that over transgender athletes is generating an even fiercer storm. Prominent female athletes, from Paula Radcliffe to Martina Navratilova, have raised fears about transgender athletes similar to those about hyperandrogenic ones. While the two debates are linked, the contexts are different. Semenya was born and has lived as a woman but happens to have naturally high testosterone levels. Female transgender athletes, such as the cyclist Rachel McKinnon, were born and lived as males but have transitioned to being female. Many trans activists argue that anyone who identifies as female should be allowed to compete in women’s sport. Critics argue that, given the advantages conferred by a male physique, it would be unfair to allow anyone who has been through male puberty to compete as a woman, even if they have transitioned from male to female by taking hormone treatment. Neither claim seems reasonable. From the perspective of fairness and justice, it would be wrong simply to allow self-identified women who have the physical attributes of men to compete in women’s events. It would be equally wrong to have a blanket ban on transgender women competing in female sports. There is little evidence either of trans athletes dominating sport (there has not been a single trans Olympian) or of athletes who have transitioned from male to female continuing to have an advantage over those born female. The latest International Olympic Committee regulations allow transgender women to participate so long as they have taken hormone therapy to reduce their testosterone level to below a set figure for at least a year. These rules have been criticised from both sides. For some, they place too great a burden on transgender athletes; for others, they make it too easy for athletes not born as women to compete in women’s events. There is a debate to be had over these issues. What seems indisputable, though, is that some such regulations are required. Whereas the IAAF’s hyperandrogenic rules are irrational and discriminatory, regulations allowing transgender athletes to compete under certain conditions do seem “necessary, reasonable and proportionate”. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnist