Brian Walden was as pioneering and influential a figure in political broadcasting as David Attenborough in natural history television. That Walden was less treasured by and familiar to the general public is due to there being less popular interest in Westminster than wildlife. His profile was also further lowered by the decision, very unusual among big TV beasts, to voluntarily walk away from his ITV political talk show Weekend World, in 1986, aged just 54. He fronted later ITV franchises The Walden Interview (1988-90) and Walden (1990-94) – the very names of which prove just how famous he was – then retired to the Channel Islands in his early 60s, remaining almost completely absent from our screens for the last quarter-century of his life. But Walden and his long-time BBC rival, Robin Day, were the fathers of the heavyweight political interview, and their examples are still followed across the board. However, where Day was a natural showman with a repertoire of incredulous expressions and even a costume (bow-tie, heavy-framed spectacles), Walden favoured standard blue business suits and persistence. A key part of his performance took place off-screen, working through mountain ranges of cuttings, government bills and the parliamentary record, Hansard. On Weekend World, 284 episodes of which he hosted between 1974 and ‘86, Walden became a key proponent of the “mission to explain”, a style of forensic journalism promoted at London Weekend Television. And he was a natural explanatory missionary. As a Labour MP in Birmingham from 1964-77, he was noted for a desire to engage patiently with voters, even on topics as toxic at the time as race relations, in the city where Enoch Powell made his shamefully racist ‘rivers of blood’ speech in 1968. One of Walden’s political passions was reform of the pension and national insurance system. Discovering on doorsteps that most voters believed that, somewhere in Whitehall, there was a pot of money with their name on containing the contributions they had made, Walden would explain that the “National Insurance Fund” was rhetorical, with pensions and other welfare payments having to be found each year out of general government expenditure. He cheerfully admitted that almost no one ever believed him – most conversations on the subject ended with him being warned to “keep your hands off my pot” – but it was a measure of his logical, intellectual approach that Walden sought to educate the electorate in the truth. Perhaps realising that politicians might be more responsive to his probing than voters, he resigned from parliament in 1977 to join Weekend World, on which he had already appeared, full-time. During his 13 years as a Labour MP, his party was in power for nine, a consistency that Labour had never previously achieved, and never would again until Tony Blair took power in 1997. For 90% of Walden’s interviewing career, prime ministerial guests were always Tories: Margaret Thatcher and John Major. Thatcher, with 15 appearances, jointly held with two chancellors (Labour’s Dennis Healey, the Tories’ Geoffrey Howe) the record as Walden’s most frequent guests. All three considered themselves intellectuals, and enjoyed the chess-like progress of a Walden interview. His favoured method was to ask the politician to agree with an escalating series of propositions (“Would you agree that …?) before closing the trap: “So if you accept A, B, and C, then surely you must accept that …?” The closest he had to a catchphrase was, “Ah, yes, but first let me bring you back to”, employed when the interviewee tried to evade one of the systematic series of hooks. Heaven help any politician who lacked a comeback. It’s tempting to wonder what light Walden, at his peak, might have shed on the Brexit situation. Apart from the fact that, as a committed EU-leaver, he would have to recuse himself from the subject under broadcasting rules, the long, forensic political TV interview is now dead. Its killers include the rise, in schedules nervous of losing viewers, of the multi-item magazine approach, and the increasing reluctance of leaders to submit to extended questioning. Even if Walden had been available to interview Theresa May or Jeremy Corbyn, their media handlers would have done anything to stop the encounters happening. Among the next generation of political interviewers, Andrew Neil is the most obvious adopter of Walden’s methodical interrogative style, with Jeremy Paxman and John Humphrys more following the theatrical attitudinising of Day. Walden’s work in TV will never have the afterlife of an Attenborough because it’s hard to imagine a large audience for a box set of his chats with now largely forgotten legislators. However, with his most celebrated jousting partner, Margaret Thatcher, sure to remain of interest to biographers and history students, researchers will learn much from the 15 hours of her in Walden’s hot seat. And anyone hoping to become a successful interviewer can learn from Walden’s rules: read everything, listen hard to the answers, and ask, then re-ask, firmly and politely.