Possibly the most prolific serial killer in US history, Samuel Little claims to have murdered more than 90 women across the US over a 40-year period before DNA evidence led to his conviction in 2014. On a journey from California to Mississippi, film-maker Ben Zand delineates the extraordinary story of how this dangerous, deluded drifter managed to remain on the loose for so long. An unnerving, compelling documentary unafraid to ask important questions about the US criminal justice system. Mike Bradley MasterChef meets The Chase in this new series in which amateurs compete against pros to win up to £10,000. Its secret weapon is presenter Andi Oliver, with her infectious enthusiasm and warmth. She will be on hand as Women’s Institute president Rachel has a cook-off with Michelin-starred chef Mark Sargeant. Hannah Verdier It will be good to see Chris Packham out of the headlines and back doing what he loves best. This week, he joins Iolo Williams and Michaela Strachan to present the first of four nightly nature reports from their base in the Cairngorms and launch the largest Springwatch citizen science project to date. MB Michael Buerk, Angellica Bell and Rob Bell’s series fits the current vogue for telling individual stories to illustrate big history: we are in Liverpool in May 1941, where the Luftwaffe is creating life-changing trauma for people of all walks of life. Cutting between a handful of tales keeps the interest up. Jack Seale The return of the show that explores the national parks of the Lake District and Yorkshire Dales, and meets the locals. Tonight, boat builder Hamish Paterson puts an Edwardian steam vessel through its paces on Windermere, and a father and daughter scale a Cumbrian crag. Ali Catterall For a change, the most surprising thing about Matt David’s film about a Brighton sex-shop empire is not the anal zeppelins, double dongs or even the scary “milking machines”, but the fact that it is a family-run business. Meet Tim Richardson and his unshockable tribe as they gear up for a busy Valentine’s Day. MB You Were Never Really Here, 11.20pm, Film4 There is a lot of Travis Bickle in Joaquin Phoenix’s antihero Joe, especially when the private security enforcer is commissioned to use his brutally efficient skills to rescue politician’s daughter Nina (Ekaterina Samsonov) from sex traffickers. Lynne Ramsay’s drama has an eerie, dreamlike quality. Paul Howlett Tennis: The French Open, 10am, ITV4 The second day of the tournament from Paris. ODI Cricket: England v Afghanistan, 10.20am, Sky Sports Cricket A World Cup warm-up game from the Oval. Championship Football: Derby County v Aston Villa, 2pm, Sky Sports Main Event The play-off final from Wembley.