The Philippines has made good on a threat by President Rodrigo Duterte and put 69 containers of what its officials called illegally transported garbage on a ship that is heading to Canada. The nation is one of two in south-east Asia that have protested being treated like dumpsites by wealthier countries. Administrator Wilma Eisma of Subic Bay freeport said the tonnes of garbage were loaded overnight on the container ship M/V Bavaria, which left on a 20-day journey to the Canadian port city of Vancouver. She said the move ended a “sordid chapter in our history”. The Bavaria would stop at a Taiwanese port before heading to Canada, she said. Environmental activists, including those from Greenpeace and EcoWaste Coalition, welcomed the Bavaria’s arrival at Subic Bay, and on Thursday sailed on board a small outrigger with a streamer reading, “Philippines: not a garbage dumping ground!” “Baaaaaaaaa bye, as we say it,” foreign secretary Teodoro Locsin wrote on Twitter, along with images of the vessel leaving. Canada’s environment minister Catherine McKenna welcomed the news of the trash being returned, telling reporters on Thursday: “We committed with the Philippines and we’re working closely with them.” Duterte had threatened to forcibly ship back the trash, which officials said was transported to the Philippines in 103 containers in 2013 to 2014, and falsely declared as recyclable plastic scraps. Several containers of the rubbish had been disposed off, including in a landfill, leaving 69 containers of electrical and household waste, including used diapers, rotting in two Philippine ports. The Philippine government recalled its ambassador and consuls in Canada over Ottawa’s failure to comply with a 15 May deadline to take back the waste. The return of the garbage removes a six-year thorn in relations between the two countries, especially under Duterte, a temperamental leader who took office in mid-2016. He has resented international criticism, including by the Canadian prime ministerm Justin Trudeau, of his bloody crackdown on illegal drugs that has left thousands of mostly poor suspects dead. The countries had sought to resolve the problem for years, with Trudeau saying in 2017 that legal issues preventing the return of the garbage had been resolved. Last week McKenna said the government had awarded a contract to French shipping giant Bollore Logistics Canada, calling for the return of the containers by the end of June. But presidential spokesman Salvador Panelo rejected the plan, saying the Duterte administration would look for a private shipping company to transport the garbage sooner. “If Canada will not accept their trash, we will leave the same within its territorial waters,” Panelo said. “The president’s stance is as principled as it is uncompromising: The Philippines as an independent sovereign nation must not be treated as trash by other foreign nations.” The Malaysian prime minister, Mahathir Mohamad, has also criticizsd the practice of wealthier countries such as the United States, Canada and Japan sending their non-recyclable waste to poorer countries. China banned the import of plastic waste in 2018, causing it to be diverted to other south-east Asian nations.