Samit Patel’s unbeaten century and Alex Hales’ return ensured Nottinghamshire secured a home Royal London One-Day Cup semi-final by the barest of margins after they defeated Northamptonshire by one wicket at Wantage Road. Patel hit a career-best 136 from 124 balls and saved his best for last when he crashed 14 from the first three balls of the final over from Ben Sanderson to drag his side over the line. Nottinghamshire had looked set to concede top position in the North Group when they slipped to 116 for five in pursuit of 326 for victory. Their sense of desperation grew as second-placed Worcestershire – North Group winners for the past two seasons – were embarking on a successful chase of 351 for nine against Derbyshire on the back of a whirlwind century from Riki Wessels. But Patel stood firm as he first pieced the innings back together in a 111-run sixth-wicket stand with Tom Moores before taking control of matters alongside the tail to see his side home. Hales looked in good touch before falling for 36 in his first innings of the season. He will miss this summer’s World Cup after reportedly failing a second test for recreational drugs and England decided to remove him from all squads. After serving a 21-day suspension Nottinghamshire made him available for all white-ball cricket and after Friday’s washout against Durham, this was the 30-year-old’s first opportunity at the crease. Hales came to the wicket at 19 for one after Joe Clarke fell and struck six boundaries from 43 balls before he chopped Luke Procter on to his own stumps when attempting to work him down to third man. Worcestershire therefore had to be content with second place after Wessels produced a memorable display of hitting in front of the television cameras at Derby. The 33-year-old right-hander cleared the ropes 11 times, in addition to 10 fours, in his 130 from 62 balls. Callum Ferguson’s unbeaten 103 from 95 balls appeared sedate by comparison but crucially guided Worcestershire to a four-wicket win. Derbyshire had two centurions of their own with Luis Reece and Wayne Madsen sharing a 222-run stand after the hosts had been one for one. Lancashire claimed the final play-off place in the North Group after Durham were left frustrated by rain for the second time in a week. Durham needed victory to progress – after their midweek match away to Nottinghamshire had been washed out – and had reached 182 for two against Yorkshire before the weather set in at Headingley to leave them with a point that was not enough. Tom Taylor starred with bat and ball as Leicestershire finished their campaign with a 36-run win against Warwickshire at the Fischer County Ground. The 24-year-old all-rounder struck a career-best unbeaten 98 from 56 balls before claiming three for 58 as the Bears were bowled out for 304.