Real Madrid have responded angrily to an apparently lighthearted comment by Tottenham’s manager, Mauricio Pochettino, that the London club were denied permission to stay at their training ground before the Champions League final. Spurs are set to use the training complex at Valdebebas in the build-up to the match against Liverpool in the Spanish capital on 1 June. In a response to the Spanish radio sports podcast El Partidazo de Cope, Pochettino had said the Real Madrid president, Florentino Pérez, turned down a request to let the squad sleep at Real Madrid’s sports centre. “I asked Florentino to let us sleep in the sports centre, but he told me that I can only sleep there when I become the coach of Real Madrid,” he said. This prompted a statement from Madrid on Friday, which read: “Real Madrid CF is surprised by the demonstrations made by the coach of Tottenham Hotspur, Mauricio Pochettino, about a supposed request made to our club so that his team could stay in the residence of the Real Madrid City on the occasion of the final of the Champions League. Real Madrid CF wants to make it clear that it is outright false that this request was produced. Our club has always shown its absolute availability to meet all the requests made by Uefa, the Royal Spanish Football Federation, Club Atlético de Madrid, Liverpool FC and Tottenham Hotspur.” Madrid’s statement continued: “All requests submitted to Real Madrid have referred only and exclusively to the use of the training camps of the Ciudad Real Madrid and its changing rooms. And all of them have been granted by our club. Thus, Liverpool plans to train in our facilities on Saturday 1 June in the morning. Tottenham, for its part, will do so on Thursday, 30 May and Friday 31 May. “Real Madrid CF also wants to emphasise that the accommodation of the finalist teams of the Champions League are assigned by Uefa following criteria of organisation and security. And that at no time has our club been requested that these teams could be accommodated in the facilities of Ciudad Real Madrid.”