Such has been the expectation placed on Derby County over the last few years, you might expect a play-off place to be the minimum asked of Frank Lampard’s side. But in reality the confirmation of their top six spot, achieved by this 3-1 win over West Brom, represents a significant achievement for a first-year manager with a young and imbalanced squad. “Leeds United, we’re coming for you,” sang the home fans, in anticipation of the delicious play-off semi-final ahead. Over the next few days you’ll no doubt hear conciliatory words claiming “Spygate” is forgotten, but the two legs will a pair of games laced with needle. Cancel your plans. Much like the season as a whole, there were moments when it did not look like Derby would make it, with Middlesbrough strolling to victory at Rotherham, but goals from Martyn Waghorn, Mason Bennett and Harry Wilson were enough in the end. For West Brom, their outside chance of finishing third and a more straightforward semi-final than against Aston Villa disappeared, but this performance had an end of season vibe, with a few fans in the away end dressed as the Ideal Boiler Man, the remarkable mascot of their shirt sponsors that is simply a combi boiler with arms and legs. And it was clear which team was more relaxed in the early stages. Derby looked edgy and were lucky that West Brom didn’t take the lead in the 12th minute when Jacob Murphy had just the keeper to beat, but somehow skewed his shot wide. Lampard paced the technical area like a man who wished he could put some boots on and sort all this out on the pitch. But he needn’t have worried. Derby took the lead after 20 minutes with their first clear opportunity, as Jadon Bogle crossed beautifully on the run from the right touchline, Waghorn found just enough space in the middle and glanced a perfect header into the bottom corner. Bogle was a constant threat on the right, the very essence of a modern full-back who spends most of his time zipping up the flank. Derby looked for him at every opportunity, enjoying the space afforded by West Brom’s 3-4-3 system. Waghorn had another header, this time straight at Sam Johnston in the Baggies goal, and aside from another golden chance wasted by the visitors – Dwight Gayle this time – Derby looked to have overcome their early nerves and were in control. The only fly in the ointment was Waghorn limping off just before the break, having tried twice to run off an ankle problem before giving in at the third attempt. Nerves may also have crept in had the news that Middlesbrough were 2-0 up reached the players, but Derby went in at half-time ahead. But that lead lasted 90 seconds into the second half. The Derby defence stood off Stefan Johansen and he used the time and space to whip a superb curling shot into the corner. From a position of relative comfort, suddenly the Rams had slipped out of the play-off spots and absolutely everything was frantic. Derby came close through a dipping, swerving Mason Mount shot and had an effort cleared off the line from the subsequent corner. The tension grew, many in the stands fell silent, only opening their lungs to curse Johnstone for some flamboyant timewasting. And then, just as in the first half, the nerves were washed away. Firstly Lawrence broke into the area, shot straight at Johnstone only for substitute Mason Bennett, the homegrown lad who made his debut aged just 15, to force home. Then, a few moments later, Lawrence brilliantly cut in from the left, beat two men then tumbled after a challenge from a third. It wasn’t immediately clear how much contact – if any – there was, but that mattered not a bit to Wilson, who slotted the penalty home and the whole team charged to the corner to pile on him in celebration. After the goal, Lampard quietly advised a ballboy to take his time ahead of a throw, but again there was no need, West Brom with little need or desire to chase the game, although substitute Hal Robson-Kanu somehow managed to get himself sent off. To the play-offs, then.