The changing rooms are massive, so nobody’s going to be disappointed by the facilities, and the wicket is generally very good. Out of all the grounds in England it can be kind to the spin bowler, with proper turn and bounce – but English turn and bounce, rather than the lower and slower turn you can get on the subcontinent. After the recent redevelopment it now feels like a proper arena and games are always really well supported, particularly when any of the Asian sides are involved. The changing rooms are very small, which is the first hurdle. Particularly for an international team, with their large squads and backup staff, it’s going to be really tough just to get everybody in there. The boundaries are very small at both ends of the wicket, especially with the temporary stands in, so bowlers will want to get hit square. It is generally a low pitch, with not a lot of bounce – perhaps a bit more from the Pavilion End –, so it suits skiddy bowlers, bowling back of a length. Spinners will find life difficult because the ground is so small. Sophia Gardens is a very small ground straight but massive on both sides, so you want to get hit over midwicket or extra cover. There’s a slope that runs across the field rather than from one end to the other, which can take bowlers a bit of time to get used to. It can be a blustery ground as well. If the weather’s inclement, it can be a bit tacky, which is when the spinners will come into play. Because it is such a big ground it feels very open. When you are in the middle, the playing surface seems absolutely massive and you can score a lot more twos and threes. Tourists from hot countries, where they are maybe not used to playing in a lot of wind, can find it a difficult place to go. The pitches are normally pretty flat and probably suit batting but, if you get a bit of cloud cover and the wind coming in, the bowlers will have some encouragement. It feels a bit more like an Australian stadium with it having the grass banks on one side. Overall it can be a belter for batting but the big boundaries level the fight a bit. There is a bit of a myth about Headingley that the ball will always seam and zip around. Actually the pitches have got better over the last 10 years and are now pretty good and flat, and you often get an even contest between bat and ball. Fast bowlers will like the fact the ball goes through, especially bowling up the hill. You’ll get a good crowd at Headingley, but very partisan. They’ll get in the players’ ears and have a good time. Surrey have tried to leave a bit more grass on their pitches over the past few years, both for domestic and international cricket, which means the ball can go through. It has a reputation as a spinner’s paradise, dating back to Laker and Lock, but actually spin bowling on the one-day pitches can be a nightmare if it has that pace and carry. India played Pakistan there a couple of years ago with Ashwin and Jadeja and they got walloped. The tall, fast bowlers will get nice bounce, tennis-ball bounce. Boundaries are quite even and quite big, so expect high-scoring games but with plenty in it for the bowler. The home dressing room has just been redone, Wembley football style. It is pretty amazing in there now. When you go to Lord’s you cannot ignore the history. That does add some extra pressure, and some people won’t like it, but the big players will want to get on the honours board. People who have not played there might struggle with the slope, which does push you away from the stumps if you’re coming in from the Nursery End. Generally the boundaries are quite small square but quite big straight, so bowlers will want to get hit down the ground. The pitches are interesting – it seems to be pot luck what you rock up and get. It is not traditionally anything any more, but over the last seven or eight years it has spun a decent amount. The changing rooms are pretty good – the shower rooms are very ornate and beautiful – and the food is world renowned. This is probably the one ground where spin normally does play quite a big part. There is a big playing surface and, with the new stands, the wind is not quite as pronounced as it used to be, particularly with the big temporary stand they put up by the nets. The ground is often very dry and this is probably a place where you have a chance of reverse swing, so teams adept at getting the ball scuffed up on one side will like playing there. The changing rooms are brand new and have a more industrial feel . It is quite cool and funky compared with the more traditional style of Lord’s. The changing rooms are relatively small but somehow, because of the history of the ground, you can put logistics to the back of your mind. The dimensions have changed drastically with the new stands, so you can get some very small pockets to target – generally over extra cover or backward square-leg, on the left‑hand side when you are looking out from the pavilion. Bowlers have to be smart to defend those areas. As for the surface, you can forget about it zipping around – they generally make it as flat as your hat. Nottinghamshire as a club pride themselves on being a high-scoring domestic team, and Trent Bridge is probably the highest-scoring ground in the country. The Rose Bowl, or Ageas Bowl, looks great now it is pretty much finished, with the hotel at the far end. The pitch there is generally flat, very easy paced, not particularly quick or slow. The boundaries are pretty big and you don’t get too much crosswind, so we’re talking high scores and spinners coming into it in the middle period. You can get a bit of stop in the pitch if you are smart with the cutters. Intelligent bowlers generally do pretty well and, because of the big boundaries, you have a chance of getting one over batsmen playing big shots. Taunton is an absolute batting paradise. Very small boundaries straight, pretty big square, and a very quick outfield so you’ll get a lot of boundaries. It is a brilliant ground for innovative batsmen, who will get plenty of joy with ramps and flicks. There is always a brilliant, partisan crowd there. They will want to see entertaining, explosive cricket and will probably not be disappointed. Some players might be taken aback because this is a proper old‑fashioned English county ground but the cricket purists will love it.