Parmesan has a low water content and a granular texture, which means it can be preserved for a long time, improving with age. Even once a huge wheel is cracked open, it will store well. To maintain the full qualities of Parmigiano Reggiano, to give it its proper name, store it in an airtight glass or plastic container in the fridge (if you need to freeze it, grate it first to preserve the texture). However quickly you consume your parmesan, save the rinds. They keep indefinitely and make an ultimate stock, soup, stew or risotto enhancer; they can also be turned into an umami-rich broth that’s so delicious, it can be served as a dish in its own right. Add a rind straight into a soup, stew or risotto as it bubbles away, or use up several rinds in today’s rich broth. I haven’t provided any quantities, because there is no right or wrong amount of ingredients to add. It’s good to know that the more rinds you’ve saved, the richer the broth will be. Allow 300-500ml liquid per serving. This broth can be consumed alone or made into a soup by adding a few seasonal vegetables before heating and serving. It’s also a real treat to use this broth to cook and serve tortellini. The more parmesan rinds you add, the richer the broth will be. Save up parmesan rinds in a sealed container and odds and ends from your vegetables in the fridge or freezer. Stock vegetables (broad bean pods, celery, carrot, dried ceps, leeks, onions, parsley stalks, etc)1 dash olive oilParmesan rindsWhite wine Roughly chop and saute any alliums, such as onions, leeks and garlic, in a glug of oil over a medium heat, until they start to caramelise. Add a dash of white wine, enough to cover the bottom of the pan and bring to a boil, scraping the pan to dislodge and dissolve any brown bits. Add any other saved stock vegetables and the parmesan rinds, then add water to cover. Bring to a boil, turn down to a simmer and cook over a low heat for about an hour, until the broth is rich and flavourful, then strain. Serve immediately or store in the fridge or freezer for later use.