So now we know. After all the flipping and a flopping and the incessant leap-frogging, Manchester City did possess the necessary mental fortitude to win the 14 consecutive games required to hold off the Terminator-esque pursuit of Liverpool and win their second consecutive Premier League title. For the runners-up, the long wait for that elusive latest title will now enter its 30th year and in the meantime Liverpool fans must content themselves with the knowledge that theirs was the most commendable failure to win the title in English football history. They got lots and lots of points, considerably more than most league winners usually require and so it came to pass that all the Kop had to cheer in the wake of Sunday’s win over Wolves was the sight of Little Miss Makka Salah scoring into an empty net following Liverpool’s lap of appreciation. Having seen off Brighton down on the south coast with only the bare minimum of fuss, City accepted their trophy and hightailed it back to Manchester for a party, while Brighton’s high stakes poker-playing owner Tony Bloom waited until this morning to go all-in on Chris Hughton and show him to the door marked Do One. “Undoubtedly, this has been one of the most difficult decisions I have had to make as chairman of Brighton & Hove Albion, but ultimately one I have made due to how we struggled in the second half of the season,” said Bloom, who is understood to be ready to lure something of a managerial magician named Potter to the Amex Stadium in a bid to try to magic Brighton up the table next season. While it might have been a day of very few top-flight matches of any major or even minor significance, that didn’t stop Manchester United trying to make it all about them and they attempted to divert attention from their local rivals by somehow contriving to lose at home to already relegated Cardiff. “More or less the only positive from today is that the season is over,” moaned the increasingly haggard Norwegian, as Paul Pogba argued with an angry middle-aged man who was effing and jeffing at him in the background. “We meet again on 1 July and we will work back to where we belong.” On the evidence of their past nine games that’s down in the bottom third, somewhere between Bournemouth and Burnley. “Tradition is no limit for Juventus, but a source of inspiration for the future. The 2019-2020 Home Kit interprets this concept and promises to become the star of the next season” – in a baffling statement that will come as a blow to Him, Juventus reckon their weird new kit will be their star signing next season after they ditched the black and white stripes in a decision that may or may not have had something to do with American fans thinking the old shirt looked like an NFL referee. 20 April: “No one can stop me from playing football, I just decided to take an important time off for myself and it is very important to carefully weigh the options. It’s not the end or retirement from the game. I believe I can still play on for another two or three years” – Yaya Touré. 10 May: “Yaya has decided to end his career as a champion” – Touré’s Mr 15% confirms the player’s retirement from football. 12 May: “I love football and I’m still in contention to play for a few more years. I am now ready and focused to take new challenges in playing football. And don’t worry, once the time has come I will announce my retirement personally and officially by myself” – a plot twist from birthday boy Touré. The latest Football Weekly podcast will be somewhere around here soon. “Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s win ratio at Manchester United as permanent manager is 20%, dangerously close to the gold standard for poor management, Newcastle United’s John Carver (15%). Even if you include his initial ‘Not José’ spurt of results as interim manager, he still only averages 55% after the Cardiff debacle, which is now worse than José Mourinho (58%). What’s the betting that José mentions this in his next management interview (assuming he gets one after burning all his bridges and all that)... and every single time he’s on TV?” – Noble Francis “Re. Friday’s Fiver: DeLorean? Really Fiver, you should update your cultural references, its the quantum realm now (do we still need to say spoiler alert?). Older Fiver readers, ask your kids. Oh yeah, right, Fiver readers, kids, ha! Older Fiver readers, ask the kids from down the corridor. And don’t scare them!” – Robin Hazlehurst Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Rollover. Graham Mackrell, who was safety officer at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989, has been fined £6,500 after he was found criminally responsible for the dangerous turnstile arrangements in operation when 96 Liverpool supporters were killed at the FA Cup semi-final. Chelsea’s Danny Drinkwater has been banned from driving for 20 months and ordered to do 70 hours’ community service after admitting to drink-driving. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang believes sharing the Golden Boot with fellow Africans Sadio Mané and Mo Salah is evidence of the continent’s continuing rise. “We are representing Africa, so it is a good sign,” he whooped, while polishing his shiny gong. Grasshoppers Zurich are fuming with miffed fans who caused the abandonment of their match against Lucerne to protest against the club’s impending relegation. The, um, hopping mad supporters demanded players hand over their shirts and shorts as they were deemed unworthy of wearing them. “That is shameful and simply unacceptable,” growled a fully dressed club suit. “Rioters destroy football.” And after retiring on Sunday Robin van Persie says don’t expect him to be a manager anytime soon. “Look at how Marco van Basten was treated as a coach. The magic disappeared,” he tooted. “It’s a hard business and first I’m getting away for a while.” Settle in ... it’s our review of the season: players of the season, goals of the season, matches of the season, managers of the season, signings of the season, young players of the season, flops of the season, pundits of the season and innovations needed for next season. Barney Ronay, controversially, points out that Pep Guardiola is very good at his job. Jonathan Wilson does similar by dissecting Manchester City’s tactics. Andy Brassell on the never ending Bundesliga title race. Paolo Baldini explains how He should be the one feeling small. And Sid Lowe on Girona and everything happening all at once. And Ammar Kalia had a chat with Troy Deeney about how he’s such a nice guy. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!