Recently, while whiling away a Sunday afternoon in our local bookstore, my partner suddenly gasped, and ran over to present me with a copy of the picture book Burglar Bill by Janet and Allan Ahlberg, eyes bright, thrilled to have uncovered a childhood favourite long since forgotten. Having worked as a bookseller for over a decade, this sort of discovery was not unfamiliar to me. Picture books from our childhoods are often strongly linked to a distinct place and time in our lives, to memories that lie dormant only to be reawakened when we once again lay eyes on those intimately familiar illustrations. Many Australian classics such as Mem Fox’s Possum Magic, Marcia Vaughan’s Wombat Stew and Graeme Base’s beloved Animalia have been in print for over 30 years and can still be found in homes across the country, shared across generations of the same family. On Wednesday this week, more than one million children in schools, libraries, childcare centres, bookstores and homes across the country took part in National Simultaneous Storytime, an initiative of the Australian Librarian and Information Association. Together, they listened in rapt attention to a reading of Alpacas with Maracas by Sydney-based picture book author and illustrator Matt Cosgrove. Trending on Twitter, the event sparked off countless conversations on and off social media about those children’s books that have a special place in our hearts. When a child is read aloud to, the ongoing benefit to their literacy, mental wellbeing and relationship with reading for pleasure is extraordinary. My partner’s memories of Burglar Bill were intrinsically tied to weekends at his father’s place as a kid, when his dad would carefully wind his watch, place it on the bedside table, settle against the cushions, and welcome his child into the crook of his elbow ready to share in this familiar story. Together, they would have read Burglar Bill over a hundred times throughout the years, reciting the words in unison and anticipating favourite moments or lines. For my partner to be able to recall this less than a year after his dad had passed away was a precious and priceless opportunity to connect to a memory untouched by grief. I gained a new appreciation for the incredible gift that is the complete and undivided attention of a child As the eldest of five children, our house was always in a state of barely controlled chaos, but story time was one of the rare moments when silence descended. Despite there being 11 years between myself and my youngest brother, when mum or dad read us favourites such as Alison Lester’s Magic Beach, or Dr Seuss’s Green Eggs and Ham, age became irrelevant as we crammed together on the three-seater couch, little ones on the bigger kids’ laps, as we gave our full attention to the storyteller. As I got older and was entrusted to take on the mantle of storyteller in chief, particularly to my two youngest brothers, I gained a new appreciation for the incredible gift that is the complete and undivided attention of a child, as well as the delight I would feel when one of my silly voices elicited laughter. Being read aloud to is one of the true pleasures of childhood and bedtime routines are often not complete without entreaties for “Just one more book!” National Simultaneous Storytime taps into this joy, so perhaps it’s fitting that it is the centrepiece of National Library and Information Week, a highlight in the school and library calendar each year. To read to a child is to perform to a captive audience of one, and the storyteller must let go of pride, self-consciousness and doubt and throw themselves wholeheartedly into the telling. It is an exercise that many adults who have forgotten what it’s like to be a child could well benefit from rediscovering. • Which picture books do you remember fondly? Share your favourites in the comments