Name: Carrie HyndmanAge: 38Income: £20,000Occupation: Fashion designer I started working in retail when I was about 13 at the steam railway in Llangollen as a trolley dolly offering refreshments and earning £1.10 per hour. From there I worked in a friend’s candle shop for 18 months, so by the time I finished my A-levels I’d had a taste of independence and a regular income. After applying for university with no idea what I wanted to do in life I got a part-time job in Next and when I got the chance to go full time I took it and gave up my university place. I’ve always been pretty stubborn, and having a huge enthusiasm for fashion I decided that I wanted to work my way up in this sector. I worked my butt off to progress and by 21 I was a store manager with 70–80 staff working under me and had bought my first home, a terraced two-bedroom house in north Wales. It was a repossession which cost £24,000; I got a 100% mortgage and I did it up myself. Six years later I gave it in part-exchange for a beautiful old three-bedroom detached property a developer was renovating nearby. He gave me £85,000 for mine which I used as a deposit for the £170,000 asking price. After eight years at Next and one at River Island I moved to Topshop as brand manager on a salary of £28,000 plus bonuses. High street retail is a competitive environment and it became too consuming so I decided to do something for myself. I started buying and selling vintage clothes and jewellery at markets as a hobby, then when a friend started a co-operative enabling independent traders to sell their products under one roof, I jumped on board and took on bar work in hopes of turning my hobby into a career. I took a massive income hit from about £30,000 to £15,000, and was living hand to mouth. I realised then I needed to create something with an identity that reflected me personally. I looked at what made me happy in life – travel, outdoor adventures, skating and surfing – so in 2013 I founded Junkbox and created a “mix and match” capsule wardrobe for every activity. The premise is to fit plenty of outfit options into the smallest rucksack possible. My parents helped me with the £1,000 capital I needed to buy a heat press and blank garments from a supplier. I began designing in my spare room, creating patterns and printing the products myself. I’ve since set up in a shop/workroom the 2nd Floor in Chester with a friend who splits the £600 a month rent with me. My annual turnover is around £35,000, of which I take £20,000, gross. I employ no staff, keeping my monthly business costs around £1,200, excluding rent, and including expenses such as a card payment processor. I’m terrible with numbers and spreadsheets but the payment processing system I use, Square, captures fees, stock inventory and customer details so I can manage my accounts more easily. It’s tough sometimes, but the financial sacrifice is far better than the personal sacrifice of working in a big corporation. I love the freedom. My husband and I are in a touring band, which more or less pays for itself. I find so much more pleasure in experiences than things and love to travel although our last holiday was three years ago in an Airbnb in Malaga. My husband makes meals from scratch, keeping the monthly food bill with a couple of bottles of wine a week to £200. We both do bar work in the places where we like to socialise and the staff discounts make nights out more affordable; otherwise the band and our £20 a month subscription to Netflix and Amazon is our evening entertainment. We remortgaged for £120,000 in 2009 to afford a car and do the house up – that costs £800 a month in repayments. Our monthly outgoings are about £1,900, including a £30 gym membership, £155 in loan repayments and £250 for petrol. I try not to use my overdraft and a credit card is for emergency expenditure. My philosophy is live within your means; experiences are more valuable than possessions.