On a windswept Tuesday morning in Greater Manchester, you might expect the local buses to be full of passengers commuting to work, school and college. Yet taking the No 83 from Manchester to Oldham, the double-decker was almost empty – and the cost of a single fare £4.40. A Guardian analysis has found that while bus passengers in London pay only £1.50 for a single fare, elsewhere in the country prices are significantly higher and services more fragmented, leading to increasing numbers of locals abandoning the bus as a form of public transport. Oldham is the perfect example of this phenomenon: here the average salary for 2018 was £25,000, compared with £37,000 in London, and yet single fares are almost three times higher than those in the capital. As a result, in Oldham and throughout Greater Manchester bus usage has dropped by 40% in the 30 years since the buses were deregulated. London plays a crucial economic, political and cultural role in the UK. It is home to one of the world’s busiest financial centres, the royal family, parliament and some of the best museums on the planet. But that domination has come at a cost. To many living outside it, London has become more of a distant city-state than a capital, increasingly disconnected from the rest of the country. In the devolved nations of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, voters can elect representatives who put their countries first. Londoners sometimes argue they deserve a special deal. After all, London paid an average of £12.7bn a year more in taxes than it received in public spending in the decade up to 2014, subsidising most of the rest of the country. And while life in London might be easy for the oligarchs who have bought up Mayfair, it is a struggle for many. Yet while rail passengers in the north of England and Cornwall still judder to work on 35-year-old Pacer trains, Londoners will soon be able to get around even quicker on the £17.6bn Crossrail. This series explores how the rest of England has been left behind. It will expose how some of the poorest people pay the most for public transport, the north-south divide in health and how cultural institutions have been ravaged by cuts. Finally, it will look at the case for more devolution in England and ask what can be done to bring the country back together at a time when it has never seemed more divided. Helen Pidd While bus travel still accounts for 80% of public transport journeys in Greater Manchester, the use of taxis to replace these trips is on the rise for those living in and around Oldham. The issue has become so widespread that the Greater Manchester mayor, Andy Burnham, has pledged to introduce free journeys in the area for 16- to 18-year-olds by September, funded by an increase in council tax. This would be welcomed by Elijah Wolstenholme, 17, who commutes into Oldham sixth form college from rural Saddleworth. “I often get the 350 if I want to go into town and it’s such a dud, it never shows up,” he said. “I’d rather get a taxi because it’s cheaper and more convenient, and I often have to.” For Sujita Dey, 18, who lives within walking distance of the college, taxis have become a last resort if she is running late or if there is bad weather, because a single bus ticket is not worth the expense. “There’s no student day-saver fare so if you only need to make one trip every now and then you have to pay the full amount,” she said. “And getting an Uber is much cheaper.” Burnham said it was crucial to get young people back on the buses after research from Transport for Greater Manchester found that only 26% of 16-18 year olds cite the bus as their main form of transport: “The economics are if there are three or four of them it’s cheaper to get an uber than three single tickets... By getting more 16-18 year olds on buses now we can shore up some of the routes that are at risk or that might be withdrawn.” Back on the 83, the only two other passengers are asleep as the bus drives through the former industrial towns of Failsworth and Newton Heath, bumping along the Oldham Road. One rider, Alex Davies, 26, wakes up and says he is on his way to a shift at Costa in Oldham’s Spindles shopping centre. Coming from Swinton, 15 miles from Oldham, his journey involves a change of two buses and two service operators. “It’s just too expensive to get around, especially if I’m working odd shifts,” he said. “I have to pay different fares for each bus and it’s not worth the effort – they’re too slow and unreliable.” The other passenger chimes in: “I would rather just get a taxi to work sometimes; the bus is too expensive if I’m only travelling one way, especially on a day like this.” Pascale Robinson, founder of the Better Buses for Greater Manchester campaign, says that this infrequent and expensive bus service is more than just an inconvenience. “Bad buses create isolation and 37% of jobseekers in Greater Manchester have turned down jobs because of the public transport being unreliable or the journey taking too long,” she said. “Routes also need to be extended because 8m miles have been cut from bus services since 2014, and it’s a symptom of our deregulation. Companies pick the most profitable routes and use public money to subsidise anything else that’s actually needed.” The bus companies have been profiting from this plan, with north-west operators Stagecoach, Arriva and FirstGroup reporting an average £18.5m payout  a year to their shareholders over the past decade. Robinson wants to bring the bus network back into public control, mirroring the franchising system operated by Transport for London. “The north has a productivity problem and the state of our transport system is worsening it,” she said. “So we need Andy Burnham to listen to the voices of the people who use these public services, rather than the interests of the bus companies themselves.” It is a sentiment echoed by the Oldham council leader, Sean Fielding, who said: “Franchising would allow us to use profits to protect socially important but less profitable routes. It would let us put the public interest and passengers’ needs first – not shareholders’ dividends.” Until these changes are implemented, though, the day-to-day reality of getting around Oldham remains an expensive and difficult one. Alex Woods, 18, said: “It’s so frustrating to see prices increase, almost at random it seems, because if fewer people used cars it’s better for the environment.” Wolstenholme, who is looking to start driving soon, said: “As I’ve got older and become more independent the buses have become a bigger part of my life, but the quality of the bus service and amounts of routes have massively dropped. “It’s something I can’t rely on anymore. It’s definitely made me want to get out of Oldham.”