Campaigners for non-British/Irish EU citizens have made a formal complaint to the Electoral Commission amid fears that many of them will be unable to vote in the UK in this Thursday’s elections for the European parliament. Nicolas Hatton, the co-founder of the3million, has accused the regulator of undermining EU citizens’ right to vote through “insufficient guidance” and “inconsistent” advice from what he believes is uninformed local authority electoral officers. “The3million has multiple examples of local authorities mishandling the application process,” he said in a three-page letter. Catherine West, the Labour MP for Hornsey and Wood Green, has also raised concerns about the issue in a separate letter to Sir John Holmes, the chairman of the Electoral Commission. She fears that as many as 75% of non-British/Irish EU citizens living in the UK who registered to vote in the local elections three weeks ago could be turned away on Thursday because they have not filled in the necessary second form to vote in the European elections. This is based on research in her own constituency, which showed that just 25% of EU citizens who had registered for local elections and were not from the UK, Ireland, Malta or Cyprus had returned the second UC1/EC6 form to state they also wanted to vote in the UK this Thursday. In her letter to Holmes, West points out that those EU citizens had to “undergo a two-step process” unlike UK or Irish nationals, who can register once to vote in all elections. “I fear that this process has helped create an artificial barrier to the enfranchisement of EU citizens, a concern shared by a number of my parliamentary colleagues,” she said. Her concerns come a year after reports that local election officials wrongly turned away some EU citizens, claiming they could not vote. West said she understood the extra step was to prevent people voting in the UK and their birth country, but said it was “largely superfluous” as many were unaware until after the register closed. In a separate letter, the3million also recognises Theresa May’s consistent declaration that the European parliament elections would not take place, but it says the commission should not be taking its cues from politicians. It had a duty to ensure the civic rights of EU citizens and should have done away with the two-step process, the letter says. “The3million believes that the Electoral Commission’s conduct has created unnecessary confusion and placed barriers in the way of exercising voting rights” for non-British/Irish EU citizens. It says the situation was compounded by sometimes erroneous advice from some electoral registration officers (EROs) at local councils. One EU citizen contacted the campaign group to say they had had “three identical letters stating that I cannot vote because I either did not register to do so or that I’ve done it too late”. This person was also offended when they were told that they could “still vote in their country”. The Electoral Commission denied that it had been late in communicating with EU citizens about the two-step process. In its response to West, it said it wrote to EROs as early as 4 April, before Theresa May confirmed elections would take place, to remind them that registration was more complicated for some EU citizens. “We advised EROs to identify such electors and send them a declaration form.” It said any request for a change in the process would require a change in the law and was a matter for the government.