Lunchtime was fast approaching when Liverpool’s morning charter flight taxied towards the private terminal adjacent to Newcastle airport. Travelling Premier League teams do not usually touch down with only hours to spare before kick-off but, right now, almost every conceivable margin is becoming uncomfortably tight for Jürgen Klopp and his players. With a domestic title and an improbable Champions League semi-final comeback to pursue, Liverpool are all out of wriggle room and it is not only their travel schedule that is being squeezed. On the pitch there is no room for error; not when Klopp’s team headed back to the airport for their return flight with the joy of having climbed two points clear of Manchester City tempered by the latter’s game in hand at home to Leicester on Monday. By way of exacerbating Liverpool’s nervousness, Mo Salah was carried off in the second half after being caught accidentally on the head by Martin Dubravka’s hip. It seemed emblematic of an often agonising, if brilliantly thrilling, night for the red half of Merseyside. The evening concluded with Divock Origi’s late winner reviving Liverpool’s previously fast-fading optimism but the tension was as suffocating as the manner in which Jamaal Lascelles and company attempted to mark Salah. The Egyptian’s quick feet, not to mention his speed and clarity of thought, were invariably far too fast for Newcastle and as he saw a shot deflected for a corner a visiting goal beckoned. Sure enough, an unattended Virgil van Dijk duly headed home from the set piece but then came a passage of slapdash defending featuring a failed clearance from Dejan Lovren and Trent Alexander‑Arnold handling in the area. With the referee playing advantage the ball eventually dropped kindly for Christian Atsu to equalise – and spare Alexander Arnold a red card – and Rafael Benítez was influencing Liverpool’s fortunes once more. On Monday another ghost of Anfield past – Leicester’s Brendan Rodgers – will assume centre stage in the minds of Merseysiders but Saturday night was Benítez’s turn to have his say in the title race’s penultimate twists. Ten years ago Benítez stood in Klopp’s shoes going head to head with another team from along the M62 as he came achingly close to taking the title. The only differences then were that it was Manchester United rather than City and Benítez felt he was taking on the British “establishment” – he believes there was an unspoken alliance between United’s Sir Alex Ferguson and the Football Association – rather than the oil-rich might of Abu Dhabi. Benítez, who won the Champions League and FA Cup during his six years at Anfield, is not remotely patronising Klopp when he says there is no shame in coming second to a Pep Guardiola side funded by Emirati wealth. “Liverpool are one of the best teams in the world,” he says. “They haven’t won a trophy but there are so many strong sides at the moment, that can happen.” There are also some highly talented coaches in perhaps unlikely places and here a manager close to renewing his Newcastle contract delighted in jogging everyone’s memories about the tactical cleverness which has yielded him quite a haul of silverware down the years. A narrow victory against City here in January also showcased his ability and resulted in a photograph arriving on Benítez’s phone. Sent by Liverpool fans it captured a wintry Merseyside street with the words “Ta Rafa” written in the snow. The ties that still bind Benítez to the Mersey explain why he has no intention of deleting that image but the Spaniard is more ruthless than romantic and looked quietly furious as an unmarked Salah volleyed Alexander-Arnold’s cross home. Yet if Sadio Mané’s movement proved far too sharp for a defence dragged all over the place, Liverpool’s back line – the excellent Andrew Robertson apart – were not all that hot either. As if to prove the point, a corner led to Salomón Rondón equalising with a wonderful volley. Judging by the expression on Klopp’s face it might as well have been a stake through the Liverpool manager’s heart but then Origi intervened and those tight margins looked a little less painful.