This 12,000-hectare (30,000-acre) estate near Skipton, in the Yorkshire Dales, is laced with 80 miles of footpaths that weave their way around the ruins of an ancient Augustinian priory – better known as Bolton Priory – although the real draw is just outside, on the banks of the River Wharfe. There’s a large beach area along this quarter-mile stretch that’s ripe for sandcastle building and the water is shallow enough for toddlers to paddle safely. Older children can swim or tackle the 60 stepping stones that cross the water – once the route of lay workers making their way over to the priory. (If you’d rather not brave it or are with a buggy, there’s a bridge over to dry land). One of the estate’s more hardcore walking routes takes you through the Valley of Desolation, which sounds like something from The Hobbit but is so-named after the great storm of 1826, and actually very pretty. It leads all the way up to Simon’s Seat, a 485-metre peak with breathtaking views from the summit. It’s massive, so kids can let of steam at full volume without disturbing anyone. Find a space of your own and pitch up with a picnic, a ball and either swimming gear or wellies, depending on the weather. On the subject of wellies, the Welly Walk is worth doing. This self-guided woodland adventure, open from 25 May to 3 November, leads you from the stepping stones at the priory up to the Cavendish Pavilion, where you can sit down with a drink or lunch and let the kids play in the pop-up sandpit and wooden pirate ship, or carry on walking into Strid Wood. There are child-friendly slides, bridges, mazes and tunnels along the mile-long walk but bear in mind it’s not pushchair-friendly, and they really mean it about the wellies. We took a picnic and ate it on the banks of the river but we did pop into the Cavendish Pavilion for cake (£2.95). The pavilion is an elegant building that serves sandwiches, drinks and snacks from 10am every day. There are also several smaller, traditional tearooms around the estate, as well as picnic seating next to all the car parks and a barbecue area at one end of the Riverside car park. Depending on where you parked, there’s a gift shop full of upmarket accessories and homewares next to the Cavendish Pavilion near the Riverside car park, and another – the Village Shop – in the village itself, by the Bolton Abbey car park. The latter has more in the way of toys, although our kids spent their money sending postcards from the shop’s little post office instead. The nearest railway stations are Skipton and Ilkley, respectively six and seven miles away from the estate by taxi. There are also buses from Ilkley and Grassington Wakefield, Leeds, Otley – but not every day (check website for details). The abbey is just off the A59, between Skipton and Harrogate. If driving, put BD23 6EX in the satnav, which gets you to Bolton Abbey village and the priory ruins. BD23 6AN goes to the Riverside car park. It’s £10 to park in any of the estate’s car parks but once you’re in it’s free. Daily from 9am, closing time varies seasonally (from 1 June 1-31 August it closes at 9pm with the last admission at 6pm). In winter everything closes at 6pm, with the last admission at 4pm. An absolutely glorious way to tire everyone out. On a sunny day it’s a 10/10. • boltonabbey.com Looking for a holiday with a difference? Browse Guardian Holidays to see a range of fantastic trips