In the winter of 1961 the tribespeople of Kothie, a small hamlet in the western state of Gujarat, were chased off their ancestral lands as though they were intruders. Kothie quickly turned into Kevadiya Colony, a grim concrete homestead for the government engineers and bureaucrats who would, over the next few decades, build the gigantic 138.68metre-high Sardar Sarovar Dam. It was one of four mega dams – and thousands of smaller dams – that were part of the Narmada Valley Development Project, planned on the Narmada river and her 41 tributaries. The people of Kothie joined the hundreds of thousands of others whose lands and homes would be submerged – farmers, farmworkers, and fisherfolk in the plains, ancient indigenous tribespeople in the hills – to fight against what they saw as wanton destruction. Destruction, not just of themselves and their communities, but of soil, water, forests, fish, and wildlife – a whole ecosystem, an entire riparian civilisation. The material welfare of human beings was never their only concern. Under the banner of the Narmada Bachao Andolan (Save the Narmada Movement), they did everything that was humanly and legally possible under the Indian constitution to stop the dams. They were beaten, jailed, abused and called “anti-national” foreign agents who wanted to sabotage India’s “development”. They fought the Sardar Sarovar as it went up, metre by metre, for decades. They went on hunger strike, they went to court, they marched on Delhi, they sat in protest as the rising waters of the reservoir swallowed their fields and entered their homes. Still, they lost. The government reneged on every promise it had made to them. On September 17, 2017, the prime minister of India, Narendra Modi, inaugurated the Sardar Sarovar Dam. It was his birthday present to himself on the day he turned 67. For me it was a time of odd disquiet Even as they went down fighting, the people of the Narmada taught the world some profound lessons – about ecology, equity, sustainability and democracy. They taught me that we must make ourselves visible, even when we lose, whatever it is that we lose – land, livelihood, or a worldview. And that we must make it impossible for those in power to pretend that they do not know the costs and consequences of what they do. They also taught me the limitations of constitutional methods of resistance. Today, even the harshest critics of the Narmada Bachao Andolan have had to admit that the movement was right about almost everything it said. But it’s too late. In the last 20 years, the opening of the Indian markets to international finance has created a new middle class – a market of millions – and has had investors falling over themselves to find a foothold. The international media, for the most part, was at pains to portray the world’s favourite new finance destination in the best possible light. But the news was certainly not all good. India’s fleet of brand new billionaires and its new consumers were being created at an immense cost to its environment and to an even larger underclass. Backstage, away from the razzle-dazzle, labour laws were dismantled, trade unions disbanded. The state was withdrawing from its responsibilities to provide food, education and health care. Public assets were turned over to private corporations, massive infrastructure and mining projects were pushing hundreds of thousands of rural people off their lands into cities that didn’t want them. The poor were in freefall. For me personally it was a time of odd disquiet. As I watched the great drama unfold, my own fortunes seemed to have been touched by magic. My first novel, The God of Small Things, had won a big international prize. I was a frontrunner in the line-up of people who were chosen to personify the confident, new, market-friendly India that was finally taking its place at the high table. It was flattering in a way, but deeply disturbing, too. As I watched people being pushed into penury, my book was selling millions of copies. My bank account was burgeoning. Money on that scale confused me. What did it really mean to be a writer in times such as these? As I thought about this, almost without meaning to, I began to write a long, bewildering, episodic, astonishingly violent story about the complicated waltz between corporate globalisation and medieval religious fundamentalism and the trail of destruction they were leaving in their wake. And of the remarkable people who had risen to resist them. The backlash to almost every one of the essays when I first published them – in the form of police cases, legal notices, court appearances, and even a short jail sentence – was often so wearying that I would resolve never to write another. But equally, almost every one of them – each a broken promise to myself – took me on journeys deeper and deeper into worlds that enriched my understanding, and complicated my view, of the times we live in. They opened doors for me to secret places where few are trusted, led me into the very heart of insurrections, into places of pain, rage and ferocious irreverence. On these journeys, I found my dearest friends and my truest loves. These are my real royalties, my greatest reward. Although writers usually walk alone, most of what I wrote rose from the heart of a crowd. It was never meant as neutral commentary, pretending to be observations of a bystander. It was just another stream that flowed into the quick, immense, rushing currents that I was writing about. My contribution to our collective refusal to obediently fade away. My collection of essays goes to press around the time that an era we think we understand is coming to a close. Capitalism’s gratuitous wars and sanctioned greed have jeopardised the life of the planet and filled it with refugees. It has done more damage to the Earth in the last 100 or so years than countless millennia that went before. In the last 30 years, the scale of damage has accelerated exponentially. The World Wildlife Fund reports that the population of vertebrates – mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, and reptiles – has declined by 60% in the last 40 years. We have sentenced ourselves to an era of sudden catastrophes – wild fires and strange storms, earthquakes and flash floods. To guide us through it all, we have the steady hand of new imperialists in China, white supremacists in the White House, and benevolent neo-Nazis on the streets of Europe. Capitalism’s gratuitous wars and sanctioned greed have jeopardised the life of the planet and filled it with refugees In India, Hindu fascists are marching to demand a grand temple where the mosque they demolished once stood. Farmers deep in debt are marching for their very survival. The unemployed are marching for jobs. More temples? Easy. But more jobs? As we know, the age of Artificial Intelligence is upon us. Human labour will soon become largely redundant. Humans will consume. But many will not be required to participate in (or be remunerated for) economic activity. So, the question before us is, who – or what– will rule the world? And what will become of so many surplus people? The next 30 years will be unlike anything that we as a species have ever encountered. To prepare us for what’s coming, to give us tools with which to think about the unthinkable, old ideas – whether they come from the left, the right, or from the spectrum somewhere in between – will not do. We will need algorithms that show us how to snatch the sceptres from our slow, stupid, maddened kings. Until then, beloved reader, I leave you with … my seditious heart. • This is an edited extract from My Seditious Heart by Arundhati Roy, which will be published by Hamish Hamilton (£30) on 6 June. To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.