It took her five attempts but Johanna Konta has reached the second round of the French Open. Try as she might to ignore the weight of her wretched history at Roland Garros, she had to overcome nerves as well as the talented young German qualifier Antonia Lottner to eke out a 6-4, 6-4 win. “First rounds are always tricky, especially slams,” Konta said. “She’s not easy to play. There was not much rhythm out there on court. Had to hang tough to come through. I’m feeling the game reasonably well and most importantly I’m not panicking.” Lauren Davis, a competitive if injury-bedevilled American, is next on the dance card for the world No 26 after beating Kristyna Pliskova, 6-2, 6-4, in little over an hour. Konta has won two of their three encounters but, in their only match on clay seven years ago in Florida, Davis allowed her only a single game. Some memories stay longer with Konta than others but that surely is one from long enough ago to put aside. She has buried her French Open ghost. Now it is time to assert herself in the tournament. For years, Konta relied on “process”, that enticing concept of repeating skills and drills and trusting in talent to deliver the best performance – almost regardless of results. Separating the execution of efficient forehands and serves from the bottom line of sport, the final score, always seemed counterintuitive. Winning is what it’s about, and to continually ignore losing is blatant self-denial. Which is why, when she walked on to the intimate outside court No 7 on a mild Monday morning to open her 2019 campaign, Britain’s best player, burdened with four first-round setbacks in four years against players way below her in the rankings, had to draw on a little more than “process”. She brought with her to Paris a new method and attitude, encouraged by her coach, the French-Russian Dimitri Zavialoff. She has recently developed a clay game to match most, reaching finals in Rabat and Rome, and putting her faith in drop shots and surprises, rather than metronomic, back-of-the-court grinding. But could she translate that change into victory at a place where defeat against outsiders has been a curious and unfortunate burden? As was likely, she relied on old instincts rather than daring under pressure. It was a mixed start for both of them, with seven breaks of serve in the first 10 games. Lottner, not a clay-court natural but a lanky, 6ft 1in shot-maker with a good junior pedigree and more comfortable on hard courts, broke at the first opportunity; the rollercoaster was up and running. Konta won 12 of the next 13 points to steady the boat, dropped serve again then, serving for the set at 5-3, was broken to 30. When she forced a backhand error from Lottner after 40 minutes to take the set, she looked mightily relieved. They settled in the second and Konta’s class was beginning to tell. Lottner had to save two break points to hold for 2-2, while the British No 1 held to love as she neared the business end of the contest. Yet tension remained, for Konta at least; Lottner was making her debut, so the landscape before her was an unknown. She had not dropped a set in three qualifying matches. Confidence was not an issue. After eight games Konta had lost only four points on her serve, yet had to save three break points for a 5-4 lead. Lottner, serving to stay in the tournament, went 15-40 down and could not reach Konta’s final withering forehand. She had won seven of the last eight points. After an hour and 19 minutes, relief and joy mingled.