Johny Pitts was born in Sheffield to an African American father and a white English mother. He has worked as a music journalist, a musician with Bare Knuckle Soul, a TV presenter and a photographer. In 2013 he founded the online journal Afropean.com, which examines the interplay of black and European cultures. Now he has written a book called Afropean: Notes from Black Europe, documenting a five-month journey around the continent exploring the lives and communities of black Europeans. Where did the term “Afropean” originate and why did it appeal to you?The term was coined by David Byrne and Marie Daulne, a Belgian-Congolese musician who performs as Zap Mama. When Byrne was touring Europe with Talking Heads in the early 90s, he talked about seeing a new continent emerging in which a “reverse colonisation” was taking place [with black communities exerting a strong influence on European culture]. Growing up in a council estate in Sheffield, I felt like I had a choice between two identities: a proud, working-class Sheffield identity, or a kind of ghettoised black identity. It was either/or, I couldn’t be both. “Afropean” suggested I could be whole and unhyphenated, I could incorporate all these different things into my identity, and in a way transcend them. What prompted you to embark on a tour of black Europe?I’d been wanting to do it a long time. In the lead-up to Brexit, I’d started to notice a growing racism from some of my white working-class friends and a growing anger from my black friends, and anger in general from all sides. I was noticing it as early as 2007-08, as it became evident the New Labour dream had failed. When Tony Blair got into power, Britain felt modern and multicultural, it seemed to have come to terms with its colonial history, but that was very cynically spun to people. I don’t think it ever really happened. So I feel this book emerges out of the rubble of New Labour in lots of ways. It’s trying to put together a sort of multiculturalism 2.0. Looking at Europe through an Afropean lens, what stood out for you?That the black experience can’t be pinned down to a solid thing. As I travelled, I met Tunisians who had a real problem with Somalians in Sweden, or Martinicans who looked down their noses at Senegalese in France. No matter how much I tried to fit it all together, it never fitted perfectly. Yet at the same time, I saw lots of opportunities for black communities to come together and lots of instances where they did. I saw a continent full of opportunity, of commonalities, of possible solidarities, but ultimately what I found empowering was knowing that the continent was full of people like me. Where did you feel most at home?Definitely Marseille. It gets a bad reputation, but it’s an amazing place. I’m from Firth Park in Sheffield, which is very multicultural and working-class, and I’ve jokingly started to call Marseille “Firth Park-on-Sea”. It’s one of the few places in Europe where I found that the black community wasn’t banished from mainstream civic life. I’m hoping to move there actually. I felt at home in Marseille in a way that I never have in the UK. Did you have a book deal before you set off on the trip?No, my travel was completely independent and self-funded, and I feel that was really important. Most of the time when someone who’s black writes a book about black issues, the publishers want something polemical. Whereas I wanted to just travel and have everyday experiences. A lot of the photography in the book shows people commuting. I didn’t want protests, I didn’t want carnivals, just this everydayness of the black experience. Do you plan to write more books?Definitely. One book I’m quite keen to write is about the failure of the future. Francis Fukuyama’s idea of the end of history seems anachronistic now in a hilarious way, but if it wasn’t the end of history, it was definitely the end of a concept of the future. It’s really hard to look forward now and imagine what the future holds. So I’d love to explore past visions of the future and see what the ruins of those visions might suggest for moving things forward. I have a four‑year‑old daughter now, and I have to believe that there is a future for her. • Afropean: Notes from Black Europe is published by Allen Lane (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99