It was a case of goodbye yellow brick road, hello Cannes red carpet as Elton John made an appearance at the film festival as part of his extended global farewell tour. The musician, who has announced that he will retire from performance in 2021 at the conclusion of a 300-date world tour, appeared on the Croisette for the premiere gala of upcoming biopic Rocketman, where he was joined by the actor playing him, Taron Egerton, as well as Bodyguard star Richard Madden, who plays John’s former lover and manager John Reid, the film’s director Dexter Fletcher and John’s husband David Furnish. John characteristically was in more flamboyant attire than his fellow attendees, with the musician dressed in a tuxedo emblazoned with sequins spelling out the film’s title (and name of John’s 1972 hit). He stood out too at the film’s photo call, where he sported a powder blue suit and matching glasses. The 72-year old, who underwent surgery on his knee last year, was seen to be visibly limping on his way up the red carpet and opted against climbing the steps to the Palais des Festivals. Co-produced by John and Furnish, Rocketman traces John’s life and career, from his early breakthrough to his difficulties with substance abuse and his own sexual orientation. The film also explores the musician’s creative partnership with songwriter Bernie Taupin, who was in attendance at the festival. Ahead of its premiere, there was speculation that some of Rocketman’s same-sex content would be censored in order to achieve a US PG-13 rating (equivalent to a 12A rating in the UK), with the Daily Mail reporting that Fletcher had been pressured by producer Paramount to cut 40 seconds of a scene in which Egerton and Madden are seen partially naked. However, the film has since been given a more mature R rating, and Fletcher has promised that it will be a “no-holds barred” account of the singer’s life. John has praised Egerton’s portrayal in the film, particularly Egerton’s decision to perform all the songs himself. “It’s not [Queen biopic] Bohemian Rhapsody where the brilliant Rami Malek, who played Freddie [Mercury], lip synched. You’re actually doing the whole thing,” he told Egerton in an interview with Beats 1 radio. Rumours that John might himself perform on the red carpet ahead of the premiere proved to be wide of the mark, despite a mischievous hint from Thierry Frémaux that a piano would be “hidden behind the curtain,”. However it is hoped that the singer is will perform at a private aftershow party following the premiere. Rocketman is released in UK cinemas on 22 May, with a US release following on 31 May.