Did you see the pictures from the Met Gala in New York? I mean, bloody hell. They were enough to discredit the whole concept of fun. The theme this year was “Camp: Notes of Fashion”, which most of the photographed celebrities seem to have interpreted as meaning “Daft”. To be fair, I have no idea what my own sartorial take on “Camp” would have been. I’d probably have put on a cravat, but worried it was a bit much. It wouldn’t have been a bit much. People turned up in the craziest togs imaginable. I think what many of the celebrities were doing was trying to show they have a sense of humour, which in general I welcome. But the lengths they went to to show it betrayed such seriousness in the endeavour, such focused and directed effort, that the joke collapsed under its own weight even if the intricately engineered dresses just about managed not to. I couldn’t help imagining the meetings, the sketches, the arguments, the disappointment, the relief and the nerves that lay behind every outfit – a whole royal-wedding-dress-load of stress and cash invested in each of them – and, for me, that put the kibosh on any sense of levity. It was obviously so important to them to seem fun that it wasn’t fun. But neither was it actually important. To take something so silly so seriously is so silly, but not in a way you get to own. But if a thing’s worth doing, it’s worth doing properly, I suppose. That’s the western industrial way. So, if you’re doing a thing properly, that must mean it’s worth doing, right? If fun is to be had, and all but the 17th-century Puritans are agreed that sometimes it is, then let’s roll our sleeves up and do it in earnest. Starting with the sleeves, which ideally should look insane. And, to be fair on the madly hatted megastars of Fifth Avenue, fun is a pretty serious business everywhere. Just ask any party planner who’s had a nervous breakdown. Take straws, for example. They’re a fun thing that’s got a bit serious. As a child, I loved drinking through a plastic straw, watching the rising Coke darken the white plastic between the stripes, or blowing and causing bubbly turmoil in the glass. Everyone loves that and so, in the interests of democratising and commercialising the fun, billions of those little tubes have been called into existence. But nobody really meant to wipe out huge swaths of marine life just for fun. “They are a real killer of our seas,” Nabil Pulita from Legambiente, an Italian green group, said of straws last week. He was speaking in approving response to the decision by the authorities on Capri to ban visitors from bringing non-recyclable plastic to the island, the seas surrounding which are increasingly clogged with the bobbing, fish-slaughtering remnants of plastic convenience and fun. But it’s so weird that straws do so much harm. The stakes don’t seem high enough. It’s not like with burning fossil fuels, which feels like an appropriate issue to be of great planetary moment. We’re stuffed if we keep burning them, but it’s also a huge challenge for our society to manage without burning them. It’s a massive, serious issue. But straws are just fun. The only upside is a tiny bit of joy lots of times. We can definitely manage without straws. So screw the straws. They’re just straws. But that’s the very thing that makes it seem so odd: they’re just straws. How much harm can a straw do? It’s like finding out that those little drinks umbrellas have caused widespread drought or that deely boppers spread Ebola, just like the penny lick did with TB (which isn’t as rude as it sounds). How did we end up making so many bloody straws? One day, a child says: “Can I have a straw?” and the next they’re more plentiful than plankton. Disaster wrought from mass-produced levity, as if the great library in Alexandria didn’t catch fire but all of its books got turned into paper chains in a Christmas-decoration frenzy organised by a particularly festive patriarch. We may have lost two-thirds of the works of Aristotle, but people had fun. I’m no fan of Donald Trump, but this might have been a good move on his part. Obviously, he wasn’t aware of making it For the Nevada Museum of Art, Donald Trump spoiled the fun. The institution had collaborated with artist Trevor Paglen on an artwork called Orbital Reflector, which was to be blasted into space where it would inflate into a diamond-shaped shiny balloon that would reflect the sun and be visible to the naked eye, hopefully without blinding it. The whole project cost about $1.3m and was launched into orbit, as planned, last December. Unfortunately, a few days later, the longest federal shutdown in history was triggered by Donald Trump’s Mexican wall standoff. During that period, the museum was unable to get the go-ahead to inflate the balloon and, by the time it ended, contact with the artwork had been irrevocably lost. I’m no fan of Donald Trump, but I think this might have been a good move on his part. Obviously, he wasn’t aware of making it, but I feel he’s at his most statesmanlike when he acts inadvertently. By putting the first purely artistic object into space, Paglen said he wanted to explore ideas of “who gets to do what in space”. People with $1.3m to spend on something they don’t mind gaffer-taping to a rocket seems to be part of the answer and we’ve managed to explore it without blowing up a metal balloon in the thermosphere, which is all to the good in my book. I mean, you’re not even supposed to leave a glass bottle in the woods on a sunny day! What if the whole planet caught fire? You may scoff, but look at what straws do. Frankly, it all sounds a bit hubristic. I say let’s leave the malevolently self-opening space objects to villains who have at least got the excuse that they’re trying to achieve global domination, rather than artists who are doing it for fun. And then we can channel more arts funding into regional theatre groups. People love dressing up. That fun feels comparatively harmless.