“We are so successfully colonised, we don’t even call it colonisation,” said Pulitzer prize winner Viet Thanh Nguyen during a keynote address at the PEN/Hemingway awards in April. “We call it The American Dream.” Joanne Ramos’s thrilling but flawed debut novel is a colonisation story set inside Golden Oaks, a baby farm in Massachusetts where wealthy foetuses occupy immigrant bodies. These grateful “hosts” are mostly black or “mild and service-oriented” Filipinos. “Premiere Hosts” are white, pretty and “smart, but not intimidatingly so”. They carry babies for career women and ageing billionaires while having their every move watched, their diet regulated, their emails monitored. It seems luxurious, with all the massages and fish dinners you may want – a “gateway to a better life”. But the farm isn’t concerned with everyone’s welfare. The women are not in charge of their bodies: they can’t take pain medication. C-sections cost them bonus money. And despite the clients’ extreme wealth, they are charged rent and forced to accept total income uncertainty (as in corporate America, only a few stars make real money). During an ultrasound scan, the doctor speaks to an invisible “Mom” on a laptop far away, asking her if she has considered invasive testing as the host lies clueless and ignored. The Farm reads not so much as dystopia, but as a plausible next venture for a capitalist ruling class that has grudgingly opened its doors to women and must now contend with the problem of fertility and motherhood. It is also a novel about the limits of American meritocracy. It asks us to consider who gets to rise (from poverty, immigrant abjection), and who must serve that person’s narrative. Is an enterprise exploitative if all parties agree? This is what business schools teach our future capitalists: the invisible hand makes all free markets fair and efficient. The Farm reads not as dystopia but as a plausible venture for a capitalist ruling class that has grudgingly opened its doors to women Golden Oaks is managed by Mae Yu, a Harvard Business School graduate who taught herself Chinese because her father refused to speak it at home. Perhaps he failed to realise, as his daughter did, that she would need the language of the world’s fastest growing economy if she were to become a money-grubbing supervillain who monetises other women’s uteruses with all the subtlety of Dr Evil. As a character, Mae Yu may lack depth and dimension, but her every self-serving word rings true: the way she weaponises the garbled language of business is familiar from my own HBS days (“Incentivised Hosts are the best hosts”, “maximise fetal potential”). Mae is full of smug, simple certainties: that a fair exchange means, by definition, that both parties are better off, so lack of options or negotiating power are irrelevant. Meritocracy is all - the ultimate free pass. It all gets to be a bit much when the Manhattan skyline comes into view and Mae is overcome by a “lusty Ayn Randian love of New York”. Though it’s hard to top Mae, who pauses to apply her lipstick in the cluttered flat of a Filipino family she is about to destroy, The Farm has two greater villains: representing the patriarchy is Leon, an old-money boss who believes in just markets tempered by noblesse oblige, and representing the greedy consumer who makes it all possible is billionaire Madame Deng, who is never seen. One imagines some withered organs in a jar. The most beautifully realised character is Evelyn, an elderly Filipino baby nurse and caterer whose complex motives give her the kind of impossible moral struggles that immigrants actually face. No one has clean hands, and the patriarchy’s bidding is done mostly by women trying to survive in it. Evelyn’s community of Filipino women is richly rendered and engrossing, with their acquired wisdom about motherhood and the nature of trust, their coded language and surprising take on white employers (“they have softer hearts” than rich Filipinos). Evelyn’s storyline, and her voice, give this novel its power. She endures indignities from clients and stockpiles their gifts, sends washed plastic catering plates home to the Philippines to be “piled high with pancit at church gatherings”. Early on she gives her cousin pages of instructions on how to baby-nurse for limousine liberals who like to preserve certain soothing beliefs about themselves - these pages are the finest in the novel. As a fellow immigrant and financially aided Princeton student, I find Ramos’s take on the silliness of the rich wildly enjoyable. She has the acute gaze of the immigrant girl made good. Her book is a necessary one – we need a mass-market novel that shows the impact of colonisation, with flawed white people failing to save the day. But The Farm has a problematic ending, in a way similar to Kathryn Stockett’s The Help: it seems almost to pardon Mae. In the final pages, Ramos works frantically to scrub Mae clean – a pang of guilt here, a sudden desire for babies there – but the reader is left unsatisfied after all that supervillainy. Where is the agency, the collective hope for those so cruelly exploited? Ramos’s prose is workaday, full of lumps in throats, minds racing or spinning, weather that signals danger, foreshadowing gongs before a chapter break (“It’s sunny now but it’s supposed to storm,” or an insect that “looks completely harmless”). Ramos has a structural tic, too: she flees the scene just before every confrontation or moment of truth, returning to recap it after all is settled. The Farm is a great read, but storytelling comes with responsibilities, especially in such times. In his speech Nguyen warned: “The colonisers let us tell stories. Even angry stories … They please the coloniser, make him feel hip and cool … What the coloniser would be frightened of is an uprising where the colonised took the means of representation and production and made them equal, for everyone, of all backgrounds.” There is no uprising in The Farm; there doesn’t have to be, but what is also absent is a sense that, by choosing to preserve a heartbreaking status quo, the author is warning of complacency. Ramos implies that Mae’s story is at least somewhat worth celebrating; that servitude is the best the world can offer the kind of immigrants unwilling to become Mae, those who want to keep their culture, their boundaries and their time. If they refuse to promote the coloniser’s agenda, they can only go so far. Because the world and all its resources belong to the high-fliers with shiny MBAs, and the rest of us must make do with whatever crumbs they choose to return to us, out of kindness or a belief in the cachet of performance liberalism. • Dina Nayeri’s The Ungrateful Refugee will be published later this month by Canongate. The Farm by Joanne Ramos is published by Bloomsbury (£12.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.