The financial crisis at Bury has been laid bare by a statement on behalf of the players, who won promotion to League One this season, that the club has not paid any of their wages since February. Nicky Adams, a 32-year-old midfielder in his third stint at Bury, issued the statement on Twitter, saying that the players “have gone from elation to complete and utter dismay”. Non-playing staff have also been kept waiting to receive their wages and not been paid in full, because of the club’s cash-flow and financial difficulties. Bury face a winding up petition on June 19, principally for unpaid taxes due to HMRC, which was adjourned last week after the owner, Steve Dale, said he had “some expressions of interest” from potential buyers. In a bitterly critical statement, the players called on Day to “move on” and sell the club, saying that they understood he has received offers. “Mr chairman, we know you have no regard or consideration for us as players, our families or our futures, but please just accept the offer and walk away from our club before you bring it to its knees,” the statement said. The players have not been paid by the club for 12 weeks, Adams’ statement said, and their union, the Professional Footballers’ Association, had partly paid their March wages. Dale took over Bury in December from Steve Day, a Lancashire property developer, whose regime had latterly also struggled to pay the players on time, previously taken out loans at an annual interest rate of 138%, secured on Gigg Lane, and been through three winding-up petitions in 2016. Day’s property company, Mederco, which had loaned Bury £4.2m according to the club’s 2016-17 accounts, went into administration in February. Day said when he left in December that he believed he had left Bury “in a stronger position than it was in when I arrived”, and was leaving “with a heavy heart” to spend more time with his family. The administrator of Mederco, Phil Deyes of Leonard Curtis in Leeds, revealed in his report on the insolvency that in November HMRC had issued a winding-up petition against Mederco for £605,000 unpaid tax, and that Day had instructed the insolvency accountants in early December. Deyes reported that there were “limited financial records” at Mederco, and he estimated the company owed creditors £4m. That included £190,000 outstanding to investors who had bought parking spaces at Gigg Lane for £9,995 each, in a scheme marketed by Day with a commitment to pay 9% annual interest. In a long statement issued on the club website last month Dale said that when he took over, “This football club was in serious trouble, and this turned out to be far in excess of what we could have comprehended”. He said that he had delayed paying players and staff their wages because of a £250,000 electricity and water bill, and that £1.6m was needed to pay wages, HMRC and pensions alone by the end of this month. “Clearly we have not made ourselves popular with the staff for our need to cut back, but our job is to save the club, not ingratiate,” Dale said. He concluded by saying he had received expressions of interest and “would like to openly invite offers to me directly, to take over ownership of the club”. The players in their statement pleaded Dale to sell immediately: “If it’s become too much, all we ask is that you step aside, move on and stop negatively impacting everyone’s livelihoods.” The Guardian has contacted Dale for his response to the players’ statement; at the time of writing he had not replied. The players’ public statement on the crisis at Bury comes in the week after their historic 6-0 win in the 1903 FA Cup final has been widely remembered, following Manchester City’s victory over Watford by the same score.