Lewis Hamilton took pole for the Monaco Grand Prix with a fine lap around the streets of Monte Carlo, leaving his best to last secure the place with his final lap of the day. He beat his Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas into second with Max Verstappen’s Red Bull in third. Sebastian Vettel, having crashed in final practice, recovered to take fourth place but his teammate Charles Leclerc endured a shocker at his home race. He went out in Q1 in 16th place as Ferrari miscalculated badly in not sending him out to do a second run. Pierre Gasly in the second Red Bull was in fifth. Hamilton took the pole with a stunning final lap with which he was ecstatic. Under pressure throughout the session he had it all to do on his last lap in Q3, and with a time of 1min 10.166secs pipped Bottas by just under a tenth of a second. Hamilton was a little late on the brakes into the chicane out of the tunnel on his first hot run and could manage only second place to Bottas, but on their final runs Hamilton had the edge while Bottas pushed but could not improve on his time. Vettel was quickest in the first session but Verstappen had the edge in Q2 just a tenth up on Bottas, with Hamilton in third. Ferrari had kept Leclerc in the garage at the end of the first session, assuming his time was good enough to save a set of tyres. However as the track got quicker he fell down the table and was left furious as he found himself knocked out while standing helpless next to his car. He admitted the team believed they had done enough. “I asked whether they were sure [the time was good enough], they said: ‘We think we are,’” he said. “I don’t have any detailed explanations yet, it is a very difficult one to take. I need some explanations. It is heartbreaking and disappointing, a difficult day.” This is Hamilton’s 85th career pole position and his second this season, having taken the top spot for the opening meeting in Melbourne. His pace and control over the single lap discipline remains remarkable. He took pole 11 times last season but this is only the second time he has claimed pole at Monaco, having last done so in 2015. Hamilton does not have the best record on the streets of the principality and has only won here twice in 12 attempts, in 2008 and 2016. He has, however, never been caught out by the looming walls of Monaco and has finished every race he has competed in here. After victory at the last round in Spain and having retaken the championship lead by seven points from Bottas, he will be optimistic that he will be able to further extend it on Sunday, with pole absolutely vital here. The team was rocked by the death of non-executive chairman Niki Lauda on Monday and Hamilton will be eager to return a win in the three-time champion’s honour. The Mercedes’ are running with their halo devices painted red in his memory, with the tribute “Niki we miss you” written on them. A minute’s silence will be held before the race and F1 has invited a selection of Lauda’s contemporaries and peers to attend the grid where each will hold a red cap in tribute, when they join the drivers for the national anthem. For Mercedes, who have a record-breaking five consecutive one-two finishes already this season, making it a sixth looks to be highly likely with another front-row lockout. Hamilton ensured his win in Spain by beating Bottas off the line, and if he keeps his nose in front into turn one in Monaco the race will be in his hands.  Haas’s Kevin Magnussen was in sixth with Renault’s Daniel Ricciardo in seventh. The McLaren of Carlos Sainz was in ninth with the Toro Rosso’s of Daniil Kvyat and Alexander Albon in eighth and 10th. Nico Hülkenberg in the Renault went out in 11th. Britain’s Lando Norris was in 12th for McLaren, with the Haas of Romain Grosjean in 13th. The Alfa Romeo’s of Kimi Raikkonen and Antonio Giovinazzi were in 14th and 15th. The two Racing Point’s of Sergio Pérez and Lance Stroll were in 17th and 18th with the Williams’ of George Russell and Robert Kubica in 19th and 20th.