Jacob Rees-Mogg is the stupid kind of Tory’s idea of what a clever kind of Tory ought to sound like. He knows a few long and obscure words. He can employ a smattering of the Latin phrases that he picked up during his education at an expensive academy near Slough. Among the easily bamboozled, the double-breasted suits, the retro spectacles and the patrician drawl can be confused with seriousness. So I suppose that this attempt to show that he deserves a reputation as a Tory intellectual may do quite well at the bookshop at the next Conservative conference. Yet even the dimmer type of Tory may twig that they have been duped once they embark on 400-plus pages of inch-deep ponderings conveyed in plodding prose. Far from being the “bold” and “landmark” work puffed by the publishers, his shallow thesis is that the Victorian age was one of “moral certainty”, “wise confidence”, “tremendous energy” and “patriotism”, qualities that Rees-Mogg finds lamentably lacking in our own era of “moral relativism” presided over by “the present-day politically correct elite”. This is glibly insulting about modern Britain and does terrible injury to the Victorian age. The 19th century saw tremendous economic, social, cultural, political and philosophical ferment, which changed every aspect of life as Britain transformed into an industrialised, urbanised country and at the same time ruled the largest territorial empire the world has ever witnessed. Rees-Mogg claims an ambition to restore the reputation of this vivid period of history. All he achieves with this awful book is to make a shipwreck of his own pretensions as they are repeatedly dashed on the rocks of his incoherent thoughts before sinking under the dead weight of his lifeless language. There’s no evidence that he has done any fresh investigation of primary sources. There is some evidence that he has hurried through a few biographies. He lumps in the occasional quote from a historian, as a schoolboy might do when hoping to impress his teacher that he has glanced at the reading list before sitting down to write. The result is 12 turgid essays about “the titans who forged Britain”. Eleven of them are men. Queen Victoria, one of the less interesting women of the era that takes her name, is the only non-male character to make it between these covers. The 19th century was an age of dynamic invention, but he doesn’t have time for a single engineer or scientist. The Victorians produced some outstanding literature, but you will not find a single novelist here. There’s room for four prime ministers, two generals and the cricketer WG Grace, but not for a poet or a painter. Where has he been for the last three years? It can’t have been in Britain We hear little about the foreign populations of the empire or the masses at home. Very occasionally, he remembers that this was a time of often intense agitation for economic and political reform. “It is important to note that Britain’s workers… had honest grievances.” Gawd bless you, my lord. There is no quote from the period so tediously familiar that he won’t dust it off and paste it in. In the unlikely event that anyone needs reminding, Disraeli managed Victoria using “flattery which he laid on with a trowel” and the Queen complained that Gladstone addressed her as if she were a public meeting. Rees-Mogg likes the formulation “new-fangled”, whether talking about the Metropolitan police or public lavatories. Perhaps that antique Disraeli quote is “new-fangled” to him. He likes it so much he uses it twice. The lack of any revelatory material or novel interpretation is not mitigated by any originality of expression. A chapter devoted to Prince Albert climaxes with this multiple ejaculation of cliche: “Albert fought the good fight, finished the course and kept the faith. He was a truly virtuous Victorian.” There’s a hilarious irony about this abysmal enterprise. Even though Rees-Mogg is in charge of selecting his exemplars of Victorian character, he can’t even make his own cast conform to his thesis. Having commended the Victorians for their “moral tone”, whatever that means, he is in serious difficulties when on the subject of Viscount Palmerston, a sexual predator whom contemporaries nicknamed “Lord Cupid”. Rather than use the example of that important prime minister to tease out the hypocrisies and contradictions of Victorian moral codes, he hides behind the line that Palmerston had “a complicated and notorious private life”. No doubt Mogg the moralist says something similar when asked about his friend Boris Johnson. A chapter in praise of the “just and implacable” General Charles Napier, the conqueror of Sindh in modern-day Pakistan, collides with the hard fact that the legacy of this “heroic” and “benevolent” imperialist was a blood-soaked disaster. The only reason for including the constitutional lawyer Albert Dicey, a man who would make few other people’s selection of the top dozen Victorians, is that he favoured referendums as a “check against tyranny”. Displaying a total ignorance of the exploitation of referendums by dictatorships, Rees-Mogg writes: “History was to vindicate this analysis, in that polities in which referendums are a feature of life tend towards long-term stability.” Where has he been for the last three years? It can’t have been in Britain. The chapter with most relevance to the Brexit nightmare is that on Sir Robert Peel, the early Victorian prime minister who put the national interest and the greater good before Tory unity. Rees-Mogg is off to a bad start when he calls Peel a “self-made man”. That’s a bizarre description of the Harrow-educated son of a mill-owning baronet whose first seat in parliament was a rotten borough controlled by the family. Peel is one of the more compelling and consequential prime ministers of the 19th century. He invented the manifesto and created the Conservative party only then to smash it up over the Corn Laws. He was, first, a reactionary on the big issues of his day: the extension of the franchise; the easing of discrimination against Catholics; and the high tariffs on grain imports that profited landed Tories at the expense of everyone else. Then he embraced reform, broke with the diehards in his own party and combined with the opposition to end the Corn Laws. This is what makes him so fascinating. And too much for Rees-Mogg’s baffled synapses, which can’t handle this much complexity. Nearly every historian judges that Peel was correct to repeal the disastrous tariffs that contributed to the murderous famine in Ireland and alienated less affluent Britons from the governing elite. Rees-Mogg almost seems to agree only then to suggest that Peel made a mistake by “dividing (Conservatives) against themselves”. So was Peel right to put enlightened policy, free trade and saving lives before short-term party interest? Or was he wrong? Nearly 200 years later, muddle-headed Mogg doesn’t know. If you want to read about the Victorians, AN Wilson, Simon Heffer, David Cannadine and Peter Ackroyd have all published acclaimed books. The only purpose of this dreadful pulp is to demonstrate why Britain’s past is no more safe in Jacob Rees-Mogg’s hands than its future. • The Victorians: Twelve Titans Who Forged Britain by Jacob Rees-Mogg is published by WH Allen (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99