Eoin Morgan has warned his England players that “blind belief” will not be enough to claim World Cup success this summer, with the captain eyeing a win by any means possible – rather than a statement of intent – against South Africa on Thursday. Four years of trailblazing one-day cricket will finally come to a head over the next six and a half weeks as England, the world’s No 1 ranked side and playing on home soil, look to claim their first 50-over global trophy at the 17th attempt. But while Morgan was satisfied with the leadup – he reported a fully fit squad, from which Liam Plunkett is expected to get the nod over Mark Wood as third seamer – the message followed that only an ability to respond to adversity will see them prevail. “In my head there is still a lot more to do, because we will get beaten by teams, we will get knocked down and have to come back,” said Morgan, who makes his 200th ODI appearance for England after recovering from a fractured finger. “And if we’re showing blind belief and not reacting to what is in front of us then that is no good. We need to be able to react and get better as the tournament goes on. It will throw up something to test us, maybe being five down early or chasing 150 and we’re eight down for 100. “ We’ll need to be open-minded as to how we tackle each game. We’re going into this tournament with eyes wide open and there is still work to be done.” Asked if England’s explosive batting line-up, one that has posted 300-plus totals 38 times since the last World Cup (17 more than the next best, India), will look to lay down a marker, Morgan simply replied: “No, no. A win under any circumstances, yeah.” While Morgan and his fellow captains had an audience with the Queen at Buckingham Palace after practice on Wednesday, he insisted he would avoid tub-thumping pre-match words. Instead he will only offer a touch of “direction” should the dressing room feel “scattered” before the big push. He said: “The first game of a World Cup or a series always feels different, and that’s natural for it to feel different because it will. Accepting that, and finding a way of dealing with it on the day, is a challenge within itself but one that we’re looking forward to. “It’s difficult to describe [the team’s mood] unless you actually hear them say it, but I think there’s a lot of belief within the room. We’re very confident within our own game.” South Africa know all about expectation, having pitched up at previous World Cups among the favourites and yet suffered for it. Faf du Plessis leads a side slightly shorn of stardust following the retirement of AB de Villiers and a shoulder injury that means Dale Steyn will miss the opening fixture. But with 13 wins from their past 16 ODIs, they must not be underestimated. “It’s a case of making sure that we have a really good time together, because that’s when you are most relaxed,” said Du Plessis. “When you are intense and desperate, that’s when you make mistakes.” Du Plessis admitted his batsmen will need to take a few deliveries to adapt to Jofra Archer, who is expected to share the new ball with Chris Woakes, but feels that the pace of Kagiso Rabada provides him with a significant weapon of his own. He added: “KG, to be a talent like he is, he doesn’t need any guidance from me. I can try and speak to him a little bit from a tactical point of view but I certainly am not trying to tell him how to bowl. He knows much more than I do. “It’s just about letting him free. He’s a world-class athlete and what people like him do best is they want a stage to perform and this World Cup will be a stage for KG to once again show the world what kind of bowler he is.”