In the great war between kitchen gadget fanciers and kitchen gadget cynics, one thing rarely comes up: the rice cooker. I’ve heard more domestic arguments about Brevilles than I have about these wonders, even though the toastie is a much less aspirational foodstuff than perfect, fluffy rice. Rice cookers don’t have to be expensive, and you can do plenty of things in them that aren’t rice, such as vegetables and even meat. But still, they are pretty niche. In supermarkets, however, the ready-cooked rice market is going strong, which suggests that while no one wants help from a machine, a lot of us don’t really trust ourselves to cook rice. The Chinese company Joyoung clearly believes it can overcome the technophobia. The S5 Steam Rice Cooker, its latest attempt at automation, is so slick, so advanced, that it looks like a fictional version of the future. If you would like a loose transport analogy: while some of us have been wondering whether or not the car is going to catch on, this outfit has been developing the Tesla. There is an ad that could be for Concorde or James Bond, right up to the point where the hero turns out to be a grain of rice, and its dramatic journey one of exquisite plumping. The S5 will be launched in London next week, though you won’t be able to buy the UK version until next year. It talks to you when you turn it on. “What’s it saying?”, I asked Pearl Zhu, its handler – currently it doesn’t speak English, although the UK version will, naturally enough. “It’s saying: ‘Welcome to your rice cooker,’” she says, with the trace of a smile: because what else would it be saying? It’s no faster to steam rice than it is to boil it; indeed, it is considerably slower – 35 minutes – even though it is considerably hotter, at 120C. You can turn the steamer on remotely with an app. It’s shaped a bit like a Nespresso machine, with a chamber of water at the back, producing steam that shoots down what Joyoung calls an energy stick, into a pot of uncooked rice. The problem with boiling rice, according to Zhu, is that it’s never evenly heated – some bits are always more cooked than others – plus it sticks. I’m sceptical about this, but I am also 35 minutes away from my first machine-steamed rice, so let’s all just reserve judgment, shall we? While we wait: you could use this steamer for souped-up rice ideas – the rainbow bowl, featuring many coloured vegetables, for instance. It has accessories for steaming fish, pumpkin or sweet potato. You could make a breakfast congee – basically more rice, with more liquid – and put pickles in it, and never eat anything else again. But there are plenty of rice styles you wouldn’t take anywhere near this or any other steamer. Persian rice, with a golden crust, which is like a trust exercise between you and yourself (you need to not poke it or it won’t form a crust, but you can’t let it burn). The rice masterworks of the Mediterranean: risotto, paella, those funny, unassuming French dishes looking very service-station, then exploding with flavour. The classic British rice pudding. You wouldn’t do any of these in a machine, because the point of the machine (aside from evenness) is that you don’t have to attend to the rice. Whereas the point of rice, mostly, is that you have to do more than look after it, you have to be its Florence bloody Nightingale, and maybe that’s part of why you love it. Not all rices are the same, but steaming does work on the main varieties – jasmine as effortlessly as basmati. It’s a match for the mad sticky rices of Japan, and can unobtrusively tease out the differences that connoisseurs can taste between the rices of north-east and north-west China. Delia Smith used to say that the enemy of fluffy rice was the wooden spoon; she didn’t elaborate, but I guess implicit is that the best friend of fluffy rice is the stainless steel energy stick. The 35 minutes are up; bear in mind, there is nothing in this steamer except rice, not so much as a pea. So I am not expecting to be at all excited – not by the appearance, not by the taste and especially not by the fact that it comes out cooked, given that it has been in for as long as someone might take to roast some vegetables. Yet it is peculiarly perfect. For a start, it looks larger than long-grain (though that’s the packet I saw it come out of), fuller, rounder and smoother. It is to regular rice as American teeth are to British teeth. Could it even be whiter? Texturally, it’s less waterlogged and it’s preternaturally even, although I can’t say whether I preferred it that way. It tastes a bit like it came out of a bag. You would have to eat rice every day, and congee for breakfast, to justify this thing, which is gigantic, expensive (£310!) and will make all your other appliances – also your family – look dated. I wonder who would ever buy one, in real life. Still, if you even saw one at a distance, you would fall in love with rice all over again.