Labour’s ruling body is facing demands to ballot all party members about whether to start campaigning immediately for a second EU referendum, as thousands sign petitions asking for the party’s policy to change in the wake of the European elections. Campaigners in the Labour party wanting a “people’s vote” wrote to the national executive committee on Tuesday requesting a members’ ballot or special conference. Each of these options has been endorsed by Labour’s deputy leader, Tom Watson. The letter said: “Party members are increasingly concerned that Labour’s chances of winning the next general election could be harmed if we fail to commit clearly to a public vote on Brexit, and to campaign for remain in that referendum. “Polling over the last year has been clear that over 80% of members, and over 70% of Labour voters, want a second referendum and to remain. Party conference, where policy is normally set, is still four months away, only a month before the end of the article 50 extension. It’s essential that we clarify our position as a party much more quickly.” Mike Buckley, the director of the Labour For A People’s Vote campaign, said the group had already received thousands of signatures from Labour members calling for a special conference or members’ ballot, to be held before the end of June. With several grassroots campaigns already beginning to push for a shift in the party’s Brexit policy, Labour is expected to come under more pressure from constituency parties in the coming days. Jeremy Corbyn shifted his position to saying he would back a referendum on “any deal” after an exodus of voters to the pro-remain Liberal Democrats and Greens. He said he was “listening to both sides” and would consult members about the best way forward. However, there are calls for the Labour leader to take a more unequivocal position of backing an immediate second referendum, as hardline Brexit supporters take a lead in the Conservative race to be the next prime minister. Senior shadow cabinet ministers – John McDonnell, Keir Starmer, Diane Abbott and Emily Thornberry – have all moved in recent days to a clear backing for a second referendum. Labour sources played down the idea of a members’ ballot or special conference but suggested the party could announce ways of consulting constituency parties and trade unions, a bespoke call for evidence or consultation through the national policy forum. There are several campaigns all now endorsing the idea of a members’ ballot. Michael Chessum, national organiser for Another Europe Is Possible, a leftwing anti-Brexit campaign, said: “A special conference would be better from the point of view of giving unions a vote and allowing delegates to debate the issue properly. “But ultimately it’s essential that members – who are overwhelmingly anti-Brexit and in favour of free movement – have a serious, binding, say on Labour’s policy, and a poll could be a mechanism for doing this. The fact that the party’s policy has been held back by a tiny number of unelected people at the centre, against the overwhelming will of members, is doing profound damage to the left and giving our opponents a major boost.“It’s clear that Labour and the left are shifting rapidly towards an anti-Brexit position, including at a very senior level, as well as [with] the big majority of the grassroots. What’s missing at the moment is a clear and deliberate announcement, something like a set piece speech from Jeremy [Corbyn] which sets out Labour’s determination to campaign for a final say as part of a wider radical programme.”