Sport has a habit of creating heroes from the ranks of the previously unknown. In 1982, the young goalkeeper Nigel Spink came from nowhere to help Aston Villa win the European Cup. Two years later, another young English keeper took centre-stage in a European final. Tony Parks’ rise from reserve goalkeeper to Uefa Cup final hero was, in his own words, “the sort of thing you read about in comics.” Born in Hackney, Parks had been at Tottenham since 1979, but had only started three games in his first four seasons at the club. Given a one-year contract in the summer of 1983, Parks knew he had reached make-or-break time at the club he supported. As understudy to Ray Clemence, Parks knew it would take a lucky break – or dislocation – for him to get into the team. In January 1984, Clemence dislocated his shoulder at Fulham in an FA Cup tie, giving Parks the chance to earn a new contract. “He won’t let us down,” said assistant manager Peter Shreeves as Parks prepared to take his place between the sticks for the replay against Fulham. “He’s very sharp and his handling is excellent.” Keeping a clean sheet in Tottenham’s win was a confidence booster and soon Parks was seemingly making the No 1 shirt his own. Another clean sheet followed against Ipswich and Parks continued to perform well over the next couple of months. Despite Clemence returning to full training, manager Keith Burkinshaw was not guaranteeing the former England international his place. “In some clubs an international player gets back automatically but not here. Tony is showing the benefit of a long spell in the team. He has growing confidence and more of an understanding with the rest of the defence. It wouldn’t be fair if I left him out.” But just as an injury had given Parks an opportunity, it also looked as if it might take it away. In the first leg of the quarter-final away at Austria Vienna, Park suffered a deep cut in his knee that left him with three stitches and damaged prospects. Clemence returned to the team, but fate was about to intervene again. He severed a finger tendon in training at the end of March and Parks’ path to glory opened again. As news broke that Burkinshaw would be leaving the club at the end of the season, Parks was given the chance to do just the opposite. Parks played his part for Tottenham in the semi-final. He made a crucial save towards the end of the first leg of the semi-final at Hajduk Split and then kept a clean sheet back at White Hart Lane as Spurs progressed on away goals. As the final approached, it was becoming evident that Clemence would not be fit. He had barely pulled on his gloves for Tottenham a few months earlier, but now Parks was playing in Tottenham’s first European final in a decade 1974. Anderlecht may have reached the final in highly dubious circumstances – it later emerged that their chairman bribed the referee in their semi-final against Nottingham Forest – but their quality was unquestionable. They were the reigning champions and their team was full of internationals such as Morten Olsen, Erwin Vandenbergh, Franky Vercauteren, Frank Arnesen and the emerging Enzo Scifo. This was their fifth European final in eight years; to put that in some context, Tottenham are currently preparing for the fifth in their history. Parks had very little to do in the first leg in Brussels, with Tottenham creating the best openings. Paul Miller gave the visitors the lead just before the hour but, when Parks was unable to hold an Arnesen drive with five minutes to go, Olsen tapped in for a crucial equaliser. Hugo Lloris Goalkeeper  Season apps  43 He's captained France in more matches than any other, leading his country in 85 of 110 caps. Kieran Trippier Right-back Apps 37 Goals 1 Although his family are Manchester United fans, he joined Manchester City aged nine, signing a professional contract in 2007. Toby Alderweireld Centre-back  Apps 49 Goals 0 Played for Atlético Madrid in the 2014 final, which they lost to Real. He has represented Belgium at every level from Under-15s upwards. Jan Vertonghen Centre-back Apps 33 Goals 2 Belgium’s most-capped player with 112 appearances. He has represented them at the Olympics, Euros and World Cup. Danny Rose Left-back Apps 36. Goals 0 Scored a wonder goal on his Premier League debut against Arsenal as a 19-year-old. Ben Davies Left-back Apps 40 Goals 0 He is fluent in Welsh. He was part of Viborg’s academy while his family lived in Denmark for three years. Eric Dier Midfielder Apps 27 Goals 3 His family moved to Portugal when he was seven. In 2011, he spent six months at Everton, but did not play for their first team. Moussa Sissoko Midfielder Apps 43 Goals 0 Signed for £30m from Newcastle and has been a revelation this season. Joined his local academy, Espérance Aulnay, aged six. Victor Wanyama Midfielder Apps 22 Goals 1 He made his international debut aged 15, and became the first Kenyan to score in the Champions League when Celtic beat Barcelona. Christian Eriksen Midfielder Apps 50 Goals 10 He has scored the most direct free-kicks in the Premier League since joining the club. He started his career in the Middelfart academy. Dele Alli Midfielder Apps 37 Goals 7 Lived in Nigeria for two years from the age of nine. He grew up supporting Liverpool. Huge Fortnite fan. Érik Lamela Midfielder Apps 33 Goals 6 He scored 120 goals in one season when playing for River Plate’s youth side. Barcelona tried to sign him, offering his parents jobs and a house. Son Heung-min Forward Apps 47 Goals 20 His £22m move from Bayer Leverkusen made him the most expensive Asian footballer. Joined Hamburg’s academy aged 16 and recently said he will not get married until retiring. Lucas Moura Forward Apps 48 Goals 15 Won a silver medal for Brazil at the London Olympics. His hat-trick against Ajax was the first by a Brazilian in a Champions League semi-final. Harry Kane Forward Apps 39 Goals 24 Played for Arsenal and Watford before joining Tottenham. Has two Labrador retrievers, named after his NFL heroes, Tom Brady and Russell Wilson. Fernando Llorente Forward Apps 34 Goals 8 He was a member of Spain’s victorious 2010 World Cup and 2012 Euros squads. There was a feeling of slight disappointment after the away leg. They had missed chances; captain Steve Perryman had picked up a booking and would be suspended for the second leg; and Parks’ mistake had let Arnesen score. Winning without the experience of Clemence, Perryman, and Glenn Hoddle would not be easy and things started slowly at a nervy White Hart Lane. However, the game sprung into action in the second half. Anderlecht took the lead on the hour through Alex Czerniatinski and, even though Spurs laid siege to the opposition goal, it looked as if Anderlecht would hold on to their trophy. Graham Roberts had other ideas, though. After Ossie Ardiles somehow struck the bar from a few yards out, the replacement skipper slotted home calmly to send the match into extra time. With no further goals, the dreaded penalty shootout became a reality. Roberts took Tottenham’s opening penalty and scored, putting pressure on Olsen as he stepped up for Anderlecht in front of 46,000 fans. “Not an easy job for the ice-cool Olsen,” said the excellent Brian Moore on ITV. “Can he beat Parks?” SAVED IT!” yelled Moore. “It’s not over yet. Five for each side, remember,” added the commentator, explaining the relatively new concept of penalties to the viewing public. The next six penalties were all scored, putting Tottenham 4-3 up and on the brink of victory. Danny Thomas just needed to roll his penalty home and Spurs would have won the third European trophy of their history. But the full-back missed, giving Anderlecht hope – and giving Parks a chance to write himself into Tottenham folklore. As Thomas slowly made his way back to the halfway line, a chorus of “One Danny Thomas” filled the night sky. All was not lost. Tottenham were still 4-3 up, so Arnor Gudjohnsen (Eidur’s father) knew he had to score to send the shootout into sudden death. He hit his penalty to Parks’ right. “With the first, the Anderlecht player told me where he was going to put it,” Parks said later. “I could see in his eyes where it was going. With the next three I just guessed and got it wrong. On the last, I changed my mind and went the other way and got it right.” “And he’s saved it,” screamed Moore in commentary as Parks sprinted off in celebration. “Spurs have won it. Tony Parks is the hero.” Swamped by jubilant teammates, Parks had delivered the perfect going away present to Burkinshaw – and earned himself a new two-year deal. “At the start of the season I wasn’t even sure I had a future here,” said Parks. “I did not think they would be keeping me on, so it’s fantastic for something like this to happen.” He stayed at Spurs until 1988 without ever establishing himself as the club’s first choice keeper, but he will always be remembered for that night on 23 May 1984. Parks was a hero, even if it was just for one day. • This article appeared first on That 1980s Sports Blog• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter