Tammy Abraham is glad he stayed at Aston Villa after their promotion to the Premier League, having been in talks about cutting short his loan to join Wolves from Chelsea in January. Abraham scored 26 league goals for Villa and has made it clear he wants to play first-team football in the top flight next season, whether with Chelsea or elsewhere. Villa are understood to be keen on signing the striker in a £25m permanent deal. With Chelsea facing a two-window Fifa transfer ban, Abraham is among the youngsters hoping to benefit from more first-team opportunities. If called on, Abraham, who will represent England at this summer’s Under-21 European Championship, is adamant he could lead the line. “Every player wants to start,” he said. “Obviously if it is at Chelsea, a team like Chelsea is always difficult, because they have got world-class players. It is always going to be difficult to bring in youngsters and bring in people like myself – it is a big role. “But for me, it is about believing in myself and to just keep doing what I do. I am still young and I am still improving. The aim is to be at the highest level and playing the best football, and if Chelsea say they need me there I will put 100% in. I am person who believes in myself. So wherever I am at I believe I will get in and play and score goals.” Asked if he could return to Villa next season, the 21-year-old replied: “You can never say never.” Abraham said a move to Wolves stalled because of concerns over Fifa regulations that stipulate a player “may be registered with a maximum of three clubs during one season … but only eligible to play official matches for two clubs”. He had already played for Chelsea and their under-23s before being loaned to Villa last August. “I had that situation in January where it looked like I was going to Wolves but Dean Smith spoke to me he said: ‘Listen, stay here, we believe in you, the boys believe in you, the fans believe in you and we’ll get promoted,’” Abraham said. “I am glad I did. That’s the aim. It wasn’t my first choice to come to the Championship but I don’t look back on it. It has been a fantastic year for me and the boys as well, and to clinch it off we got promoted. I would like to think it [the move to Wolves] was close.” Abraham has enjoyed another immensely successful Championship campaign – he has scored 52 goals across two seasons in the division, after a fruitful spell at Bristol City in 2016-17. After a disappointing loan at Swansea, Abraham had to prove his critics wrong. “I have developed a lot. Coming here it was always tough; there was always a lot of pressure. People were questioning if I could score the same amount of goals as I did last time. I just believed in myself. I give credit to the boys, they created a lot of chances for me and I’ve scored a lot of goals.”