Ecuador’s Richard Carapaz took a big step towards Giro d’Italia glory by holding off the two-time champion Vincenzo Nibali and increasing his lead over Primoz Roglic in Tuesday’s 16th stage. The Movistar rider regained contact with Team Bahrain Merida’s Nibali in the gruelling ascent up the Mortirolo pass, an 11.9km climb at an average gradient of 10.9%, as the favourite Roglic was dropped and eventually lost more than a minute. Overall, Carapaz retained the pink jersey with a 1 min 47 sec lead on Nibali, who leapfrogged Roglic into second place. Roglic is now 2 min 9sec behind the leader. “The truth is that it’s been a very complicated day, especially because of the weather conditions and the climbs,” said Carapaz. “But as a team we’ve worked very well for Mikel Landa and myself. It’s another good day in terms of time gained on GC.” The final part of the brutal Mortirolo climb took place in a sinister crepuscule, with the only light coming from the TV motorbikes’ headlights as rain further reduced visibility. The Italian Giulio Ciccone won the 194km stage from Lovere at the end of a long breakaway after the race organisers decided that the route would avoid the much-feared, snow-covered Gavia pass due to the risk of avalanches. The win helped Ciccone increase his lead in the mountains classification as the main favourites had shown no interest in the stage victory. Among the top three contenders, only Nibali had already climbed the Mortirolo in race conditions, and he looked to take advantage of that when he attacked early on, hoping to then increase a potential lead in the descent. But while the move was damaging to Roglic, Carapaz was well-protected by his team-mates, including Landa, and the Ecuadorian eventually clawed his way back. Roglic had the Briton Simon Yates and the Dutchman Bauke Mollema with him to try to limit his time losses. Stage 16, Lovere to Ponte di Legno, 194 km 1. Giulio Ciccone (ITA) Trek - Segafredo 5:36:24 2. Jan Hirt (CZE) Astana Pro Team 3. Fausto Masnada (ITA) Androni Giocattoli - +1:20 Sidermec 4. Vincenzo Nibali (ITA) Bahrain - Merida +1:41 5. Hugh Carthy (GB) EF Education First 6. Richard Carapaz (ECU) Movistar Team 7. Mikel Landa (ESP) Movistar Team 8. Joe Dombrowski (USA) EF Education First 9. Damiano Caruso (ITA) Bahrain - Merida +1:49 10. Mattia Cattaneo (ITA) Androni Giocattoli - +2:03 Sidermec Overall leaders 1. Richard Carapaz (ECU) Movistar Team 70:02:05 2. Vincenzo Nibali (ITA) Bahrain - Merida +1:47 3. Primo* Roglic (SLO) Team Jumbo - Visma +2:09 4. Mikel Landa (ESP) Movistar Team +3:15 5. Bauke Mollema (NED) Trek - Segafredo +5:00 6. Rafal Majka (POL) BORA - hansgrohe +5:40 7. Miguel Ángel López (COL) Astana Pro Team +6:17 8. Simon Yates (GBR) Mitchelton - Scott +6:46 9. Pavel Sivakov (RUS) Team INEOS +7:51 10. Jan Polanc (SLO) UAE Team Emirates +8:06