Torey Krug lined up St Louis center Robert Thomas and knocked him off his skates, delighting the crowd and sending an unmistakable message to rest of the Blues: the Bruins had woken up from their 11-day layoff, and they were ready to fight for the Stanley Cup. “I think it gave our team energy, and that’s all you’re trying to do out there,” Krug said after Boston rallied from a two-goal deficit to beat St Louis 4-2 in Game 1 on Monday night. “Hopefully it gave the guys a boost on the bench.” Sean Kuraly scored to break a third-period tie and assisted on another goal, and Tuukka Rask stopped 18 shots to help the Bruins complete their comeback. Game 2 in the best-of-seven series is on Wednesday night. .@ToreyKrug: closet linebacker.#NHLBruins pic.twitter.com/AzbOowmCur Forty-nine years after Bobby Orr flew through the air to beat the Blues for the 1970 NHL title, the Bruins got goals from defensemen Connor Clifton and Charlie McAvoy. Brad Marchand added an empty netter with about three minutes left. The unofficial clincher came when Krug got up off the ice after losing his helmet in a tussle with David Perron in front of the Boston net. Jordan Binnington made 34 saves for the Blues, who haven’t been back to the final since getting swept by Boston in 1970. But it was Boston who were struggling with a long layoff early on. Idle since May 16, when they completed their sweep of the Carolina Hurricanes, the Bruins spotted St Louis a two-goal lead before snapping out of their slumber. Brayden Schenn made it 1-0 lead midway through the first period on a third-chance shot. In the first minute of the second, David Pastrnak got sloppy behind the Bruins’ net and Schenn was there again, this time to pass it to Vladimir Tarasenko in the slot to make it 2-0. But the Bruins went on to outshoot the Blues 18-3 in the second period, finishing the game with a 38-20 edge. “I was pretty much a spectator after that,” Rask said. “In the second period we stopped skating, turned it over and gave them momentum,” Blues coach Craig Berube said. “I thought they were the better team after that.” The crowd began a chant of “Let’s Go Bruins!” Although David Krejci’s penalty quieted the building, it came back to life thanks to Krug. “You know, you don’t want to mess with that guy,” Clifton said. “Don’t make that guy mad.”