Giannis Antetokounmpo and James Harden got the most votes, and Damian Lillard and Kemba Walker were also big winners when the All-NBA teams were announced. Those guards can cash in with supermax contracts based on their selections to one of the three All-NBA teams that were announced on Thursday. Rounding out the first team were Stephen Curry, Paul George and Nikola Jokic, who was Denver’s first All-NBA selection since Carmelo Anthony in 2010. The 2018-19 All-NBA First Team! @Giannis_An34 @StephenCurry30 @Yg_Trece @JHarden13 Nikola Jokic pic.twitter.com/Lib2RfRPuN LeBron James also was voted to the third team, tying the NBA record with his 15th All-NBA selection. However, his streak of 11 consecutive seasons as a first-team player, a record he shared with Karl Malone, came to an end. He did make his 15th consecutive appearance on the All-NBA roster, joining Kobe Bryant as the only players to make that many teams in consecutive fashion. The 15th All-NBA nod also tied James with Bryant, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Tim Duncan for the most in league history. James has been a lock for most of his career, but was no sure thing after an injury-shortened first season in Los Angeles. The second-longest active streak now belongs to Curry, who’s been on each of the past six All-NBA teams. That means he wouldn’t be able to catch Bryant and James’ longevity mark until 2028. Antetokounmpo and Harden were unanimous selections, receiving all 100 votes from a panel of sports writers and broadcasters who had to choose two guards, two forwards for each of the three teams. Walker was the final selection but all that matters is that he made it. By doing so, he became eligible to receive a five-year contract extension worth about $221m from the Hornets if he opts to stay in Charlotte, a reward the NBA put in recently as further incentive to keep players with their current teams. The Hornets could have offered him about $30m less if he wasn’t selected and failed to earn the criteria for the largest possible contract. Lillard, a second-team selection, can get more than $190m over four years with a new contract in Portland. Golden State’s Klay Thompson, Washington’s Bradley Beal and Minnesota’s Karl-Anthony Towns were also in position to cash in with those lucrative extensions, but none was an All-NBA selection. Philadelphia center Joel Embiid led the second team that along with Lillard included Kevin Durant, Kawhi Leonard and Kyrie Irving. James and Walker headlined a third team that featured Russell Westbrook, Blake Griffin and Rudy Gobert.