Heidi Allen, the leader of the pro-remain Change UK party, has challenged the Brexit party leader, Nigel Farage, to a live TV debate before the European elections. Allen, the former Conservative MP who joined the breakaway Independent Group, said she wanted to take on Farage so the British people could decide which new party’s vision they preferred. The challenge was made on Monday night in Change UK’s party election broadcast, launched in Cardiff at a rally in which Allen spoke alongside the former Labour MP Chuka Umunna, another key voice in the party. “I’m challenging Nigel Farage to join me in a new live TV debate and let’s share with the British people our vision for the future and let them decide which they prefer,” Allen said. “Brexit is too huge an issue for our country. It’s about the future for our children and grandchildren, so I hope very much he will join me and take that invitation and that you will join us too.” Speaking after the broadcast at the rally, Allen said the proposed debate would be about “two competing visions in these European elections”. “One put forward by Nigel Farage’s Brexit party, which seeks to divide communities, demonise migrants and blame all of the world’s problems on the EU, and the other vision put forward by Change UK, with Britain at the centre of the global community and leading on the world stage,” she said. “I want to talk about the open, global, outward-looking Britain that I know that we are, with exciting opportunities ahead of us as we work together with our neighbours and allies in the EU.” Polls currently show Farage’s party has a significant lead over both Labour and the Conservatives, who could be pushed into fifth or sixth place. An Opinium/Observer survey of voting intentions in the European elections released at the weekend gave the Brexit party 34% of the vote, 13 points ahead of Labour on 21%. The Liberal Democrats were on 12%, with the Conservatives in fourth on 11% and Change UK on 3%. The breakaway party is regularly polling behind the Green party and the Lib Dems, both of which had successful campaigns in the local elections a fortnight ago, in which Change UK did not stand. The launch on Monday night also heard from the party’s Brexit spokeswoman, Anna Soubry, a former Tory MP, as well as the campaign director, Chris Leslie, a former Labour MP. It is unclear whether broadcasters would allow a head-to-head debate between Allen and Farage to go ahead without the participation of the other parties. On Friday night, the BBC pulled Allen’s appearance on Have I Got News for You, citing broadcaster impartiality rules. Change UK has written to the BBC asking for a full explanation of the decision, claiming the broadcaster was providing Farage with unduly favourable coverage.