Boris Johnson and Dominic Raab have been warned that Tory MPs would be prepared to bring down any prime minister backing a no-deal Brexit, triggering a general election, amid fears the leadership hopefuls will veer to the right in response to a surge in support for Nigel Farage at the European election. A string of senior Conservatives, led by Philip Hammond, the chancellor, delivered a sobering message to candidates that many Tory MPs are prepared to take drastic action to stop a no-deal Brexit. “Any prime minister would find it very difficult to govern if he or she were to pursue a no-deal Brexit without parliament’s permission,” Hammond said, while refusing several times to rule out losing the whip in order to vote against his own prime minister in a confidence motion. There are fears among Tory moderates that many of the eight declared leadership candidates will adopt hardline Brexit positions to win over the Conservative membership. The highly Eurosceptic selectorate of 160,000 will choose who is to be the next prime minister from a shortlist of two candidates whittled down by MPs. The leadership hopefuls will also be desperate to win back supporters tempted by Farage’s Brexit party, which is expected to top the European elections, with the Tories pushed as far back as fourth or fifth place. Johnson and Raab, two of the leading candidates, both said they would take the UK out of the EU at the end of October with a deal or no deal, as they positioned themselves on the hard Brexit side of the contest. Raab even suggested he would be prepared to ignore the will of parliament in order to do so, telling the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show: “It’s very difficult for parliament now to legislate against a no deal, or in favour of a further extension, unless a resolute prime minister is willing to acquiesce in that – and I would not.” In contrast, Michael Gove, the environment secretary, is pitching himself as a leave supporter who is more willing to compromise on a deal in an attempt to keep the party together. He threw his hat into the ring to be prime minister on Sunday, saying he was the candidate with both the belief in Brexit and the “wherewithal” to negotiate a better deal with Brussels. That appeared to be a swipe at the organisational skills of Johnson, his old adversary, whom he turned against in the last leadership contest and forced out of the race with a withering critique of his suitability for the job. Gove, along with most of the other candidates in the Tory leadership contest, is still saying he would keep no deal on the table but has not made leaving at the end of October a red line. Andrea Leadsom, the leader of the Commons, has the same position as Raab and Johnson on leaving by the end of October regardless, while Esther McVey, the hardest Brexit candidate, said she wanted a “clean break” no-deal Brexit without even trying to renegotiate the withdrawal agreement. Jeremy Hunt, the leading candidate among MPs, said he would keep no deal as an option, while using his business experience to negotiate a better deal. Only Rory Stewart, the international development secretary, and Matt Hancock, the health secretary, have effectively ruled out pursuing a no-deal Brexit and stressed they would be in favour of negotiating a compromise. Hancock said May’s successor must be more “brutally honest” about the “trade-offs” required to get a deal through parliament. Stewart said a no-deal Brexit was “undeliverable, unnecessary and is going to damage our country” and revealed that Johnson had privately told him that the was “not going for a no-deal exit”, before publicly taking a different position in Switzerland on Friday. Conservatives on the soft Brexit and remain wings of the party said on Sunday they were serious about stopping a no-deal departure from the EU. Speaking on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show, Hammond told the candidates: “Parliament has voted very clearly to oppose a no-deal Brexit. A prime minister who ignores parliament cannot survive very long.” Justine Greening, a former cabinet minister arguing for a second referendum, also warned that the contest was becoming a “beauty parade of hard Brexiteers”. The government currently only has a majority of four, even with the support of the Democratic Unionist party, meaning it would take just two Tory MPs to withhold their support for a new prime minister to lose the ability to get legislation through. Several Conservative MPs said they thought the chances of a general election will quickly rise if any candidate decides to pursue a no-deal Brexit policy. Currently, Hunt is leading the race among his colleagues with around 29 endorsements, while Johnson and Raab both have about 22 publicly declared supporters. Raab has about 18 public backers, while Sajid Javid, the home secretary, who has not yet declared his candidacy, has about 11. In surveys of members by the ConservativeHome website, Johnson beats all the other candidates in head-to-head runoffs, making him the clear favourite if he makes the shortlist. However, many of those involved in the “Stop Boris” campaign among Tory MPs are concerned that he would be too divisive in a general election against Labour because of his involvement in the Vote Leave campaign. Labour is also braced for difficult results at the European elections, with John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, saying he expects the party to get a “good kicking”. There is likely to be pressure on Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, to shift his position in favour of a second referendum in the coming weeks if the party loses ground to the Liberal Democrats and Greens as expected. Tom Watson, Labour’s deputy leader, criticised the party’s “mealy-mouthed” failure to fully endorse a second referendum. He won support from Shami Chakrabarti, the shadow attorney general and an ally of Corbyn, who said it was “past midnight” for shifting to support for a public vote. But Len McCluskey, the general secretary of Unite and another ally of Corbyn, accused Watson of being an ineffective Machiavelli using the issue of a second referendum to attempt a coup against the leadership.