Theatre and scholarship combine with aerial archaeology and neat graphics as Alice Roberts introduces a second series that profiles six more British towns and their place in history. In a fascinating opener, she explores wartime Dover, the port known as “the lock and key to the kingdom”, which formed the first line of defence during the second world war. It’s an engaging history lesson that spans Dunkirk, the Battle of Britain and the women’s land army. Mike Bradley It is worth tuning in for Graham Norton’s tongue-in-cheek commentary alone as he covers the final live from Tel Aviv. UK entrant Michael Rice could go all the way but can he out-Eurovision Icelandic synth-punks, latex-clad Belarusians and Slovenia’s answer to the xx? MB To the Birmingham Hippodrome, where Anita Rani and Ore Oduba find out which heat winners – from the south Asian dance, contemporary, ballet and street dance categories – will impress judges including the Royal Ballet’s Wayne McGregor and B-boy Junior of Wanted Posse crew. Ali Catterall What this series lacks in performing dogs and Diversity-standard dance troupes, it has made up for in sheer comfort. Ant and Dec are side by side, David Walliams is baiting Simon Cowell, and Amanda and Alesha are emoting in the right places. The Royal Variety Performance is one step nearer for tonight’s hopefuls. Hannah Verdier The Canadian thriller based on the novels of Giles Blunt gets darker still as psychopath Sharlene “Mama” Winston and her hoodie “warriors” reveal their intentions. A worried Kreeger remains chained to the bathtub; Henry is nowhere to be seen; and haunted detective Cardinal is having a bad day at the office. MB As cases develop, so does the appetite for more true-crime content. And so, despite HBO’s The Jinx and other Robert Durst-themed outings, prior to a new trial we return to the New York real estate scion for this two-parter. Regardless of any new analysis, it seems unlikely to blow the case wide open. Hannah J Davies The Imitation Game6.45pm, Film4 Dressed up as a war yarn about the Enigma code, Morten Tyldum’s film is a celebration of Bletchley Park’s hero, the mathematician Alan Turing, who was scandalously mistreated by the establishment because of his homosexuality. At its centre is Benedict Cumberbatch’s fine performance. Paul Howlett Rugby League: Catalans Dragons v Wigan Warriors 3.15pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Super League action from the unlikely setting of the Nou Camp. FA Cup Football: Manchester City v Watford 3.55pm, BBC One. Five-time winners City take on 1984 finalists Watford. Golf: USPGA Championship 4pm, Sky Sports Golf. Day three of the major. 