You can also make different coloured meringues for different coloured jellyfish. Or, before you transfer the meringue mixture to the piping bag, paint the inside with food dye to get coloured streaks. Prep time: 15 mins (cupcakes), 15 mins (meringue) Baking time: 20 mins (cupcakes), 1 hour (meringue) Makes: 12For the cupcakes 100g butter100g caster sugar100g eggs (about 2 medium) 100g self-raising flour35g ground almonds½ tsp almond extract2 tbsp milk90g frozen blueberries For the meringue40g egg white (about 1 large egg)Pinch of cream of tartar70g caster sugarFor the buttercream120g butter240g icing sugarAbout 2 tbsp whole milkGrated rind of 1 lemon Blue food dyePlusBlack food dyeVodka or gin Long, colourful sweets for the jellyfish legs Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/350F/gas mark 4. Line a 12-hole cupcake tin with paper cases. Cream together the butter and sugar until light in colour and fluffy. In a separate bowl, whisk together the eggs. Add the eggs to the mixture one to two tablespoons at a time, whisking well after each addition. Add the flour, ground almonds and almond extract, and whisk on slow speed. Add the milk and keep whisking until just combined. Don’t overmix. Use a spatula to fold in the frozen blueberries. Divide the mixture evenly between the 12 cupcake liners. Bake for 15 to 20 mins, or until risen, golden and firm on top. Transfer to a wire rack to cool. Leave the oven door open to cool to 100C/90C fan/210F/gas mark ¼. Next make the meringue. Whisk the egg whites until foamy, then add the cream of tartar and continue whisking until you have soft peaks. Add the caster sugar one tablespoon at a time, whisking well after each addition until you have a stiff glossy mixture. Transfer the meringue mixture to a piping bag with a large round nozzle attachement. Pipe 12 meringues on to a baking tray lined with greaseproof paper. Dip your finger in water and use to smooth down the tips of the meringues. Bake for one hour. Leave to cool before using black food dye mixed with a little alcohol to paint on the faces. Meanwhile, make the buttercream. Cream together the butter and icing sugar until light and fluffy. Add milk to lighten the texture, and add lemon rind and blue food dye to flavour and colour. Transfer to a piping bag with a decorative nozzle tip and pipe swirls on all the cupcakes. Add sweets and a meringue to each, so that they resemble jellyfish.