Graham Mackrell, the secretary of Sheffield Wednesday football club, has been fined £6,500 after he was found criminally responsible for the dangerous turnstile arrangements in operation on 15 April 1989 when 96 people were killed at its Hillsborough stadium. Mackrell was found guilty on 3 April of failing in his official duties as the stadium’s safety officer to ensure there were adequate turnstiles for the thousands of people with tickets to support Liverpool in the FA Cup semi-final against Nottingham Forest. He was also ordered to pay £5,000 towards prosecution costs. The charge was brought under the 1974 Health and Safety at Work Act, which requires responsible people at work to keep others safe, but is punishable only with a fine. The Crown Prosecution Service originally charged Mackrell with two other offences that carried possible prison sentences for alleged breaches of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 but both were dropped before the conclusion of the 10-week trial. The jury at Preston crown court found Mackrell criminally breached his safety officer duties by providing only seven turnstiles for all 10,100 people with tickets to stand and support Liverpool on the Leppings Lane terrace. Only 16 more turnstiles – all at the Leppings Lane end, which was described as a geographical bottleneck – were provided for the further 14,000 Liverpool fans with tickets to sit in the north and west stands. Film of the Leppings Lane turnstiles taken by South Yorkshire police was played in court, showing congestion at the turnstiles, which was severe “certainly from 2.25pm”, according to the judge, Sir Peter Openshaw, for the match, which was scheduled to kick off at 3pm. The queues of people “compacted into a dangerous crush”, one witness said, and police officers outside began to worry there was a risk of serious injury or death. At 2.52pm the officer in command, Ch Supt David Duckenfield, ordered the wide exit gates to be opened and allow large numbers of people into the ground, in response to repeated requests from the senior officer outside, Supt Roger Marshall. A tunnel directly in front of exit gate C was not closed off by police officers, and a large number of the 2,000 people who were allowed in went down that tunnel, into the central pens of the terrace. Those pens became lethally overcrowded, killing 96 men, women and children aged between 10 and 67. Hundreds more were injured, including some who suffered brain damage due to oxygen deprivation. The jury in the 10-week trial failed to reach a verdict on the charge against Duckenfield of having caused the deaths by gross negligence manslaughter after eight days of deliberation. The CPS is seeking a retrial, which Duckenfield is set to oppose, at a hearing set for 24 June. Mackrell’s barrister, Jason Beer QC, claimed in court that he was not even responsible for the turnstile arrangements at the Sheffield Wednesday ground. He also argued that supporters could arrive in the ground over a three-hour period, after turnstiles were opened at 12pm, so a crush was not foreseeable due to the allocation of only seven turnstiles for the 10,100 people with standing tickets. The jury did not accept those arguments and found him guilty by a 10-2 majority. Mackrell has become the first person to be found guilty of any criminal offence relating to the disaster 30 years ago.