In a proportional representation election, it can be counterproductive to become embroiled in debates on tactical voting (Letters, 21 May). However, my mind goes back to the debacle in the north-west region during the 2009 Euro election. Labour urged voters to support their party and desist from backing other reasonable options in a bid to keep out the far right. Then came the law of unintended consequences. When the votes were being shared out and the seats allocated, it became clear that one of two smaller parties would take the final place. Out of around 250,000 votes there were fewer than 6,000 separating them – the Green party was denied a seat, and it went to Nick Griffin of the BNP. My advice this time would be to respect the fairness of PR: vote for what you want and you are very likely to get it.Bob GledhillTrowbridge, Wiltshire • To all those European Union supporters who have been agonising in the columns of the Guardian in recent days over which pro-remain party to support in the Euro elections, I would say that you should count yourselves lucky. Guardian readers who think that the EU is an institutionally reactionary and increasingly unreformable organisation that it’s best to be outside of – and who are, obviously, too progressive, leftist, anti-nationalist and anti-racist to contemplate supporting Tory or Faragist politics – have no one at all to vote for.Albert BealeLondon • Why all the debate? Remainers must vote for parties with an unequivocal opposition to Brexit. As a lifelong Labour supporter, I will not be voting Labour. The real majority in the UK must overcome tribal loyalties for the general good. It is as simple as that.Les SummersKidlington, Oxfordshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition