The shopping centre landlord Intu has warned of a bigger drop in rental income this year as struggling retailers shut shops at a faster rate than expected. The Trafford Centre owner said Brexit uncertainties were also having an impact on letting demand and that it would suffer from a further rise in company voluntary arrangements (CVA) – an insolvency process used by struggling firms to shut underperforming stores and cut rents. Its shares dropped 8% to 92p. Two years ago they were changing hands at 279p, now they are worth less than 10% of their pre-financial crash peak. It is understood that the company failed to factor in potential shop closures by Debenhams and Sir Philip Green’s Arcadia as part of its previous forecasts. Debenhams last week revealed plans to close 22 department stores. None on its current list are in Intu centres, the landlord said, but more are expected. “We expect the remainder of 2019 to be challenging due to a higher than expected level of CVAs and a slowdown in new lettings as tenants delay their decisions due to the uncertainties in the current political and retail environments,” Intu’s chief executive, Matthew Roberts, said. “As such, we have revised our approach to how we guide towards our year-end like-for-like net rental income to factor in expected CVAs and have adjusted our 2019 guidance accordingly to minus four to six per cent,” he added. Intu, which also owns the Merry Hill centre in the West Midlands, the Gateshead Metrocentre and Braehead in Glasgow, had previously forecast a drop of only -1% to -2%. The company published the market update before its AGM on Friday. Intu has struggled amid a growing retail crisis, which has also hit its rival Hammerson. Hammerson last year abandoned its plans for a £3.4bn buyout of Intu after pressure from shareholders. Figures released by the Local Data Company earlier this week showed that the number of shops lying empty soared by more than 7,500 last year. Retail chains hardest hit included Poundworld, Maplin, Toys R Us and Multiyork, which fell into administration. There has been no let-up in 2019, with Debenhams and Topshop boss  Green’s Arcadia empire expected to close dozens of stores. Marks & Spencer is also in the process of closing 100 shops by 2022.