You could not write a more dramatic script. Galatasaray and Başakşehir, tied on 66 points at the top of Turkey’s Süper Lig, face each other in Sunday’s derby in the penultimate game of the season. Many followers of Turkish football will take issue with calling the game a derby. In Turkey a derby is widely accepted as being a match between two rivals. Galatasaray and Başaksehir may both be Istanbul sides but calling them rivals would be stretching it. First, Başakşehir were formed only in 1990 and reached the top division for the first time in 2007. Nor do they have many fans, which they have used to their advantage. Having millions of hardcore supporters is great when one is winning but the pressure can become unbearable when results go the wrong way. In many ways Başakşehir are the antithesis of the stereotypical image of Turkish football. They do not have a diehard supporter base, the atmosphere at home games is not intimidating and football really is not life or death. Abdullah Avci has a chance to make history as Başakşehir’s manager. The club are hoping to lift the league title for the first time and become only the sixth side to be crowned champions. But it should never have got to this stage. A few weeks ago Başakşehir were eight points ahead of second-placed Galatasaray; now they trail with a goal difference inferior by eight. Germany Bayern Munich need a point at home to Eintracht Frankfurt to claim the title but defeat would leave the door open for Borussia Dortmund, who must win at Borussia Mönchengladbach. One of Gladbach, Bayer Leverkusen and Frankfurt will secure the final Champions League spot (RB Leipzig will finish third). Wolfsburg, Hoffenheim and Werder Bremen are in contention with that trio for Europa League places.  Spain Barring unlikely goal difference swings, the only issue is who joins Barcelona, Atlético Madrid and Real Madrid in the Champions League. Valencia (58 points, +14 goal difference, away to Real Valladolid) or Getafe (58 points, +13 goal difference, home to Villarreal) are best placed but if neither win Sevilla (56 points, +13 goal difference, home to Athletic Bilbao) could sneak in.  France Monaco are not safe from relegation. They are above the drop zone by virtue of a goal difference better than Caen’s by one, and face the team immediately above them, Amiens, who need a point to be sure of safety. Caen go to Lyon. Second-bottom Dijon need to win at Paris St-Germain to have a chance of surviving. The third-bottom side can still save themselves via a promotion/relegation play-off.  Italy Two games remain in Serie A. Internazionale would guarantee a Champions League place with a win at Napoli on Sunday. Atalanta, who go to Juventus, can secure fourth place with favourable results. The relegation battle involving Empoli, Genoa, Udinese and Parma appears likely to go to the final day.  Portugal Benfica will wrap up the title if they beat Santa Clara or Porto fail to win at home to Sporting. GD Chaves must beat Tondela to avoid relegation at their opponents’ expense.  Netherlands The Europa League play-offs begin. Heracles Almelo welcome Utrecht and Vitesse visit Groningen in the first legs.  Ali Rampling They were first on merit. Avci’s team, who have conceded only 19 goals in 32 games, resembled a machine – a well-organised, tactically sound side who at times played attractive football. With players such as Emmanuel Adebayor, Gaël Clichy, Robinho and Demba Ba the team sheet reads like something from a Premier League veterans match. Başakşehir have an average age of 31, with a sprinkling of younger players such as the in-form attacking midfielder Irfan Can Kahveci. But the machine malfunctioned. In April Beşiktaş became the first side to beat them in 2019. Başakşehir then dropped points in their next three games. The pressure appears to have got to them. It would be a huge upset if they win the title. Başakşehir are the underdogs but the vibe is less Leicester and more Manchester City or RB Leipzig. Rival fans feel they have received a helping hand from the ruling party. They have a pretty extensive list of sponsors and a high wage bill for a new club with such a small fan base, but most top-flight clubs have received state help in some form, from new stadiums to debt restructures. Başakşehir have benefited from state support but that is not the sole reason they have upset the traditional order. They have a stable ownership model rarely seen in the Süper Lig, being a joint-stock company with an eight-strong board. They are able to make quick decisions and enforce long-term plans. Most major clubs in Turkey have a ‘foundation club’ model – like Real Madrid and Barcelona – often with thousands of official members. Leadership is elected and they operate in multiple sporting disciplines. The membership system helps keep club traditions, identity and principles in check but makes change very difficult to implement. This exercise in football democracy has been dogged by short-termism and a lack of accountability. Club presidents typically get three-year terms and need to win trophies to stay, meaning leadership is focused on today rather than tomorrow. Also, as it is the club and not the leadership footing the bill, spending has been out of control for decades. At Fenerbahçe, for example, Ali Koc, the scion of the wealthiest family in Turkey, replaced Aziz Yildirim after 20 years in charge. With the backing of the Fortune 500 conglomerate KocHolding a new era of spending might have been expected. However, Koc is not the owner of the club and has FFP to contend with. It soon emerged that the previous leadership had racked up €621m of debt. Koc has attempted to get the debt under control, restructure and bring in sweeping changes from transfer policy to youth development. A few weeks ago Fenerbahçe, a football juggernaut with tens of millions of fans, were hovering above the relegation zone. They have since moved up to 10th but it has been a traumatic season In the long term Koc’s project will modernise the club. Patience is required but patience is one of the rarest commodities in Turkish football. It has been a season of soul searching for most Süper Lig clubs. Years of mismanagement and a debt crisis made worse by the fluctuations of the Turkish Lira have forced them to reassess. The gravy train is over. Teams have been forced to give young players a chance and make loan and free signings. In the long run it will make for a healthier league with more sustainable clubs and a higher calibre of domestic player production – making use of the previously ignored 80 million-strong population. But there will be short-term pain for many sides. Galatasaray have adapted quickly. The Everton loanee Henry Onyekuru is their highest scorer with 13 goals. The Stoke City loanee Badou Ndiaye has been a star in midfield. The Lions promoted several players from the academy. Eighteen-year-old Ozan Kabak was so impressive that Stuttgart snapped him up for £10m in January. Fatih Terim has to be given credit considering Galatasaray played much of the first half of the season without a first-choice striker. Sinan Gümüs was drafted in as a makeshift forward and Eren Derdiyok featured when fit. Galatasaray sold last season’s top scorer, Bafetimbi Gomis, but failed to replace him over the summer. The reigning champions did finally sign a striker in January, bringing in Mbaye Diagne for £9m. Despite being the highest-scoring foreign player in Süper Lig history, with 30 goals this season, the Senegal international divides opinion. Twelve of his goals have been penalties. He has not won over Galatasaray fans. This is by no means one of the great Galatasaray sides. They have not played particularly attractive football. What they have, however, are grit and determination. They know how to grind out results. And this is Terim territory; he revels in high-pressure games. And Sunday is a must-win home match. Expect a raucous atmosphere, ear-splitting whistles, smoke from the flares, the deafening beat of the drums. This is where the 12th man comes into effect. For Başakşehir second place would still be a major achievement. It is difficult to imagine them beating Galatasaray at the Turk Telekom Arena. And with Beşiktaş four points behind in third place even a runners-up spot is not guaranteed. Terim is on course for a record eighth league title. Two years ago the ‘Emperor’, as he is known in Turkey, had a bust-up with a kebab shop owner which resulted in him resigning as Turkey’s manager. Now he is on the verge of back-to-back league titles. The emperor has found new clothes.