“It’s time to demythologize an era and build a new myth from the gutter to the stars. It’s time to embrace bad men and the price they paid to secretly define their time.” So said James Ellroy in the preface to his 1995 novel American Tabloid and I’m not going to argue. Partly because arguing with Ellroy is always foolish. But mainly because American Tabloid won the public vote and is our Reading group subject for May. Those bad men are all over the book and it looks like there’s no choice but to embrace them. Not that I’m worried. American Tabloid is a fascinating book with an impeccable pedigree, for Ellroy himself credits Don DeLillo’s Libra for his inspiration, “his recounting of the conspiracy that led to the death of JFK, largely seen through the eyes of Lee Harvey Oswald.” The story goes that when Ellroy read Libra he decided it was so good he couldn’t possibly rival it, feeling painfully cut off from writing about one of the most significant crimes of the 20th century. But then, he realised he could dodge what DeLillo did, and write “an epic in which the assassination is only one crime in a long series of crimes. I can write a novel of collusion about the unsung leg-breakers of history. I can do a tabloid sewer crawl through the private nightmares of public policy.” He would write the “secret history”: explore the private lives of the Kennedys, variously twisted and evil characters such as Jack Ruby, J Edgar Hoover, Jimmy Hoffa and Howard Hughes, as well as the underworld figures around them. “James Ellroy’s brilliantly unpleasant new novel chronicles the seething interactions of a bunch of sleazos, spies, thugs and mobsters,” explained William T Vollmann in his New York Times review. Meanwhile, the Times said it was “brilliant and appalling”, the Telegraph deemed it “intense and flamboyant” and Time magazine named it as its novel of the year for 1995 – though Nick Kimberley in the Guardian called it Ellroy’s “angriest, ugliest, sprawlingest and by some distance his least interesting novel.” Oh well. Vikram Jayanti, director of James Ellroy’s Feast of Death, gave a warmer assessment in the Guardian in 2001: “It’s raw, visceral, brutal, profane, hilarious, and deeply true about the darkness underlying the American Empire: politics as street crime moved up a rung.” That one sentence may well contain more adjectives than the entire novel, a 500-page book that supposedly contains no paragraphs longer than 10 lines. Not that it needs them – you can get a good sense sense of what’s in store from the preface: “America was never innocent. We popped our cherry on the boat over and looked back with no regrets. You can’t ascribe our fall from grace to any single event or set of circumstances. You can’t lose what you lacked at conception.” The beginning of the first chapter is sharper still: “He always shot up by TV light.” Bam! I’m in. I hope you’ll join me. By way of further encouragement and thanks to Penguin Random House, we have five copies of American Tabloid to give to the first five people from the UK to post “I want a copy please”, along with a nice, constructive suggestion in the comments section below. If you’re lucky enough to be one of the first to comment, email the lovely folk on culture.admin@theguardian.com, with your address and your account username.