Acts of audacious self-promotion in the contemporary art world now tend to be linked to names such as Damien Hirst or Tracey Emin, the Young British Artists who grabbed public attention in the 1990s. But research in the archives of a Yorkshire gallery has revealed that in the 1960s a student called David Hockney was also capable of a bold stunt. The aspiring artist invited a leading light of the Yorkshire art scene to Skipton to see some of his first public paintings, according to a letter discovered by curators preparing an exhibition at the Hepworth Wakefield. “We were surprised by the confidence with which he writes and by the headed gallery notepaper he is using,” said curator Abi Shapiro, who is putting together the new show, which opens on 19 October, celebrating both the early work of Hockney and the art of the late Alan Davie, an artistic hero of Hockney’s formative years. In the previously unknown letter, scrawled by Hockney while he was studying at the Royal College of Art in London, the 23-year-old brazenly adopts the tone of an established artist and invites Helen Kapp, the curator of the Wakefield gallery, to see his work as if she were an old friend. Writing to the imposing Kapp, who he had previously met by chance and sold a ceramic “pot cat” to, Hockney sends a catalogue and suggests she should see the show. He “clean forgot”, he adds, that he had promised to make another cat for her brother. “I am afraid I have no more left and as I was to trying to cast another my rather badly made mould broke in pieces, so I cannot make any more,” he concludes. The curator politely declines, calling him David Hackney by mistake. She has, she says, no car and a bus journey over to Skipton would take too long. The show Hockney was mounting in Skipton in 1960 was one of two that Shapiro and her team now believe were his first entrepreneurial efforts. The young artist, who had studied at Bradford College of Art before starting at the RCA, had banded together with a few friends to put on a show in Skipton, but he also staged a bold solo show in the town earlier that year, ahead of a London show once thought to have been his first. In 1958, Hockney had heard Davie speak at the Wakefield gallery at the opening of a show celebrating the work of the older, Scottish artist. This encounter changed Hockney’s artistic ambitions and sent him in a new direction. He moved to London to study, discarding realist figurative painting, just as Davie had done, and instead making colourful, abstract and symbolic work. “Helen Kapp was an extraordinarily formidable woman,” said Shapiro. “She carried on the tradition of the gallery from the 1930s that they should exhibit and collect contemporary art; quite a radical thing in a provincial gallery then. The major retrospective show that had made Davie’s name in 1958 is often thought to have opened at the Whitechapel Gallery in London, but it was actually here first and then it toured. Kapp’s show generated a great buzz and she got 1,300 people through the door in that first week in Wakefield.” Fifty of the works that featured in the Davie retrospective, including a three-metre-long painting, Creation of Man (1957), will be brought together again for the first time when the show opens this week. The career of Davie, who died five years ago, was ultimately overshadowed by Hockney’s international fame.