Maro Itoje picked an apt quote to sum up the task facing England on Saturday and the reward that awaits should they overcome New Zealand and reach a first World Cup final since 2007. “To be the man you’ve got to beat the man.” By his own admission, Itoje was borrowing from Ric Flair, a former WWE wrestler, who by all accounts loved nothing better than to whoop, cheer and do just about anything in his power to rile his opponents. He was apparently pretty good at it too. Here, it seems, was Itoje embracing his role as one of England’s chief antagonists. He can sometimes let his media training get the better of him, but not on the eve of a World Cup semi-final against the All Blacks. “They are two-time World Cup winners, and in a row. They have obviously been the dominant team over the last eight years and if you want to be the best, you’ve got to beat the best. That is our challenge, that is what is in front of us.” This was Itoje brimful of confidence and happy to show it, the Itoje that his opponents know so well. The Itoje who celebrates a free-kick at a scrum like a match-winning try – not so much despite the annoyance of the opposition but because of it. And as much as the impact Itoje will make at the lineout, with his ball-carrying and at the breakdown, every bit as important to England’s cause on Saturday will be his ability to get under the skin of New Zealand. For the All Blacks know all about Itoje. The enduring image of the British & Irish Lions’ second Test victory in Wellington two years ago was the tens of thousands of Lions fans – not to mention Alun Wyn Jones – chanting his name in the pouring rain. “The whole [Lions] touring experience is a reference,” Itoje said. “I learned a lot about New Zealand, their culture, how they play the game, how good and clinical they are and how to get them. This weekend feels like the time we’re going to get them. I remember most things about the [Wellington] game. I’m sure they could make an opera about it.” Brodie Retallick and Sam Whitelock are arguably the world’s premier second-row pairing but in all those debates taking place in Tokyo pubs on Friday night as to who would feature in a combined England-New Zealand XV, it is hard to imagine there would not be a place for Itoje. Not that New Zealanders would want to admit it. His celebrations play into their notion of English arrogance and go against their shed-sweeping, humbler-than-thou ethos. But make no mistake, New Zealand know all about Itoje. “The way I see New Zealand, I respect what they have done but I don’t see them as a team that is going to beat us,” he said. “I have never ever gone into a game thinking that team is going to beat me. I look at the quality of our team, our coaching and our support staff and it gives me immense confidence.” Perhaps it is to do with the feeling that England’s pool stage campaign never really got going because of Argentina’s early red card and the cancelled match against France, but Itoje’s performances have not garnered great attention. There has been very little wrong with them however, and having finished the domestic season with Saracens in rampant form he has continued with England. Like all his teammates, however, he will have to find another level if New Zealand are to suffer their first World Cup defeat for 12 years. “We have a strong amount of belief in this squad,” Itoje said. “If you speak to most people and if you really dig into their psyche I think you will find a strong belief that we are capable of beating these guys.” Steve Hansen’s decision to bring in Scott Barrett, a second-row by trade, seems designed to not only put pressure on England’s lineout but also beef up New Zealand’s pack, which is 9kg heavier than their opponents. As such, Itoje not only has his hands full at the set piece but in what will be a brutally physical battle for gainline dominance as well. He has also emerged as one of England’s key operators at the breakdown and has effected more turnovers than most at the tournament. With Nigel Owens in charge he is likely to be afforded some latitude but Itoje’s ability to stay on the right side of the law will have a significant bearing on whether England can prevail. For it is not an exaggeration to say that when Itoje produces a standout performance for either club or country, he rarely ends up on the losing side and he does not intend for his first World Cup campaign to end on Saturday. “I’ve always seen England as a team that should be there competing for World Cups and should be there winning World Cups,” he said. “As a young rugby player you watch all these tournaments and think: ’I want to win. I want to be part of something special.’ When Eddie said [this team can be the best in the world], I hadn’t played for England but I definitely bought into it from the jump.”