This is all pointless isn’t it? We all know this government can’t pass anything, we know all these promises are hollow electioneering, we know there will be an election very soon and everyone in parliament knows that we know all of that. What a tremendous waste of everyone’s time. deGooder Good lord. She actually read that crap?! It’s a funny thing when you realise you have more freedom and integrity than the Queen for a day! Daniel James How much lower can Johnson and his government sink? He’s lied to and insulted the Queen and now he’s using her to kick off his election campaign. The country is in chaos and on the brink of bringing the worst disaster since WWII upon itself and the focus is on a pageant? It’s time the UK forgot its colonial past and ideas of “we rule the world” and joined the real world! expatontour My country must now be a laughing stock in the eyes of the world! This makes Monty Python look like Panorama! Barry Bennett This certainly is weird – a party that does not have a majority, whose leader has not won an election, at a point where there is very likely going to be another constitutional, and there’s a Queen’s Speech, as if nothing unusual was going on? The Tories are seriously taking the p*ss out of the monarchy. They are using her. There’s no other way of describing it. Using the Queen as a tool for their propaganda. I hope she does something to upset their arrogance and complacency, like wearing an EU badge or blue and yellow shoes. Cyclist30mph You know you are desperate when you feel sorry for the Queen being forced to slide around in Johnson’s bullshit with Cummings lurking in the gloom. Why is there no shame at all? My daughter (year six) is doing a school trip to the houses of parliament next month. Why do I feel so ashamed to tell her about what the grown-ups have been getting up to in there? These people should think about the little children looking at their behaviour and saying “cor” to each other. My Race Is Human Once again the monarchy is allowing itself to be a political tool of Boris Johnson. This is becoming something of a habit. Much like the unlawful prorogation, on the surface it’s not that odd to have a Queen’s Speech. It is rather odd to have one right before a general election that the Tories have been campaigning for over the past month. They’re getting the Queen to announce a Tory manifesto. pretentiouspenguin The Queen says the government is committed to the environment. There will be measures to improve air and water quality, and to promote the welfare of animals. The hypocrisy is incredible. This is the same govt thats being hauled through the courts by the people to ensure it abides by its own clean air act. mammonstool Correct me if I am wrong, but today can be described as a rich great grandmother wearing costly jewels reading out in her plummy accent a list of various assorted right wing policies concocted by a “government” that has yet to win a meaningful vote in parliament and one that has no majority. Doesn’t it make you proud to see democracy in action? pipini The showiest, most expensive party political broadcast ever. Paid for by taxpayers. On behalf of a party that is hopelessly divided. On behalf of a government that does not command a majority in parliament and has lost every one of six votes in a row. A Queen’s speech that the government has no intention of implementing. Still, some of the flunkeys are wearing pretty frocks so it’s all alright then. BroadfordBoy