By a strange chance it is currently possible to see two radically different adaptations of incomplete Jane Austen novels. Laura Wade’s version of The Watsons, abandoned by Austen after the death of her father in 1805, has moved triumphantly from Chichester to London’s Menier Chocolate Factory. Meanwhile an eight-part extension of Sanditon, on which Austen was forced to stop work in 1817 because of illness, occupies a prime-time Sunday night slot on ITV. Seeing the two works in conjunction tells us a lot about the challenges of adapting Austen and about the nature of stage and TV drama. Wade takes a bold approach to adapting Austen. She faithfully sets up the dilemma posed by what little we have of The Watsons: which of three potential suitors should the lively, witty but impoverished Emma Watson choose? A diffident aristo, a sententious parson or a suave bounder? Having established the situation, Wade then springs a surprise – and it is difficult not to give part of the game away – by introducing herself, as the adapter, into the action. What follows is a dazzling meditation on any number of topics: on Austen’s own preferred outcome, on the afterlife of literary creations, on the inherent conflict between invented characters and the writer who brings them into existence. At what point, Wade asks, does a character acquire such independent vitality that it starts to dictate action? Does Austen write Elizabeth Bennet or does Elizabeth Bennet, to some extent, write Austen? Sanditon, adapted by Andrew Davies and a team of writers, inevitably takes a different tack. For a start, the unfinished novel shows Austen, at the end of her life, opening up new territory. She was writing about the early 19th-century vogue for seaside resorts and the commercial hazards, burgeoning possibilities and social mobility this involved. TV seizes on this to show Sanditon being built and to follow the fortunes of the speculating Tom Parker, the disdainful Lady Denham (a wonderful Anne Reid) and the highly practical Charlotte Heywood. Ideas are niftily pinched from other Austen novels as a way of developing plot. We’re told of the young Catherine Morland in Northanger Abbey that she “greatly preferred cricket not merely to dolls” but to all other childish amusements. So one episode of Sanditon was almost entirely taken up by a cricket match in which Charlotte rescued the toffs’ team from humiliating defeat by a gang of resentfully unpaid workers. Sanditon makes an entertaining addition to the Austen canon even if the hint of oral sex in the first episode might have had dedicated Janeites reaching for the smelling salts. While Sanditon is bound by the linear conventions of TV classic drama, Wade’s version of The Watsons plays with dramatic form, poses a whole series of questions about the nature of drama and fiction, and even makes glancing topical points: “We don’t need experts,” Emma cries at one point, “we have hearts, we have minds!” Television can do all manner of things that the stage can’t. But, for all its merits, Sanditon basically offers a decorative speculation about what might have happened next in Austen’s imagined resort. The Watsons, taking advantage of the theatre’s capacity for risk, digs much deeper to question the very nature of adaptation and to ask who actually “owns” a fictional character. I accept that Sanditon is Sunday-night viewing and The Watsons is for a theatrical minority but when, if ever, will television show the same freedom to experiment? • The Watsons is at the Menier Chocolate Factory, London, until 16 November. Sanditon is on ITV at 9pm on Sundays; catch up with past episodes on ITV Hub.