The first time I meet Hammed Animashaun, Britain is wilting in a heatwave and he is dressed accordingly. He bowls into the bar at the Bridge theatre in London, standing 6ft 3in in a green basketball vest, black shorts, a bandana, assorted beads, rings and necklaces, and white trainers brighter than the afternoon sun. At this point, the genial 28-year-old is midway through the run of Nicholas Hytner’s blissful production of A Midsummer Night’s Dream, in which he is a joyful Bottom. A friend texted him all the wonderful things people have been saying – Time Out named him “man of the match”, the Standard “a master of big-hearted comic nonsense”, the Observer “show-stealing” – but he couldn’t bring himself to look. “I had to delete the chat,” he says, sipping a Diet Coke. In Hytner’s gender-swapping spin, it is Titania who puts a love spell on Oberon, rather than the other way round, so it is Oberon who falls for Bottom. In yellow boiler suit and pert donkey ears, Animashaun laps up the affection, taking it merrily in his stride. “There’s no spell on Bottom. He could just turn around and go, ‘No thanks’, but he doesn’t. Do we have to explain that? I don’t think so. Love is love.” Most of the show’s riotous highlights are his: demanding a mobile phone from the audience before snapping a group selfie of him and his am-dram troupe, or dancing and cavorting with Oberon while their bed is pushed through the crowd. “I love looking out and seeing all those jaws on the floor,” he says. Such gleeful exhibitionism, it should be said, is par for the course for an actor who wore a Lady Gaga-style meat dress as one of the Ugly Sisters in Cinderella at the Lyric Hammersmith, rocked a pink leopard-print pantsuit and ginger beehive in The Producers at the Manchester Royal Exchange and twerked naked on screen in the debauched British comedy The Festival. Hytner emails later to enthuse about Animashaun. “He has what all the best Shakespeareans have: the ability to make it sound like he just thought of it. Here’s at least one thing he did that hadn’t occurred to me until he did it: he played the morning-after scene like he was kind of over Oberon. That he loved all the treats, the honey, the massage, the champagne, the clothes, but it wasn’t ever going to be much more than a one-night stand and that the other guy was starting to be clingy. Which I thought was hilarious, truthful and rather sad, at least for Oberon.” Animashaun tells me his performance is getting bigger all the time. “I’m still waiting for Nick to tell me to rein it in,” he laughs. “It’s like a party every night. If we didn’t have to finish, I could go on doing this for ever. One hundred per cent.” When we meet again six weeks later backstage at the National Theatre, he cuts a very different figure. He is now deep into rehearsals for “Master Harold” … and the Boys, Athol Fugard’s drama set in 1950s South Africa, in which he and Lucian Msamati play Willie and Sam, two servants whiling away an afternoon by practising ballroom dancing and shooting the breeze with Hally (Anson Boon), the teenage son of their white employers. Picking over a sandwich in his lunch break, Animashaun is relieved to have finally hung up his donkey ears for good and looks aghast when I remind him of his earlier enthusiasm for a bottomless Bottom, a never-ending Dream. “That was when I still had, like, a soul,” he says, shaking his head. “I’m exhausted. I’m done.” Though “Master Harold” … and the Boys makes further demands on his dancing skills (“My calves are killing me”), it represents a change of tempo, swapping the party atmosphere of Shakespeare’s comedy for the simmering tensions of this politically charged three-hander. “Willie is extremely flawed and that’s where the challenges are coming from. He doesn’t say an awful lot but he communicates so much in the choices he makes physically. The way he treats Hally with respect compared to how he treats women. He doesn’t see the problem – when women mess up, you beat them, right? It’s a lot easier in his society to attack a black woman than to attack a white man. It’s the food chain: he chooses the weaker animal.” I grew up in an area where you saw different sorts of people … I never had any racism directed at me until I was older Animashaun remembers going to the library in Tower Hamlets, London, as a child to read up on apartheid. “I was so shocked. I grew up in an area where all you saw was different sorts of people, and that was amazing. I never had any racism directed at me until I was older, but, even at that young age, I knew it wasn’t right.” I ask where the racism came from. “It’s happened a few times in the industry in quite subtle ways. You hear stories or someone will say directly, ‘The only reason you got this job is cos you’re black.’ And then you go, ‘Wait. That’s racist.’” He has also experienced hostility outside work. “You get people hurling things, screaming things. That was a long time ago. But look at today’s world. I was on a train and this guy was sitting beside me watching a Tommy Robinson video. That’s how open everyone is about it right now.” He scans the walls, momentarily lost for words. “What could I say to him? I wouldn’t know where to start.” He’s in no doubt about where the rise in intolerance has come from. “It’s the leaders. One hundred per cent. When you’ve got a prime minister saying women in burqas look like bank robbers and letterboxes, and a president mocking disability and calling Mexicans rapists, then it allows people to think, ‘Well, if they can say that stuff, I definitely can.’” He was thrilled to see the Labour MP Tanmanjeet Singh Dhesi take the prime minister to task over his use of derogatory language. What would he say to Boris Johnson if he got the chance? “Bro, apologise.” The question of why this is a pertinent time to stage “Master Harold” … and the Boys barely needs answering. “The play isn’t just about race. It’s also about love and friendship, and today those things are more important than ever. Sam has this amazing speech about how ballroom dancers don’t bump into one another because everyone’s doing the right steps. If everyone thought about love and acceptance, there wouldn’t be any bumping. Hally isn’t the problem; it’s his society. We’ve got kids growing up saying hateful things because of the society they’re being raised in. How about if we told them that anyone could be whoever they want to be and still be regarded as a person of relevance and importance?” Theatre has played a big role in building Animashaun’s own self-esteem. He was doing poorly at school when his drama teacher encouraged his mother to sign him up to the Half Moon Children’s Theatre in Limehouse, telling her: “He’ll thrive.” And he did. He was at the National in 2016 in Rufus Norris’s staging of The Threepenny Opera and Michael Longhurst’s spectacular revival of Amadeus, being flirted with by Olivia Colman in the Channel 4 comedy Flowers and turning up in BBC3’s Pls Like as a YouTuber whose anti-aggression campaign is called Let’s Punch Violence in the Head and Break Its Jaw. His professional highlight so far, though, was the original production of Barber Shop Chronicles, the breakneck compendium of stories of black male life from across the globe. “I got very emotional gazing out from the stage each night and seeing young men in the audience who looked just like me, who know what it’s like to be a young black man in this country. That show was for the culture.” Indeed, Animashaun’s appeal is instant and wide-ranging, as Hytner explains: “The audience sees him and they think, ‘He’s our guy.’ This is a gift that can’t be taught or faked. I predict an immense career. I imagine he could play more or less anything.” Just so long as he doesn’t have to see himself doing it. He sat through the NT Live broadcast of Amadeus “with one eye closed” and won’t be watching A Midsummer Night’s Dream when it reaches cinemas this month. “Oh my gosh,” he grimaces. “No one needs to see this face on the big screen.” But they do. And they will. One hundred per cent. • “Master Harold” … and the Boys is at the National Theatre, London, until 17 December. A Midsummer Night’s Dream is broadcast in cinemas by NT Live from 17 October.