They were found by the postman; two young children home alone. They spent most of the day in a police station before social services took over. Eventually they found themselves in our home. Like so many children taken into emergency foster care, they looked frozen – like rabbits caught in the glare of car headlights on a dark night. It wasn’t until the next day that one of them spoke. Dummy? My wife offered one but he shook his head. The other child helped: “in-dum-my”. With Google’s help we discovered that Indomie was a brand of instant noodles popular with children from Western African countries. A bowlful was rustled up and the barriers began to come down. This experience brought home to me the need for a greater diversity of carers. These shellshocked children should have had carers from their own community who would have known better how to understand and look after them. The problematic lack of diversity in carers from black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) backgrounds was highlighted in 2018’s foster care stocktake. But it gets worse. Not only are BAME children entering the UK care system unlikely to be matched with BAME carers or those with the cultural experience necessary to understand their needs, they then stay disproportionately long if they cannot return to their birth families. The average white British child waits 919 days for adoption but boys of black African descent face the longest wait – 1,302 days. During National Adoption Week and Black History Month, as the government looks into how to best accelerate the adoption of “hard-to-place children” (and identifies black boys as a particular important cohort), one cannot help but ask: is the care system institutionally racist? Myths abound as to why BAME children are overrepresented in the care system (BAME people make up 13% of the UK population but 25% of children in care). It is not, as some people assume, due to attitudes towards corporal punishment of children. A study of 400 parents in 2006 found that BAME children were no more likely than white children to be referred to welfare services because of concerns about physical abuse. Nor can we point the finger at “home alone” cases such as the one described above. Although these situations disproportionally involve more African families, they are also influenced by parents’ income and inability to access affordable childcare. Additionally, children in this category typically do not spend long in care. One must look elsewhere to discover why BAME children, and black boys in particular, wait longer to be adopted. According to a 2013 report, black people are twice as likely to be charged with drug possession, despite lower rates of drug use. Black people were also 6.3 times more likely to be stopped and searched for drugs than white people and five times more likely to be charged rather than cautioned or warned for their possession of drugs. And black Caribbean pupils are three times more likely to be excluded from schools than white pupils. Is it possible that the pervasive discrimination and racist stereotypes behind these statistics have unwittingly infiltrated the care system too? Many social workers show an exemplary level of understanding and empathy towards BAME people. Nevertheless, I believe social service departments need a long-term engagement strategy that will undo some of the prejudices and fears among adopters, as well as an audit and appraisal of the degree to which racist stereotypes still persist in the sector. For example, I have heard concerns from both black and white adopters waiting for children that black boys will join gangs or be otherwise criminalised. It seems children as young as three are consistently having their future written off based on their skin colour. More research is needed to show why black children are overrepresented in care, to what extent BAME communities are distrustful of social services, and whether this is part of a larger fear of racism within government institutions. Could specialised BAME adoption teams help? One study by Action for Children suggested they could be four times more effective at recruiting adopters than comparable general adoption teams. Or perhaps faith literacy training would be useful? The inquiry line at my charity, Home for Good, regularly finds that potential adopters are put off by social workers’ negative attitudes to all faiths. More research is needed. But there is strong statistical and anecdotal evidence to suggest that the definition of institutional racism put forward by Sir William Macpherson in his 1999 report on Stephen Lawrence’s murder applies to BAME children in the care system in general and to black boys awaiting adoption in particular. There is a compelling case for more support to social work teams to become aware of cultural and religious blind spots, and weed out unconscious bias in the systems, processes and cultures. For the sake of the black boys who wait too long, appropriate radical action must be taken now. • Krish Kandiah is a foster carer and adopter and the founding director of the charity Home for Good