In the three years since an underground car park in London, tucked between Borough and London Bridge, was turned into a theatre, the Bunker has made a name for itself as a venue prepared to take risks, and to produce work from and for people from marginalised and diverse backgrounds. Now the Bunker has embarked on perhaps its most ambitious venture yet: converting its 110-seat theatre space into a fully functioning pub. “I always wanted to write a pub play,” dramatist Anna Jordan tells me. Chris Sonnex, artistic director of the Bunker, sips a pint and nods along. We’ve met in one of the many pubs nearby after a day of rehearsals for We Anchor in Hope, Jordan’s play about the closing of a local pub. Jordan was a barmaid for years in her home town of Brentford, supplementing her income while at drama school, while director Sonnex “grew up” in pubs around Pimlico. During Sonnex’s time as an associate at the Royal Court, he commissioned Jordan to “go into these pubs, buy people drinks, and just be part of the community”. The aim was that she would write something they both felt accurately depicted the highs and lows of local pub life. “I’m not trying to eulogise it in any way, because it’s problematic in so many ways,” Sonnex says of being taken to pubs from a young age. “There’s so much that as I kid I really shouldn’t [have seen]. There was a lot of violence, there was a lot of fighting, there was a lot of cheating and sex and drugs and rock’n’roll. It was constant, but part of me looks back at it and goes, ‘You know what? It was nice, though.’ Because at least it was a community. It might have been shit, it might not always have been great, but quite a lot of the time it was fun. A lot of plays that are working-class-focused always go into a weird stereotype. But that’s not my experience.” Jordan interjects: “What, misery?” Sonnex pauses. “Yeah. Where’s the joy in it?” Jordan agrees: “It’s that thing you said that I really love, about your working-class life …” Sonnex smiles and shakes his head. “Oh yeah: ‘It’s all fun and games until it’s not. And then it really isn’t.’” We Anchor in Hope is set in 2016, “Just after the referendum, and just before they trigger Article 50,” says Sonnex. “We don’t massively go into [politics] in the play” Jordan says. “It’s not talked about a lot – in fact, they have a Brexit box and a Trump box, and if anyone mentions either of them they have to put money in there. But I just thought it was a unique time, when things were starting to go batshit.” The coming together of people, in spite of politics, is what interests Jordan most about pub culture. “Mainly, I think it’s a play about community, and about memory. For me, it was emotionally a very difficult time, because my mum died just when we embarked on the project. So I was doing my research, going into these pubs in Pimlico, when I’d lost my mum a month and a half before. I think that’s come out through some of the storylines. But also, I found a lot of what I’ve written since my mum passed away is about memory.” “It’s easy, I think,” she continues, “if you’re young and haven’t experienced any huge grief or anything yet, to go: ‘Nostalgia is naff and sentimental.’ But actually, as you get older and start to lose significant people in your life, you realise that people live in memories a lot. I was interested in how a physical place could contain those memories – but also, how alcohol can resurrect dead people. How it can set you in that moment in time, and freeze you in it, and how alcohol also fucks with memory.” The two have thought a lot about the pub that the Bunker is becoming: a quiz every Tuesday, karaoke on Thursdays and a disco on the weekend. The space will be open an hour before the show for people to get a drink, with Sonnex himself pulling pints alongside his general manager, Lee. In the world of the play, the pints in the Anchor pub will be pulled by Pearl, the play’s only woman. “In the current climate, and rightfully so, you should be looking at the ratio of men to women and making sure there are really good opportunities for female actors,” Jordan tells me. But in order to stay true to the pubs she spent time in, which were “overwhelmingly male spaces”, We Anchor in Hope has “one female character and four male characters – which is something we both thought about and talked about”. To compensate, Sonnex made the decision to ensure as many women work behind the scenes of the play as possible. “All the creative team are women; the stage manager, the production manager. I definitely felt I had to offset the fact that there are four men on stage. But also, it was because my experience of being in a pub, as a young boy growing into a man, was a completely different experience to [a woman’s].” The two agree that the mix of voices working on the piece, on and offstage, helped make it stronger. As to what makes a good pub, Jordan is in agreement with Sonnex, who suggests songs “two years out of date”, bar staff who don’t take themselves too seriously, and “definitely a pool table”. He compares pubs to the theatre, in that both spaces can be unwelcoming to those who are unfamiliar with them, they’re both heavily associated with a particular class of people, and both have a focal point: the stage, or the bar. The pub we’re in, the two agree, is not a good one. Six months before, Sonnex says, it was for locals, but a refurbishment means the old men who once propped up the bar have been replaced with younger people in city-slick suits. Still, Sonnex believes all pubs can have value. “As long as it provides a space for lonely people to come, I don’t care, really. But let’s not throw people out because they’re this class, or that colour, or they’re this age or whatever.” Jordan agrees: “Or not even throwing them out, but making them feel unwelcome … that gradual sort of erosion”. Sonnex looks thoughtful and finishes the last of his pint. “Making them feel uncomfortable … which, interestingly, is exactly how I feel about theatre. If you start pushing people out and making people uncomfortable, then you can go and fucking burn, you know?” We Anchor In Hope is at the Bunker, London, until 19 October