Thousands of Italians descended on Rome for a far-right rally labelled “Italy pride”, evoking connotations to the “march on Rome” held on 27 October 1922 that marked the fascist dictator Benito Mussolini’s rise to power. The rally on Saturday had been in the making since Matteo Salvini, the leader of the League, was spectacularly ousted from government in late August. Despite the presence of militants from the neo-fascist group, CasaPound, among the crowd at Piazza San Giovanni, Salvini insisted the event would be “peaceful and beautiful”. “There will not be any anger here this afternoon,” he said. “I say this especially to our journalist friends. This [represents] an Italy that works, the true Italy.” Salvini on Friday quipped that the rally would feature “fascists, racists and people from Venus” in response to criticism over CasaPound’s attendance. He was flanked on stage by Giorgia Meloni, who leads the smaller far-right party, Brothers of Italy, and Silvio Berlusconi, the four-time former prime minister and Forza Italia leader. The trio recently revived their coalition in a show of unity against the current left-leaning government. “We’re here to say ‘no’ to the most leftwing government in history,” said Berlusconi. Meloni, whose popularity has been rising in recent months, said: “Sovereignty belongs to the people. We’ll be a strong opposition and won’t let anything go with this government.” Both Salvini and Meloni cried that “democracy had been robbed” when the government between the League’s former coalition partner, the Five Star Movement (M5S), and the centre-left Democratic party was sworn in in early September. But it was a misstep by Salvini that led to the former rivals coming together. The former interior minister broke off the League’s partnership with M5S in August as he sought to capitalise on his high popularity and bring about snap elections. He failed to factor in that the two parties, the two largest in parliament, would form an alliance to thwart his plans. Salvini is targeting the government’s weak spots, such as a clash this week over the budget, as he seeks to bolster his popularity. The League lost almost 10% in opinion polls as a result of Salvini’s manoeuvre in August but is still the biggest party in Italy, hovering at around 30%. Busloads of people came from all over Italy for the event, with passengers paying €40 each. “This government has sold itself to Europe,” said Ugo Lenardi, who travelled from the northern city of Udine. “Italians want less taxes and ports closed off to migrants, not necessarily Salvini as prime minister.” Erika Nucerelli, a Brothers of Italy supporter, came from Tuscany. “I’ve come to represent Italy and its democratic principles. This government does not represent us. I like Meloni as she is a woman who does represent us.” If national elections were held any time soon then the three parties together, judging by the latest polls, would eclipse the 40% required to govern. Salvini claimed 200,000 people were at the rally, before adding: “We’ll return to government.”