Not every inflated Rugby World Cup scoreline tells the full story and this was a prime example. New Zealand finished up with 11 tries and a comfortable-looking victory but the final margin did scant justice to the efforts of a spirited Namibia side who, for 35 minutes, proved more than a match for their illustrious opponents. It even caused Steve Hansen to suggest afterwards his players “didn’t turn up with the right attitude” in the first half before order was restored with a torrent of 47 unanswered second-half points. Until the game’s final score, a spectacular try finished in the left corner by TJ Perenara following a reverse pass from his energetic fellow replacement Brad Weber, it was Namibia who provided much of the entertainment. Their collection of amateurs and journeymen pros – the lineup included farmers, a bank worker and a dentist – certainly did Namibia proud, playing with more pace, intent and accuracy than many of their supposed peers. For just over three minutes the lowest-ranked side in the World Cup led the winners of the last two editions on the scoreboard and were still just 10-9 down heading towards half-time. In the diminutive shape of their creative fly-half Helarius Kisting and their even smaller No 9, Damian Stevens, one of the smoothest passers here, they had a splendid half-back pairing and Stevens proved equally impressive off the tee, nailing three penalties as the referee Pascal Gaüzère showed New Zealand little mercy at the breakdown. Hopefully all those who say rugby’s smaller nations are unworthy of the biggest stage were watching. Sadly for the romantics it could not last indefinitely. Despite a four-day turnaround, two props, Nepo Laulala and Ofa Tu’ungafasi, being shown yellow cards for clumsy challenges and the returning Brodie Retallick lasting just 30 minutes, the All Blacks remain the most ruthless team in the world at picking off tiring opposition. A try apiece from the replacement Angus Ta’avao and the full-back Ben Smith, added to earlier scores from Sevu Reece and Anton Lienert-Brown, put them 24-9 ahead at the interval and thereafter it was one-way traffic. Smith, Reece and Lienert-Brown all ended up with two tries and there were more for Joe Moody, Sam Whitelock, Jordie Barrett and the flying Perenara as the forwards ruthlessly raised the tempo. Barrett, pressed into service at 10, finished with 21 points, something to tuck up his sleeve when things get competitive around the family dinner table. Namibia, though, never lay down even after the departure of their hard-tackling captain Johan Deysel, known as “Buffy” to his teammates because of his reputation for slaying opponents. Deysel scored his side’s only try against the All Blacks in the corresponding fixture in 2015 at what is now the London Stadium when the final score was 58-14 but Phil Davies, their soon-to-depart coach, felt this display was still a step up. “We’re very proud of the players and the effort we put in,” said the former Wales international, whose side made more clean breaks than South Africa did against the same opposition on the opening weekend. “The scoreboard looks a bit painful but in terms of the performance there’s lots to take out of that match.” The last time Namibia beat a tier-one nation was 28 years ago – they defeated Ireland 26-15 in Windhoek in 1991 – but, on this evidence, they are an improving side who should run Canada close in their final Pool B fixture on Sunday. New Zealand, meanwhile, plan to give Retallick 60 minutes in their final pool outing against Italy on Saturday so he is fully up to speed for the knockout stages. Hansen particularly enjoyed Perenara’s try – “It got me out of my seat and not many things do that” – but this game also reinforced his belief that one fractionally misjudged tackle could yet influence the outcome of bigger games in the knockout stages. He said: “I think the two yellow cards today were fair under the guidelines but it is tough when players are falling. There are going to be times when you make a connection and I’m not sure how you avoid that. “But if you don’t use your arms you’re going to get done for a no-arms tackle. Each team is doing their best but there will be circumstances that are just about unavoidable. Unfortunately that’s just where our game is at the moment.” • We are expanding our coverage of New Zealand. Please help us by supporting our independent journalism