Mario Mandzukic, without a minute of competitive football since May, is top of Manchester United’s shopping list in January. The Croatian is more out of favour at Juventus than Paul Simon at an Art Garfunkel gig, and seems set to sit on the sidelines until the January transfer window rolls around, having been left out entirely of the Old Lady’s Champions League squad. United, meanwhile, are woefully short of options up top, with Tony Martial injured, Mason Greenwood a bit, um, green, and Marcus Rashford seemingly doing his best work these days off the left flank. Rumours are rampant that United already have a verbal agreement to sign Mandzukic in January, with the 33-year-old commanding a £9m fee and a £85,000-a-week contract. Ed Woodward always gets what he wants. One might wonder why United don’t go after Edinson Cavani, a younger, more prolific striker, who would also be available for zilch come the end of the season once his contract with PSG is up. Cavani is understood to be looking for a new challenge, having basically completed Ligue 1, but could also be tempted by free transfer mavericks Juventus. More expert negotiations for old, creaking bones: Tottenham have re-signed Michel Vorm after apparently realising that none of their academy graduates are up to the task of being No 2 while Hugo Lloris gets better. Chelsea might be under a transfer ban but they are said to be keeping tabs on Linfield 15-year-old Charlie Allen. The Irish club gave the youngster a first-team debut earlier this year after having trials at Manchester City and Tottenham. Chelsea would have to wait to sign the midfielder, meaning other clubs like Norwich, Southampton and Rangers could nip in to complete a deal in January. Speaking of Southampton and Rangers, the Scottish club’s new sporting director, Ross Wilson, who only joined the club from Saints on Monday, has wasted no time in recommending a new signing for Steven Gerrard. It’s Aaron Hickey, a 17-year-old defender currently doing bits for Hearts, with the defender reportedly valued at around £2m. Hickey has a contract until 2021, but has been offered a new deal by Hearts after scoring one of the goals of the season, a winner in the Edinburgh derby over Hibs. Should Rangers complete the deal, Celtic would receive around £600,000, owing to a 30% sell-on clause that was agreed when Hickey left for Hearts back in 2018. Finally, and arguably most importantly, Scotland manager Steve Clarke is lining up forgotten man Steven Caulker to plug a few gaps at the back. The former Tottenham defender, still just 27, is playing for Alanyaspor in Turkey but would be eligible for Scotland through his grandmother, despite making a single appearance for England in a friendly back in 2012.