Manchester City stuttered, then moved into high gear, three second-half goals ensuring victory and the cutting the gap to Liverpool two points, at least until the leaders entertain Tottenham on Sunday afternoon. Though Pep Guardiola will be pleased with this win over an Aston Villa side who came to play he may wish his men had been more ruthless, an issue he recently highlighted. A sour note for City arrived towards then end when Fernandinho received a second yellow card – for a foul on Keinan Davis – and so will be suspended for one match. Given the injury to Rodri, Guardiola’s other natural holding midfielder, and the centre-back Aymeric Laporte’s long-term knee problem, the manager could have done without this. Rodri’s hamstring problem had cleared the way for John Stones to make a first start since mid-September. Gabriel Jesus, again preferred to Sergio Agüero, missed an early chance, steering wide of Tom Heaton’s left post. City, as is their way, controlled ball and space, camping inside the visitors’ half with Raheem Sterling, the two Silvas – Bernardo and David – and Kevin De Bruyne a blue blur that Villa scrambled to slow. Dean Smith’s side proved they should be taken seriously, too, as they sought a first win against these opponents since September 2013. Wesley, the lone striker, was a powerful focal point, and Trézéguet, Jack Grealish and John McGinn looked dangerous when combining. After a Sterling shot hit Björn Engels in the area VAR ruled no penalty and moments later the same adjudication came down at the other end. Ederson saved a McGinn effort to his left, the ball spilled towards Douglas Luiz and as Fernandinho and João Cancelo closed in the midfielder, who went down but City escaped. Guardiola’s men were yet to click. When David Silva and Ilkay Gündogan’s radar is off City can struggle, though Ederson’s ability to fire 60-yard lasers – such as the one Heaton raced out to chest away – illustrates their all-round potency. Guardiola has been concerned at the chances conceded by his team, with Trézéguet and Wesley both given room to shoot in the penalty area. As half-time approached the lack of ruthlessness in the opposite box was illustrated when Sterling teed up David Silva but he sprayed wide. Twenty-three seconds into the second half and Sterling showed Silva how. A high ball was inadvertently knocked by Tyrone Mings into the No 7’s path and, after advancing on Heaton’s goal, the finish went through the goalkeeper’s legs. This was Sterling’s 12th goal of the season for City and his eighth in the league, one behind the top scorer, Jamie Vardy. When Guardiola’s team score once they often score a second or more. Moments after the opener, Mendy crashed a shot off that might have doubled the score, then Jesus missed a second sitter of the contest, unable to finish from a few yards. This had Guardiola stamping in fury and maybe wondering what the ruthless Agüero would have done with either opportunity. It also left Villa in the contest and when Douglas Luiz rose and headed straight at Ederson there was City relief. Soon they had a second goal. De Bruyne swapped passes with Mendy from corner on the left. The Belgian swung the ball in, and it passed David Silva and Sterling and went in. Cue the evermore familiar VAR delay to see if Silva or Sterling were offside or if the ball had touched the latter’s hand before Graham Scott, the referee, confirmed the goal was good, and credited to De Bruyne. Seconds later City were 3-0 ahead and the match was over. Following a corner from the other side a melee ended with Gündogan volleying sweetly home. At the close McGinn hit a post and the ball bounced into Ederson’s arms and the clean sheet was secured.