Having been given the all-clear by tournament organisers, the Wallabies will enter their final World Cup Pool D game against Georgia at Shizuoka Stadium on Friday night in the knowledge they are safe from inclement weather, but without knowing their best team. Or do they? Michael Cheika, along with co-selectors Scott Johnson and Michael O’Connor, appeared to have a stark choice between naming a full-strength team to play Georgia and continuing to experiment. Somehow they managed to go close to achieving both objectives. With the exception of tight-head prop Allan Alaalatoa, who is being rested, and suspended outside back Reece Hodge, the 23-man squad chosen for the Georgia game is nearly the best the Wallabies can field with a couple of experimental selections thrown into the mix. Most of the players were involved in the two key pool games against Fiji and Wales. All the players down the pecking order of the squad are missing from the team list. Importantly, this means the majority of the Wallabies’ top players will receive a final hit-out before their quarter-final against France or, most likely, England. It will also allow the selectors to determine one or two contentious positions, if they have not already done so. So much of what the Wallabies have done at this World Cup appears to have been part of Cheika’s master plan, a preordained blueprint, irrespective of form or formula. The most controversial example of the horses-for-courses selection policy was the choice of halves Will Genia and Bernard Foley ahead of the apparent first-choice pairing of Nic White and Christian Lealiifano against Wales, which backfired spectacularly. The Wallabies will now field their third halves combination in four Tests – White and Matt To’omua – and with a sudden-death quarter-final around the corner – an unheard of situation which only adds to the perception that Australia’s campaign is somewhat chaotic. Cheika conceded the Wallabies started poorly in all three of their pool games against Fiji, Wales and Uruguay and the selection of To’omua at five-eighth against Georgia is an attempt to turn that around. To’omua has been the Wallabies’ best-performed five-eighth, coming off the bench against Fiji and Wales, and has been given an opportunity to try to make the same impact as a starter in the gold No 10 jersey. It is doubtful that was part of Cheika’s pre-planning, but To’omua’s form has forced the selectors to at least consider him as a five-eighth option, a Hobson’s choice perhaps. Ultimately, the choice of five-eighth for the quarter-final may come down to how much the Wallabies intend to play direct by taking “route one” in attack or play with more variety and width. No doubt they will test both approaches against Georgia. Back-rower Jack Dempsey and outside back Jordan Petaia were unavailable for Fiji and Wales because of injury, but after their impressive performances against Uruguay they both have real opportunities to secure places for the quarter-final, if not as starters, then as finishers. It is unlikely Dempsey, who is starting at blindside flanker against Georgia, would win a place in the run on side ahead of Michael Hooper, David Pocock or Isi Naisarani, but he might beat Lukhan Salakaia-Loto for a spot on the bench. Dempsey (1.91m) is not as tall as Naisarani (1.95m) or Salakaia-Loto (1.98m), but that may be an advantage if the Wallabies look to reduce the overall height of the forward pack to minimise the risk of penalties and cards for high tackles. After the Wallabies’ issues with attacks to the head earlier in the tournament it was reassuring to hear Cheika say the Australians needed to improve their discipline and lower their tackling technique. A shorter back-row may help to solve the problem. Instead of complaining about the refereeing, the Wallabies are now looking to adapt to the officiating and in a big match that could be decisive. Petaia, 19, has only played one Test and must compete with the likes of Hodge, Dane Haylett-Petty and Adam Ashley-Cooper, but he is something new, something different, almost a secret weapon. A lot may depend on what the selectors decide to do with Kurtley Beale, who will start at fullback against Georgia. Whether Beale starts or comes off the bench in the quarter-final would have a flow-on effect. It is difficult to genuinely assess the form of players against a team which they should beat comfortably. Playing well against Uruguay and Georgia is not the same as playing well against the All Blacks. Outside of the scrum where the Georgians are particularly strong, the Wallabies should not find themselves seriously challenged, but they will know they have been in a game against the physical eastern Europeans. It will be a good opportunity for the Wallabies to hone both their attacking and defensive structures for the looming quarter-final. As mad as the Wallaby selection process may seem, the pieces to the puzzle are virtually all there. It’s just a matter of putting them in the right spaces.