Evacuation orders have been issued for more than 600,000 people in Japan as Typhoon Hagibis bears down on Tokyo, having already caused power outages, flooding and widespread travel disruption. The storm is 870 miles (1,400km) wide, with winds of 100mph (162km/h) at its centre and gusts of up 134mph. Hagibis is being compared to a typhoon in 1958 that killed 1,200 people and caused destruction across the Tokyo area and Shizuoka prefecture. The death toll from the latest storm is unlikely to be anywhere near as high due to Japan’s stringent building safety standards and comprehensive disaster warning systems. Emergency alerts accompanied by loud chimes are being sent directly to tens of millions of smartphones in the affected areas. The centre of the storm is expected to hit Tokyo at about 9pm local time (1pm GMT) on Saturday. One person is currently missing in Shizuoka after being swept away by flood water. By Saturday morning, roofs had been ripped off houses in Chiba prefecture, which is still recovering from a typhoon last month that killed three people, injured more than 40 and left hundreds of thousands of homes without power. A local resident told the public broadcaster, NHK: “When the winds suddenly hit, they blew the roof off my house. The noise was awful. One of my three children was injured but is now in a hospital.” A 50-year-old man has died in Chiba after being pulled from a car that had been flipped over by the storm. Adding to the danger of landslides, an earthquake measuring 4 on the Japanese intensity scale, which ranges from 1 to 7, hit Chiba shortly before 6.30pm on Saturday. #TYPHOON #HAGIBIS IN #JAPAN#Tokyo's #Shinjuku Station now5:30 pm on a Saturday eveningThis is the busiest station in the world with an average of 3.5 million passengers a dayTokyo has basically shut down the hatches today pic.twitter.com/9aC0SR9hWW In addition to the 620,000 people already ordered to move to evacuation shelters, evacuation warnings have been issued to nearly 8 million people. Up to 60cm (24in) of rain is expected in some areas by Sunday morning. All fast trains and most flights in and out of the Kanto region around Tokyo were cancelled by Saturday morning, while England’s Rugby World Cup Rugby game with France was cancelled on Friday. A decision will be taken on Sunday morning as to whether Japan’s game against Scotland can go ahead. #台風19号 の大雨で #横浜国際総合競技場 隣接の投てき練習場が冠水していました。午後５時撮影。同競技場では明日、#ラグビー Ｗ杯の日本ースコットランド戦が予定です。（省）#大雨特別警報 #鶴見川 #神奈川 #小机 #JPNvSCOタイムライン→https://t.co/aNQPxrrovt pic.twitter.com/pDtHJupH2s Tokyo Disney resort shut down on Saturday for the first time since the deadly earthquake and tsunami in 2011. Japan’s meteorological agency issued its highest warning level on Saturday afternoon, urging the more than 45 million residents of Tokyo, Kanagawa, Saitama, Gunma, Yamanashi and Nagano prefectures to find a secure building or move to higher floors. Tokyo city government has opened an evacuation centre in the Ueno district for tourists stranded by the transport shutdown. Authorities in Sagamihara, south-west of Tokyo, said they may have to release water from the Shiroyama dam, which is in danger of bursting. They have warned residents of the area near the dam to evacuate because large-scale flooding around the Sagami River is likely if they discharge the water.