Bonded by a common background, torn apart by raging ambition, the coaching rivalry between Michael Cheika and Eddie Jones will reach a climax when the Wallabies meet England in the World Cup quarter-final in Oita on Saturday. If you cut Cheika and Jones, their blood would run myrtle green, both products of that famous Sydney club by the beach, Randwick. The coaches’ enduring connection to Randwick was evident in their emotional responses to the passing of club legend and mentor Jeff Sayle last week, bringing tears to the eyes of two of hardest men in rugby. It makes you wonder what would have become of Cheika and Jones if a club like Randwick did not exist. The Sydney club scene was a snobbish place when Cheika and Jones grew up in the 1970s and 1980s. In pre-dominantly Anglo-Celtic Australia, the pair were outsiders, Cheika the son of Lebanese immigrants, Jones half-Japanese. Randwick was an egalitarian club where lawyers rubbed shoulders with labourers. Without this inclusive culture, Cheika and Jones may have found themselves playing rugby league, a game they both love and are still heavily influenced by. There is a seven-year age difference between Cheika and Jones, but their careers overlapped. Cheika and Jones were good club players, very good. Pound for pound Jones, an 80kg hooker, was arguably the toughest player in the Sydney competition, while let’s just say that Cheika, a big backrower, was uncompromising. Jones had another weapon, his sharp tongue, which eviscerated victims. A lover of cricket, Jones could certainly sledge for the Australian XI. The pair played for New South Wales, but neither played for the Wallabies, perhaps stoking the fires of their coaching ambitions. They are similar, but different, personalities. Jones coaches with mathematical precision, Cheika with passion and emotion. A competitive club like Randwick breeds a kind of sibling rivalry, intensifying the struggle for superiority between old club-mates like Cheika and Jones. Old times were certainly forgotten when England toured Australia in 2016, the year after the World Cup in England, a significant event in the careers of both coaches. As coach of Japan, Jones pulled off “The Brighton Miracle,” the Brave Blossoms’ staggering upset win against the mighty Springboks that was such an extraordinary event they made a movie about it. But Cheika was named international coach of the year for taking the Wallabies from sixth place in the world to the final of the World Cup at Twickenham, which Australia lost to the All Blacks. The sarcasm dripped from Jones’s razor-like tongue as he described Cheika as the “best coach in the world” on arrival in Australia for England’s three-Test tour. Jones out-manoeuvred Cheika as England won the series 3-0. In a sense Cheika and the Wallabies have never fully recovered from that whitewash. In subsequent years Jones coached England to another three wins against Cheika’s Wallabies, establishing a psychological advantage over the men in gold. And now here they are pitted against each other again as the pair seek World Cup glory to crown their careers. They have both lost finals, Cheika in 2015 and Jones in 2003 as Wallabies coach, denied by a Jonny Wilkinson field goal in extra-time. This may be the last chance for both of them. It would not be Cheika v Jones without a bit of pre-game chat to liven things up. When England’s final pool game against France was cancelled due to Typhoon Hagibis, Jones claimed his team would benefit from the two-week break compared to the Wallabies’ hard match with a physical Georgia. Cheika shot back saying England had the best preparation so they better win. Cheika threw another barb at Jones when he described the presence of Canberra Raiders coach Ricky Stuart in the England camp as “weird.” But it is not just rivalry with Cheika that is motivating Jones. If England beat the Wallabies on Saturday, Jones will end Cheika’s tenure as Australia coach. No one would appreciate the irony more than Jones, who was sacked as Wallabies coach at the end of 2005 after losing eight of nine Tests that year. Jones cried bitter tears at a media conference following his sacking. It hurt him then and it would surprise if it still didn’t. Time does not heal every wound. Rugby Australia tore up a contract that would have taken Jones through to the 2007 World Cup in France, making him the longest-serving Wallaby coach. Instead, Jones acted as a consultant to the Springboks, who won the tournament, while the Wallabies were eliminated in the quarter-final by England. Hoping history repeats itself, Jones now has an opportunity to exact the sweetest revenge on Rugby Australia by eliminating the Wallabies from this World Cup – and beating his old mate Cheika into the bargain.