Crack open the English sparkling wine. Boris Johnson has just won his first Commons vote. OK, it was only a statutory instrument to carry over EU air quality legislation to the UK after Brexit – the parliamentary equivalent of a second round victory in the Johnstone’s Paints Trophy – but these days the prime minister has learned he gets what he can get. Much more of this and he might even get an expression of confidence from the club chairman. That, though, was the high point of yet another day in which the government struggled to convince even itself that it knew what it was doing. It began with Jacob Rees-Mogg giving a short business statement, the sole point of which was to avoid saying that he didn’t have a clue what was going on so he couldn’t tell MPs whether they would need to be sitting on Saturday or not. Since joining the cabinet, lying has become second nature to the leader of the house. Power has corrupted him and what integrity he might once have had is now shot. Everyone knew that Saturday’s possible emergency session was entirely dependent on whether Johnson agreed to desperately negotiate himself back to a permanent Northern Ireland backstop with a customs border in the Irish Sea – the prime minister is one of the few people who could haggle the price up in a carpet shop – to give himself a deal on which the Commons could vote and save him the embarrassment of having to “die in a ditch” by writing an extension letter to the EU. But time and again Rees-Mogg argued otherwise. “Oh, no, no, no, no,” he said, chuckling to himself while oozing unctuous insincerity. “The honourable member had referred to ‘running a bath’ when surely he meant ‘drawing a bath’.” Weirdly, Rees-Mogg labours under the impression that this kind of bantz is clever. One can only imagine he rewatches his greatest hits on the BBC’s Parliament channel alone at night in a state of mild sexual arousal. Whatever gets you off. Saturday had nothing whatsoever to do with Johnson’s ability to agree to whatever the EU demanded, Rees-Mogg continued. The issue was that the Incredible Sulk was such a tough negotiator – “You’re welcome to keep Liverpool in a customs union as well if you like. I’ve never liked the whinging scousers and they’ve certainly never voted Tory. And while you’re about it you might as well help yourself to Scotland as well. After all, it’s only a matter of time” – that there might need to be a vote on the prime minister being forced to write to the EU. Er, you do know there is nothing in the Benn act about there needing to be a vote, Chris Leslie and Anna Soubry pointed out. Johnson could just knock out the “Dear EU” letter in between letting the dog out and spilling wine all over the sofa. But there is a need for a vote, Rees-Mogg persisted. There really isn’t. Not even his own backbenchers could bring themselves to offer him any support. One day, long after the thrill has gone, he might look back on this afternoon with embarrassment. It’s one thing to be thought dim. Another to prove it. Alok Sharma is one of the nicer Tory MPs, but even he must be surprised to find himself secretary of state for international development, as his entire career has been based on not doing anything to draw attention to himself. Neither clever nor stupid – the two usual qualifications for membership of the cabinet – just thoroughly unmemorably average. He must also have been horrified to find that Dominic Raab had done a runner and that he was now expected to open the Queen’s speech debate on foreign affairs. Um, I haven’t really got anything to say, he shrugged to a near empty chamber. The sheer futility of a government with a majority of minus 45 delivering a Queen’s speech is getting to almost everyone. Britain is the greatest country in the world. Which is why we wanted to leave the EU because Johnny Foreigner was just holding us back. And we’d also like to help some of the poorer countries, but frankly why should we? It would only encourage them to become more dependent on us. And yes it was true we were £60bn worse off as a result of voting to leave the EU but that was the kind of decision only the best country in the world could take. The only moment of honesty in his entire speech was when Emily Thornberry shouted “bollocks”. This wasn’t Sharma’s finest hour. Not that anyone could remember if he had ever had one. Maybe next time. Keir Starmer was assured in reply. Of the seven Brexit bills the government was planning to introduce, five were ones it had failed to implement in the last parliament and one had been withheld because it would never have passed. He swatted aside several Tory interruptions – it’s amazing how often it’s the MPs who understand a subject the least feel most inclined to speak about it – and repeatedly invited Sharma to say whether the government intended to crash out without a deal on 31 October regardless of whether there was a deal to be had. Sharma let out a quiet sob. This was massively above his pay grade. So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into the past.