Zawe Ashton has described her play as both an “investigation into the fallout of colonialism” on the women of the African diaspora and an exploration of what it means to be a black woman in Britain today. Her script uses dreamlike sequences and non-realist dialogue to create a seemingly ordinary world that is skewed and bent to hark back to other times and dimensions. It skitters from past to present, from the living to the dead, from the individual to the collective. It is a profoundly original and ambitious way to approach the subject of inherited intergenerational trauma and the toxic legacy of racial oppression. In practice, the play only partly pulls it off and leaves us frustrated given the potential of Ashton’s creative vision. The drama revolves around Joy (Mina Andala), a career woman working long hours to get ahead in a 40-storey office block. Early on, someone jumps out of the building and this suicidal act triggers Joy’s inner unravelling. Five women and a young girl stand at the sidelines of Joy’s life, occasionally intercepting the action but for the most part foreshadowing her fate in doom-laden tones. They are a chorus, both witnessing and reflecting Joy’s distress as well as relating African village life to her urban existence. They speak in opaque riddles imbued with poetry and mysticism that verge on the hammy (“You can’t stop a river”, “She loved the water and the stars”) and hit a note of thudding urgency right from the start that comes to sound loud and unrelenting. The central mystery is hinted at but never fully articulated. Some clues are dropped about the source of Joy’s distress but the plot unfolds in seemingly non-sequitur, elliptical scenes. “I can’t put the pieces together,” says one character, and she speaks for us as well. Natalie Pryce and Ultz’s stage design seems deliberately withholding, too: the set is bare but for some chairs and a window at the back. The best moments are darkly comic. There is a spark of magic realism when Joy realises she is pregnant, her stomach growing instantly. Jumoké Fashola plays Joy’s mother Ruth, a charismatic character who brings a fizzy satire to the stage in one scene and is so vividly drawn that you wish for more in this register. The other characters feel less developed, as does Joy’s relationship to them. Many important themes are touched on – the scapegoating of women as “witches”, natural healing, complicated motherhood, ancestral hauntings, the trauma of memory, modern-day racist micro-aggressions – but it is all too much for anything to be explored fully. The final, startling scene makes sudden sense of the play’s various puzzles, and it has a clever, retrospective logic. But it comes together a little too late. At Hackney Showroom, London, until 9 November