Chelsea’s Fikayo Tomori and Tammy Abraham have been called up by England for the Euro 2020 qualifiers in the Czech Republic and Bulgaria but there is no place for Dele Alli or Jesse Lingard. Other notable absentees are Aaron Wan-Bissaka and Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain, who had been in the previous squad, and Kyle Walker, who has again been omitted. Wan-Bissaka did not play for Manchester United on Monday because of injury and pulled out of the most recent England squad with a back problem. Kieran Trippier and Trent Alexander-Arnold have been selected as the right-backs. Tomori, a central defender, has been called up for the first time and two other Chelsea players have been included by Gareth Southgate: Mason Mount and Ross Barkley. Alli might have hoped for a recall after his return to fitness but Southgate has preferred Barkley, Mount and James Maddison in the more creative midfield positions. There is also a place in the squad for Fabian Delph. Southgate said of Tomori: “His profile as a defender fits with the way international football is. Athleticism is important; he is capable with the ball. We think it’s a good opportunity to have a closer look at him.” Tomori and Abraham are also eligible to play for Nigeria and, in the defender’s case, Canada but Southgate said he would not use them in a competitive game to close that door. “I don’t think it’s ethically right to select someone just to make sure he can’t play for somebody else,” England’s manager said. “Fik and Tammy are in on merit. They’ve both been part of our youth system. Fik came in a bit later but he was part of the team that won the [Under-17] World Cup – as far as we’re concerned they’re English players.” Goalkeepers Tom Heaton (Aston Villa), Jordan Pickford (Everton), Nick Pope (Burnley) Defenders Trent Alexander-Arnold (Liverpool), Ben Chilwell (Leicester), Joe Gomez (Liverpool), Michael Keane (Everton), Tyrone Mings (Aston Villa), Harry Maguire (Manchester United), Danny Rose (Tottenham), Fikayo Tomori (Chelsea), Kieran Trippier (Atlético Madrid) Midfielders Ross Barkley (Chelsea), Fabian Delph (Everton), Jordan Henderson (Liverpool), James Maddison (Leicester), Mason Mount (Chelsea), Declan Rice (West Ham), Harry Winks (Tottenham) Forwards Tammy Abraham (Chelsea), Harry Kane (Tottenham), Marcus Rashford (Manchester United), Jadon Sancho (Borussia Dortmund), Raheem Sterling (Manchester City), Callum Wilson (Bournemouth) Southgate said Abraham, who has two caps and has scored eight goals in his past 10 Chelsea games, had “really grasped this opportunity at the start of the season” but that Lingard’s less impressive form had led to the United midfielder’s omission. “Jesse has had a difficult period,” said Southgate, though he emphasised that he had “huge faith” in Lingard. He indicated that Callum Hudson-Odoi, just back from injury, would be included in the Under-21 squad named on Friday.