Pro-remain MPs are pulling back from plans to force a vote on attaching a second referendum to Boris Johnson’s Brexit deal on Saturday over fears they do not have enough support. Leading supporters of a “people’s vote” had been planning to use so-called “super Saturday” to test support for a second referendum. But sources close to the campaign said there was not enough support among former Tories for the move to be successful. They denied their pulling away from a vote was because the Labour leadership were lukewarm on the idea. As recently as Wednesday night Jenny Chapman, a shadow Brexit minister, had said she was sure there would be a second referendum amendment and that Labour would support it, but Jeremy Corbyn has been less enthusiastic. Even if members of the People’s Vote campaign hold back from forcing a vote, another pro-remain MP could table a second referendum amendment. The campaign is likely to support a vote at a later stage of the process. If Johnson’s deal does not pass, an MP could seize control of the order paper via an SO24 debate and hold a vote on a second referendum. If it does pass, they could seek to amend the withdrawal agreement bill before exit day. Expectations have been rising that Labour would work together with other opposition parties to try to secure a referendum. Chapman told the BBC’s Andrew Neil on Wednesday evening: “Should a deal be tabled on Saturday, I’m as sure as you can be that there will be an amendment tabled that would want to see a referendum attached to the deal. I would expect us to support that.” However, when Corbyn was asked on Thursday whether Labour would support such a bid, he suggested his first priority was to vote down Johnson’s deal. “We are unhappy with this deal and as it stands we will vote against it, although obviously we will need to see all of the last details of it,” he said. On the deal more broadly, he told Sky News: “From what we’ve read of this deal, it doesn’t meet our demands or expectations, it creates a border down the Irish Sea and it leads once again to a race to the bottom in rights and protections for British citizens and a danger of the selloff of our national assets to American companies.” Asked whether he had given up on his plan to negotiate a Labour Brexit deal, he replied: “Not at all. A Labour government elected in a general election would within three months negotiate an agreement with the EU around the five pillars … and then within six months we would put that to a referendum.” That was the policy agreed after a debate at last month’s Labour conference in Brighton, but Corbyn has been under relentless pressure ever since to make fresh moves towards opposing Brexit. Opposition parties at Westminster are expected to meet later on Thursday to discuss how best to respond to the news that Johnson has secured a deal with the EU27. The Liberal Democrat leader, Jo Swinson, said: “The fight to stop Brexit is far from over. When this deal comes to parliament we will use every possible opportunity to give the public a people’s vote on the Brexit deal that includes the option to remain in the European Union.” With the precise wording of the government’s motion not expected to be published until Saturday, it is unclear as yet exactly how any referendum could be appended to it. Corbyn expressed caution last weekend about the idea that Labour could support any Johnson deal in exchange for a referendum. The original plan advanced by proponents of a “confirmatory vote”, including the Labour MP Peter Kyle, was that MPs would pass an amendment making the Brexit deal conditional on a referendum, and then once it was amended they would vote with the government for the deal. But a number of Labour MPs have concerns about anything that would appear to be offering support to Johnson, albeit conditionally. And a potentially larger group have concerns about supporting a referendum at all. When Labour recommended that its MPs back the idea of a referendum in the so-called “indicative votes” process earlier this year, 27 rebelled to vote against it. Several more abstained. The shadow Cabinet Office secretary, Jon Trickett, told the Guardian last week he would not be in favour of a referendum that pitted Johnson’s Brexit deal against remain without offering leave voters in his constituency what he called a “Labour Brexit”.