You can understand why seeing someone you know from EastEnders working in a shop might make you look twice. If I nipped to the post office and Kat Slater was selling stamps, I’d probably go back. She ain’t my muvva! But she might be able to offer me a competitive rate on euros. Even so, there was something sour and not quite end-of-episode-bong-worthy about a tabloid’s decision to put the actress Katie Jarvis on its front page after she was spotted working as a security guard. “I woke up really embarrassed and really made to feel quite ashamed, to be honest,” she told Victoria Derbyshire last week. Jarvis left the soap in February this year and at some point started working at B&M, where her sister is also a security guard. I don’t know if it’s because we expect performers to maintain the illusion of being someone else, lest we start to realise that the stories we are glued to are made of scripts and sets and real people dressed up and pretending, but we all know that the entertainment business is tough and fickle. Research suggests that only 2% of actors make a living from acting, while 90% are out of work at any one time. Given those stats, it’s unusual that we find it so unusual for an actor to be doing something other than performing, even if they once had a starring role on a big show. Famously, The Cosby Show’s Geoffrey Owens was snapped working in a US supermarket last year, leading to accusations of “job-shaming” and an outpouring of support from the industry. The support for Jarvis, too, came quickly. “Person gets job so her kids don’t starve? Good for her,” tweeted Kathy Burke. But there was something else. It wasn’t so much the notion that Jarvis was doing a non-acting job so much as the emphasis on the fact that it was in a shop; if she had been working as a part-time lecturer, say, would it have even made it in to print? (With apologies to working-class lecturers, of course, but it just sounds like a fancy job.) It reminded me of an old reality TV competition theme, in which a contestant would be promised that they’d never have to go back to working in a shop again, like it was some shameful prison from which everyone must be desperate to escape. The snobbery was palpable. Good for Jarvis for explaining how how actors, and how people, work, because that’s what most people simply have to do. Nineteenth-century female authors might have had to pretend they were men in order to have their work published, but finally, at long last, now is the moment to be corseted, writerly and long dead. Apple is launching its TV subscription service with, among others, Dickinson, about the poet Emily, who would definitely have been on Tumblr and used black lipstick Instagram filters were she here to see the internet age. Now HBO has upped the stakes by ordering a pilot about my favourite, Mary Shelley, who lived such a biopic-friendly life it’s a wonder there isn’t a new film about her every year. As a teenager, she began an affair with Percy Bysshe Shelley, a married man, whose wife later killed herself; they fled the country while unmarried and travelled around Europe with her stepsister, who may or may not have been involved with Percy romantically. Then, when she was 18, she practically invented modern horror by writing Frankenstein, a novel so much richer than any plastic Halloween mask could ever begin to hint at. Somehow, this powder keg of a life was turned into a so-so film last year but the new series, The Shelley Society, sounds like it will be far less faithful to history and more indebted to the spirit of this incredible woman. Roberto Aguirre-Sacasa, the creator of Riverdale, will run what has been described as “a Victorian X-Files”, in which Shelley will lead a band of Romantic outlaws against supernatural threats. It could be promising, not least because it puts Shelley in charge, which is exactly where she should be. The comedian Kelly Bachman made headlines last week with a standup set about Harvey Weinstein. So far, so 2019, but it had a twist: her gags were off the cuff and delivered with a dry yet righteous fury, because Weinstein was in the audience, watching. He had a table at an event called Actors Hour, at a bar in New York, designed to support young comedians and actors, and if anyone knows about supporting actors, it’s Wein... hold on. “I’m a comic and it’s our job to name the elephant in the room, do we know what that is?” said Bachman, from the stage. “It’s a Freddy Krueger in the room, if you will. I didn’t know that we had to bring our own mace and rape whistle to Actors Hour.” Watch the video. Many have commented on how uncomfortable it is. One man in the audience – of course it’s a man, shouts: “Shut up” – while you can hear women cheering her on. Bachman is witty under what must have been horrible strain; naturally it’s uncomfortable, as it should be. Weinstein’s publicist – it remains a job – put out a statement calling the “scene” “downright rude”. I’ll go for downright heroic and brave, instead. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnist