In a one-run playoff loss, Ronald Acuna Jr’s lack of hustle was the obvious mistake the Atlanta Braves couldn’t afford. Acuna failed to run out a long flyball to right field in the seventh inning of the Braves’ 7-6 loss to St Louis in Game 1 of the NL Division Series on Thursday night. He admired his drive as he carried his bat with him on his slow jog down the first-base line. The bad news for Acuna and the Braves: It was not a homer. The ball hit off the wall, and he had to settle for a single instead of a double. Ronald Acuna Jr. almost hits a home run but just misses and ends up with a single #ChopOn pic.twitter.com/CS73eMY3Xy After showing lack of hustle in an almost identical play in August, Acuna was pulled out of a 5-3 win over the Dodgers by manager Brian Snitker. Acuna was contrite after that first mistake, and Snitker seemed convinced the 21-year-old All-Star learned his lesson. No one was as quick to forgive Acuna after the gaffe was repeated in the spotlight of the postseason opener. “Yeah, it’s frustrating,” Braves star first baseman Freddie Freeman told ESPN after the game. “But I think you have that conversation once. It’s kind of beating a dead horse after that if you keep having the same conversation over and over again. You have to know that was a mistake.” Acuna’s close friend, second baseman Ozzie Albies, said the lollygagging could have cost Atlanta a win. Albies said “a couple guys” spoke up in the clubhouse after the game to tell Acuna “just run out of the box.” “He had a chance to kill the inning,” Albies said. “We probably score in that inning if he’s at second base. It was a big chance in a tight ballgame.” Speaking through a translator, Acuna insisted, “I always try to give my best effort. Those things just kind of get away from me. So obviously I would love to have a double.” Acuna described his mistakes as “things only happen to guys who are on the bench. You get benched for that.” This time, however, Snitker was running out of players and couldn’t afford to remove Acuna from the game as a disciplinary measure. “He should have been on second,” Snitker said. “And we’re kind of short-handed to do anything about it right there. You hate to see that happen.” Acuna hit a two-run homer in the ninth and also admired the blast before flipping his bat. Freeman also homered as the Braves tried to rally from a 7-3 deficit. The fact the Braves needed one more run to complete the comeback added more attention to Acuna’s mistake in the seventh. Snitker said he had not yet had the opportunity to speak with his young star. Albies said it’s crucial that Acuna understands the message. “It’s a big deal,” Albies said. “He needs to do better there.”