The number 151 probably doesn’t have much significance for most people, but to my family it instantly conjures a smile and a nostalgic gaze into the middle distance. For my parents, 151 provided an opportunity to bring up their children in their own home and to escape the restrictions of sharing a house with mum’s father and his partner, as they’d done for the first seven years of marriage. For us children – Maxine, Paul and me – 151 brought seven “green and golden” years to our 1950s childhood: playing with friends in the garden or indoors; singing and dancing to records on the radiogram; helping around the house; and running free and safe in the streets and green spaces of a new council estate on the eastern edge of Cardiff. Like many estates in postwar Britain, Llanrumney was planned in a spirit of optimistic reconstruction, holding on to some of the principles of the garden-city movement. Houses were brick-built in small rows rather than the long, dark-stone terraces associated with inner-city Victorian workers’ housing. Decent-sized front and rear gardens offered the opportunity to grow vegetables and to plant shrubs and flowers. Communal green spaces lent an open, airy aspect, as did the playing fields of Rumney Rec and the woodlands of legend-haunted Llanrumney Hall. Our parents didn’t seem anxious about us venturing all over the estate on our bikes or wandering down to Rumney River In spring 1953 we were one of the first families on the estate. Dad had to go to work the day we moved in because he couldn’t afford a day off, so he cycled to Wagon Repairs Ltd in the docks, where he was a carpenter, while Johnny Workman’s van moved whatever possessions we had to 151. A concrete path led to the porch and blue door; downstairs, a front room for best, a hallway and kitchenette, a small living room at the back; upstairs, three bedrooms and bathroom. A bonus was “the outhouse”: with a separate front entrance, it was a passageway to the back garden, big enough to store coal, bikes, tools, paint, toys, etc, as well as having – wonder of wonders! – a second toilet. Our neighbours were couples in their 30s who’d survived the war and started young families – the Fletchers, Checketts, Wickhams and the Carrs in the corner house with the big front garden and garage. Friendships came easily. With hardly any traffic, we organised noisy street games such as touch, hopscotch and “Please Jack, may I cross the water?”, stretched a rope across the road and chanted skipping rhymes, roller-skated down the hill, sprinted to the lamp-post and back, or spent all day down the Rec playing football, cricket and baseball – the Welsh version, native only to Cardiff, Newport and Liverpool over the border. Perhaps it’s a boy’s-eye view, but our parents didn’t seem anxious about us venturing all over the estate on our bikes or wandering down to Rumney River where the bridge at the end of Ball Lane gave access to open countryside. It’s still largely taboo to talk negatively about social housing. Those who had places to sleep affordably – no matter how damp or dangerous or stricken with social problems – are meant to be grateful. Before I turned 16, I lived on eight different council estates, big and small, north and south, as well as homeless B&Bs, housing association flats and small private rentals designed for housing benefit recipients. My single mum with two children in tow was often shuttled to the top of the housing list. We were usually put in the flat no one wanted, on the estates that would be no one’s preference. Flats on the top floor with no working lift; ones by the communal bins for hundreds of people; a ground-floor flat with damp so thick I used to draw pictures in it with my finger while trying to sleep. Estates where rubbish was left to pile up, and crime, violence or drugs went unchecked. Compared with the alternative, social housing where we knew we would not be evicted, where the housing benefit would suffice, where if something went wrong with our flat we could ask for it to be fixed (even if it might take many months), was a better option by far. What's more dystopian than watching 72 social-housing tenants die in a tower of flames? So, I am grateful for those things. The problem is that as I got older I went into the wider world and came to understand how badly we had been failed by those who held the purse and power strings. That utopian dream of decent, affordable housing for all became a dystopian reality. Of course, you’re welcome to disagree, but then I’ll ask you to tell me something, anything, more dystopian than watching 72 social-housing tenants die in a tower of flames in the fifth richest city in the world. Grenfell happened because the residents were poor, ignored and no one gave a shit. If we are to campaign for more social housing, let it be social housing which is fit for purpose, designed to be a home for a community of happy, productive citizens. Integrate it with the community and amenities, imagine not that the folk living there will be staying home all day watching Cash In The Attic, but that they will have jobs to go to, friends and family to see, purses full of cash that they want to spend in the high street. Imagine the children growing up on that estate will become your future politicians, doctors, broadcasters, artists and scientists – so make sure they can get to school safely, that they’ll remain physically and mentally healthy, and that they like where they live so much that they will choose to stay and contribute to a community they are grateful for. After her divorce, my mother chose to move to Bristol. We lived in one room in a house of multiple occupation in Easton for more than a year in 1975-6 and shared a bed that was no more than a big piece of foam on the floor. We were offered a council flat on the top floor of a three-storey block without a lift, on a 99% white working-class housing estate on the outskirts of Bristol in Lawrence Weston. Mum didn’t drive, we were miles from friends and our black culture. My mum – not one of life’s complainers – got a job in nearby Shirehampton and made the best of our new environment. Aged 11, I befriended an older girl at Lawrence Weston comprehensive school who was also dating the local hard man. I was not untouchable, but I did now have someone to watch over me, as no one messed with “Sally”. My quick wits meant I made a range of friends from different backgrounds. You could count the number of black families on the estate on one hand. I miss the banter and camaraderie of life on the estate – it certainly helped to build my character Due to my mother’s insistence I addressed all my friends’ parents as “Mr” or “Mrs”. This meant I often got invited to “tea”, something my West Indian upbringing had no reference of, but I intrinsically knew was an important occasion. While I played with their children, these various parents would fill the gaps in the void left by the rest of my family being more than 120 miles away in London. We lived without fear of life’s everyday dangers. Soon we had a tight gang of kinship rather than terror. We fought, argued, laughed and cried together. The youth clubs, boxing gyms and a plethora of sporting clubs kept most of us away from the glue-sniffers, speed-freaks and junkies. I miss the banter and camaraderie of life on the estate. It could be vicious, yet have the most acerbic observational humour of the finest stand-up comedians. It certainly helped to build my character, sharp tongue and canny pragmatic skills in response to an array of insults and challenges. There were no safe spaces and this sink-or-swim approach to growing up is not recommended for the faint-hearted. As I grew older, I became more aware of the ritual racist abuse. I recall one vicious attack that took place when I was alone at a bus stop, which left me physically and mentally scarred. It was carried out by two assailants who shouted “nigger” at me, individuals who hated what they didn’t understand. I was lucky, I got up: Stephen Lawrence in similar circumstances did not. Clint Eastwood was our hero back then and I describe my time in Lawrence Weston as “the Good, the Bad and the Ugly”. The reality for a skinny, small black kid on the brink of adolescence without immediate family or friends meant life was tough, but it was also the making of this man. The day we got the keys, I burst into the house, darted through the kitchen, ran up the stairs and headed straight for the room at the end of the landing. Out of breath, I opened the door, walked tentatively in and closed it behind me. Everything smelled new. The bath, white and glistening, was to the right, the sink straight ahead, and the toilet to the left beside a small radiator. I was amazed. This was to be our family’s first bathroom. The home we were leaving was a two-up-two-down Victorian terraced house in the lower Falls Road area of west Belfast, with no central heating, no bathroom and riddled with damp. The toilet was outside in the yard. I was seven-and-a-half when we were told there was a new four-bedroom house for my parents and the six of us children to move into just a few streets away. Other things I remember: the aroma of naked wood and freshly applied plaster; lots of doors and built-in cupboards in which to store things; large windows; the excitement of a garden back and front; the small playground right outside the door with climbing bars; the anticipation of the friends I would make and the things we would do in this place, which was filled with newly planted trees in the streets and places to play. There were frequently pitched battles between people on both sides of the divide; sometimes they involved shooting What I soon came to understand was that the new estates springing up in and around Belfast in the mid-to-late 1970s were a response to poor housing, and also to the historical discrimination that meant the Protestant majority experienced favourable allocation of council housing while those from Catholic backgrounds were left behind. Many families had also been displaced due to violence and sectarian intimidation related to the Troubles. What I now know is that the rehousing process resulted in even greater segregation of the two communities and that this had longer-term ramifications for sectarianism and division, including the emergence of “peace lines” along what are called “interface areas”, where largely Catholic and Protestant working-class communities border one another. These walls remain a prominent feature of many Belfast communities today. My early years living on our council estate included watching as a massive brick “peace wall” was constructed across one perimeter. It was a security decision. There were frequently pitched battles between people on both sides of the divide; sometimes they involved shooting. Over time, however, other walls went up. Parts of the estate – which had felt open and accessible when we first moved in – were cordoned off by a series of smaller walls that made it difficult to enter or exit certain areas. When I returned to visit family and friends on as a young adult, it was beginning to feel more like a containment area than a housing estate. Homes for Heroes 100: Council Estate Memories, published as part of last week’s Festival of the Future City in Bristol, supported by funding from the National Lottery Heritage Fund and Bristol City Council. Cost £10, email ideas@businesswest.co.uk for details.