The decision of Spain’s supreme court to sentence Catalan politicians and activists to lengthy jail terms following their bid to win independence in 2017 is truly appalling (Report, 15 October). Normal western countries don’t lock up democratic opponents, and for an EU member state in the 21st century to have political prisoners beggars belief. This situation raises serious concerns about the very nature of democracy in Europe. The EU and the rest of the international community must intervene, offering the parties a way out of the conflict. This is no longer an internal Spanish affair, it is a European and a global crisis. The EU does not need to take a side in the argument, rather it should act as an impartial mediator, looking at democratic and negotiated solutions. The union must intervene, or the crisis will escalate. Let the EU help Spain and Catalonia find peace.Alex OrrEdinburgh • It is not Brexit but the nature of the EU that is largely responsible for the impending breakup of Spain and the UK (Spain is shamed by the Catalan jailings. Britain must avoid similar conflict, 15 October). This is because nationalist politicians belonging to constituents that make up composite EU states would always ask: why share your sovereignty with your national capitals and remain for ever a “bridesmaid” when you can share it with Brussels and acquire the “bride” status? Take, for example, the Scottish National party. It came into being in 1934, but became a political force to reckon with only after the UK joined the EU. The Catalan separatists too received a fresh lease of life only after their parent state – Spain – became a full-fledged EU member. The EU may not support the breakup of its composite states, as it has so far refused to intervene in the internal affairs of either Spain or the UK, but there is no denying that its supranational character does provide an attractive alternative to those who wish to break away from their parent states. Brexit is, therefore, the outcome – not the source – of the impending breakup.Randhir Singh BainsGants Hill, Essex • Re your editorial, if the UK is to hold together as a democratic entity, it will be need to become a federation of equal partners, with each of the four member countries taking full responsibility for the governance of their territories. A supranational federal parliament should be located away from the south of England, with the House of Lords replaced by two non-legislative councils, one of elders and one of youth, reference to whom major federal issues would be constitutionally required for debate as part of the democratic process. And we’d better get a move on before our jails are filled to bursting with rebellious radicals.John StoneThames Ditton, Surrey • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition 