This production of Maxim Gorky’s play suffered a setback when Samantha Bond had to withdraw from the title role but Siobhan Redmond has stepped into the breach with great elan. She gives a highly impressive performance as Gorky’s domineering matriarch but, although Mike Bartlett’s version begins with a caption telling us “the play is set before a revolution – capitalism is showing its age,” it seems, like Tinuke Craig’s production, strangely rootless. The first issue is which text to use. They opt for Gorky’s 1911 version rather than his 1935 revision, which is a more explicit attack on a moribund political system. What we get is a robust drama about a merchant-class family struggling to survive. Vassa, the tyrannical mother trying to rescue a debt-ridden business, despises her weakling sons, regards her daughter with wary suspicion, seeks to poison her voracious brother-in-law and forges a will to ensure future control. Even when she describes her dying husband as “promiscuous, violent, overbearing” you feel it is less in tones of moral condemnation than grudging admiration. Gorky’s play is clearly a portrait of insidious corruption in pre-revolutionary Russia. Bartlett and Craig, however, strip it of any historical context to give us a blackly comic account of the destructive nature of the profit-driven family. Even Fly Davis’s set, with its multiple upstage doors, suggests we are close to farce. The result is that we lose the play’s sense of particularity and, in her 21st-century diverse casting, Craig reinforces the sense that we are in a time-free zone. Individual performances are good. Redmond fearlessly shows the cost to Vassa of her merciless manipulation: left alone, she crumbles into despair or hides under a desk. Amber James as her equally strong-willed daughter, Danny Kirrane and Arthur Hughes as her neurotically insecure sons and Michael Gould as her lecherous brother-in-law – typically described as “a randy old shit” – all make a positive impression. But, if the intention is to suggest the play’s relevance to our own wayward times, I would rather be allowed to draw my own conclusions from Gorky’s damning historical evidence. At the Almeida, London, until 23 November.