I grew up Googling the words “gay and Muslim” most nights. Sometimes I still do. For any young Muslim like myself, whether they be queer, an ally or have a passion for social justice similar to mine, this kind of struggle to find like-minded people is all too real. This craving to find other Muslims who are open-minded enough to not just accept who they are but completely embrace their identities and to see these same people speak out against issues of marginalisation like racism, sexism and Islamophobia has always been validating to me. They were my fearless Muslim heroes and I had hoped they would speak out against homophobia in much the same way, particularly during the marriage equality debate in 2017. At the time, they never did. But attitudes are changing now and queer Muslims and allies around the world are having a moment which needs to be acknowledged. In its winning bid to host the 2023 WorldPride, which will be themed “fearless”, the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras emphasised the importance of the event to “shine a light on the widespread human rights abuses by our regional neighbours”. In the bid, there was special mention of certain Muslim-majority nations, such as Brunei, to contrast with Australia’s more progressive treatment of LGBTQ+ issues. Even though much of the Muslim world still hasn’t decriminalised homosexuality nor granted marriage equality like Australia has, in recent years there has been a noticeable shift in attitude with respect to sexuality among Muslim populations and an increased visibility of queer Muslims in the media. This change is very significant. Pride festivals do not exist to simply celebrate handsome, 6-foot white boys with glittered abs – the community has always been much more diverse In 2016, prominent queer activist, Xulhaz Mannan, founder of Bangladesh’s only LGBTQ+ magazine, Roopbaan, and the country’s first “rainbow rally”, was hacked to death in his flat. He was not the only person to have been killed in the Muslim world for standing up for gay rights. But the Muslim population has come a long way in its efforts to accept the queer community since then. Two years later, neighbouring India, which is home to about 200 million Muslims, decriminalised homosexuality with the repeal of the colonial-era law, section 377. Today, many Muslims are proudly flaunting their queerness. Whether it be UK charity, Imaan, raising more than £8,000 (A$15,000) to hold the first ever pride festival specifically for LGBTQ+ Muslims in London in 2020 or images of US congresswoman Ilhan Omar dancing at pride being circulated on Twitter, it is clear that sections of the Muslim community are not holding back from literally parading their support for LGBTQ+ folk. This change is substantial. Even conversations in the media relating to Muslims and their sexual identity are becoming more commonplace. Any discussion of sex or sexual orientation has historically been taboo in our communities. However, today Sayeeda Warsi’s weekly Muslim Pride BBC4 Radio podcast explores how Islam and same-sex attraction are not mutually exclusive, by providing a wide platform for queer Muslims to share their experiences. The way that Tan France from Netflix’s Queer Eye or Omar from Spanish drama Elite, shine the light on LGBTQ+ Muslims; their struggles and stories epitomise how the idea of queer Muslims is slowly becoming more mainstream nowadays. This kind of representation was essentially non-existent only a few years back. Someone who has contributed to the increased visibility of queer Muslims and knows the struggle all too well is British singer-songwriter Leo Kalyan. He said: “Muslims are a demonised people. And for me, I feel like as a gay person, I’m on the outside of the outside of the outside because I’m demonised by Muslims as well.” The inevitable backlash from certain Muslim communities against queer Muslims is exactly why this visibility is so necessary and why any kind of progress should be celebrated at pride. Earlier this year American activist Blair Imani eloquently laid bare why being a follower of the Islamic faith and being proudly queer are not mutually exclusive. She says: “[Allah] (God) made me to be a queer Muslim because Allah makes no mistakes.” Although the last part of Imani’s statement is reminiscent of Lady Gaga’s song Born This Way, to hear this kind of proud declaration from Muslims in the media was practically unheard of until recently. If we are to expect future generations of queer Muslim children to feel any kind of pride in their identity, we need to be celebrating individuals like Kalyan and Imani who are becoming role models for this community. We need to be celebrating this progress at WorldPride. Many Muslim-majority countries have still not progressed to the stage as Australia in terms of their treatment of LGBTQ+ issues. Nonetheless, Muslim communities around the world are evolving and conversations about these issues are being initiated like never before. Attitudes are changing and queer Muslim visibility is at its peak. Just over three years ago, 25 people marched down Oxford Street at the Sydney Mardi Gras for the first time holding up a banner which read “Muslims Against Homophobia”. Since then, so much has changed in the way many Muslim people treat LGBTQ+ issues. Pride festivals do not exist to simply celebrate handsome, 6-foot white boys with glittered abs – the community has always been much larger and more diverse than those who are the most visible. Diversity (of identity and experience) has always been at the centre of such events, and I hope WorldPride is reflective of the milestones Muslim communities have reached as well. Progressive Muslims, queer and allies alike, certainly have much to be proud of in terms of what has been achieved over the past few years. This community embodies what it means to be truly fearless. • Masrur Joarder is a university student and writer • Comments on this piece will be pre-moderated