A Moth to a Flame, Swedish author Stig Dagerman’s most popular novel, was published in 1948 as A Burnt Child. That seems more on-the-nose than the current title for a book about the destructive effects of grief, abandonment and self-absorption on a tortured young man following the death of his mother. The narrative viewpoint at first shifts between characters, but soon settles on 20-year-old Bengt. From the outset the tone is cool and dispassionate: Bengt is “the son”, widowed Knut is “the father”. Scenes of awkward family gatherings and the clearout of belongings make it look like a traditional story of bereavement and its aftermath, but the sky quickly blackens. Bengt’s late mother once told him when he was sad to write a letter to himself. “When the letter is finished, you won’t be sad any more.” But the letters he writes to address his grief, which appear between chapters, allow his thoughts to feed on themselves – resentment at the world that let his mother die, hatred of his father’s drunkenness – and we slowly see a self-driven radicalisation taking place. Bengt’s reliance on the echo chamber of his own unchallenged thoughts feels relevant to today’s concerns about the roots of extremism. When Bengt discovers that his father had – still has – a lover, his loathing escalates, and it becomes clear a terrible reckoning is ahead; the only question is which particular mess it will make. Dagerman is excellent on how our motives can be a mystery even to ourselves, as Bengt finds his malice toward his father’s lover, Gun, developing in unexpected ways. The novel, in a new translation by Benjamin Miers-Cruz, is a timely warning on the dangers of absolutism. “What can arouse more pleasure,” wonders Bengt, “than taking revenge for the sake of purity?” Bengt’s view of human nature is bleak. “If you want someone to love you, you don’t ask her to see if she ‘really’ does. Because, when all is said and done, there isn’t much we ‘really’ do. If you search deep down, you will find that the weight never reaches the bottom.” A Moth to a Flame is a book by a young writer, but the flaws that go along with that – a chaos of feelings, excessive detail, cynicism verging on nihilism – work in its favour and fit the fabric of Bengt’s churning emotions. Regrettably, we will never know how Dagerman’s writing would have developed in later life; he abandoned fiction in 1949, at the age of 26, and killed himself five years later. • A Moth to a Flame is published by Penguin (£8.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.