When he made history in Austria on Saturday morning, Eliud Kipchoge, the first person to run a marathon in less than two hours, was quick to refer to another jaw-dropping athletic milestone reached more than 50 years ago. Amid jubilant scenes in Prater park, Vienna, the 34-year-old Kenyan declared: “I’m feeling good. After Roger Bannister made history, it took me another 65 years. I’ve tried but I’ve done it.” Throughout the attempt, he had stuck to a pace of 2min 50sec per kilometre – the equivalent, as many later pointed out on social media, to running 100m in 17.2 seconds, 422 times. He hit the one-hour mark with 11 seconds to spare and, with 500m to go, burst clear of his support team to break the hallowed two-hour barrier, punching his chest twice in celebration. As he sprinted towards the finish line, where his wife, Grace Sugutt, was waiting to greet him, Kipchoge waved to the crowds. Upon breaking the tape he grabbed a Kenyan flag and was mobbed by his support crew. In characteristically modest style, he said afterwards: “This shows no one is limited. Now I’ve done it, I am expecting more people to do it after me.” Bannister’s record was broken just weeks after he ran his sub four-minute mile. But any expectation that Kipchoge’s crown will be claimed imminently seems unlikely, at least in the short term. “I think it’s going to be a while before anybody else breaks two again,” said Andrew Jones, a professor of sport and health sciences at the University of Exeter, pointing out that Kipchoge ran on a special course using pacemakers. “It’s unlikely to be replicated in a major city marathon so you’d need another specific situation to be created to make another attempt.” Kipchoge’s extraordinary, superhuman feat seemed the stuff of fantasy only a few years ago. An article published in 2010 on the Science of Sport website suggested that the world would have “80 years to wait for the two-hour marathon”. In 2017, Kipchoge had tried to dip under two hours at the Formula One track in Monza, Italy, as part of Nike’s Breaking 2 project, but missed out then by just 26 seconds. He had been joined by two other elite runners - Ethiopia’s Lelisa Desisa and Zersenay Tadese, of Eritrea - who both finished well off the pace. This time, for the Ineos 1:59 Challenge, Kipchoge was on his own, confirmation that few can rival him. Jones, an adviser on the Breaking 2 project, said Kipchoge’s achievement could “reset the psychological framework for everybody else”. “I think it will now be more common to see people running 2:02 or 2:01 and, more importantly, for the youngsters in Ethiopia and Kenya and elsewhere - it’s reset what’s possible. For them, 1:59 is the new status quo.” The man behind the attempt, the INneos chief, Sir Jim Ratcliffe, paid tribute to how Kipchoge finished: “That last kilometre where he actually accelerated was superhuman. He ran the first half marathon in under an hour and then he had to do it again.” The conditions in Prater park were perfect. Almost pancake-flat, the 9.6km course, which Kipchoge completed more than four times, boasted long straights, protected from the wind by high trees. The achievement will not be recognised as an official marathon world record as it was not run in open competition. Nevertheless, Kipchoge’s place in the history books is assured. “It’s astonishing, what he has achieved today,” Jones said. “He’s clearly the outstanding endurance athlete of our generation, possibly any generation.” Sports stars from around the world were awestruck by the achievement. The British sprinter Adam Gemili declared on Twitter: “Truly inspirational. Sub 2 hour marathon. So blessed to have witnessed that. History!” The England rugby star Maro Itoje described it as “incredible”. Kipchoge, who has won 10 of his 11 marathons and holds the official world record marathon time of 2:01:39, appeared overwhelmed by the reaction. An hour after forcing the world to reconsider what was humanly possible, the four-time London marathon winner posted on Twitter: “Today we went to the Moon and came back to earth! I am at a loss for words for all the support I have received from all over the world. Thank you to all who gave me the opportunity. Asante.” Sir Roger Bannister is the first person to run a sub four-minute mile, in 3min 59.4sec (6 May 1954). Bob Beamon breaks the long-jump record by 55cm (October 18 1968). Nadia Comăneci, 14, is the first gymnast awarded a perfect 10 (18 July 1976). Javier Sotomayor sets the high-jump record: 2.45m (27 July1993).