There are times when discussing formations seems like mere semantics but Nuno Espírito Santo’s second-half switch from 3-5-2 to 3-4-3 succeeded in changing the entire narrative on Tyneside on Sunday. By dropping Leander Dendoncker back into defence and pulling Matt Doherty forward to right wing-back, where he would combine to devastating effect with Adama Traoré, the Wolves manager paved the way for Jonny Otto’s volleyed equaliser. Until that revamp Newcastle had been in control since taking the lead courtesy of Jamaal Lascelles’ fine header but, with the £40m Brazilian striker Joelinton once again struggling, they rarely looked like scoring a second. Once Doherty and Traoré began limiting Allan Saint-Maximin’s influence, Steve Bruce’s side retreated and were left clinging on for a point after Sean Longstaff was shown a straight red card for a two-footed, high, out-of-control tackle on Rúben Neves in which he got the ball but wiped his opponent out on the follow-through. Not that Neves was entirely the innocent victim. After deliberately drawing Longstaff into making thatunwise tackle, the supremely streetwise midfielder then indulged in some serious am-dram stuff as he writhed on the turf before the red card was brandished. “I think it’s harsh on the boy, I really do,” said Bruce. “Sean’s not in control of the ball but how is he supposed to be when he’s just played the ball? And the behaviour of Neves is another thing. When they’re rolling around and screaming like that you know they’re not hurt. I’m a bit dubious about Neves. I’ll have a look at it again and, if possible, we’ll appeal.” Newcastle’s manager is unlikely to succeed but what matters more is whether he can somehow coax his low-scoring side – only Watford have fewer Premier League goals to their name – into testing goalkeepers. Before Lascelles did head Federico Fernández’s fabulous cross beyond Rui Patrício, Miguel Almirón missed a wonderful chance, shooting into the side-netting after being sent clear by Matty Longstaff’s excellent lofted through pass. Almirón is still to score for Newcastle, while Joelinton has one league goal to his name and is floundering. “We’ve invested a hell of a lot of money in the boy,” Bruce said. “He’s young, he’s trying to get used to this league and we have to be patient and protect him. He’s a good player but he’s finding it tough. That’s what the Premier League is: tough and uncompromising.” Wolves know the feeling, having returned from their Europa League win at Slovakia’s Slovan Bratislava in the early hours of Friday morning and the resultant fatigue perhaps contributed to a decidedly low-adrenaline opening.For a while things were so flat that, had the players been remote controlled toys it would have seemed that their batteries were running out. Then Newcastle woke up, Lascelles scored and Wolves’ aerial vulnerability was re-emphasised. With Allan Saint-Maximin’s pace troubling Nuno’s defence, Diogo Jota found himself repeatedly crowded out by home markers while Neves and João Moutinho were permitted similarly limited room for manoeuvre. Nuno needed Traoré to run at Bruce’s backline but this did not really happen until the implementation of that smart, if subtle, second-half formational rejig. Human error came into the equation too, with Martin Dubravka badly misjudging Doherty’s cross unleashed in the wake of Traoré’s lovely reverse pass. The goalkeeper, who signed a lucrative six-year contract last week, watched in horror as the ball fell for Jonny to volley home from eight yards. “Dubravka knows he can do better,” Bruce said. “It was a poor decision.” Another one followed as Longstaff saw red for a challenge that, if not vicious or necessarily intentional, was certainly dangerous and, significantly, went uncontested by Newcastle’s player. It could have been worse for Bruce but a VAR review went his way when Wolves appealed for a stoppage-time penalty over Lascelles’ tug on Doherty. No matter. Nuno – who confirmed Wily Boly broke an ankle in training last week – was quietly content with his half-time work. “Being versatile in our shape is good,” he said. “We are growing in that respect.”