Leigh Halfpenny Showed no sign of rust after stepping in for Liam Williams. Very sound. 7 George North His departure just before the break was a huge blow. Had looked a real threat. 5 Jonathan Davies Wales missed his attacking nous against France. Good defensive organiser. 6 Hadleigh Parkes Had work cut out with De Allende and made numerous tackles. 6 Josh Adams His sixth try in the World Cup was a gem. Always a danger in attack. 7 Dan Biggar Tackled bravely and kicked astutely before being replaced by Patchell. 8 Gareth Davies Failed to win duel with Faf de Klerk and replaced early on by Williams. 6 Wyn Jones A couple of significant turnovers and powerful at the breakdown. 6 Ken Owens Another powerful display against the strong Bok scrum. Unyielding. 7 Tomas Francis His loss was another massive blow to the power of the scrum. 5 Jake Ball Made few carries but tackled hard before being replaced by Beard. 5 Alun Wyn Jones His brave decision to go for a scrum rather than penalty deserved more. 7 Aaron Wainwright Not as influential as last week but good defensive shift. 6 Justin Tipuric Unobtrusive but hard-working display. Has been outstanding in back row. 6 Ross Moriarty Recovered from horrible mid-air collision and carried with intent. 7 Replacements Dillon Lewis (for Francis, 35) 5, Owen Watkin (for North, 39) 5, Tomos Williams (for G Davies, 47) 7, Rhys Carré (for Wyn Jones, 56) 6, Rhys Patchell (for Biggar, 58) 6, Adam Beard (for Ball, 59) 6, Aaron Shingler (for Wainwright, 68) 6, Elliot Dee (for Owens, 72) 5. Willie le Roux A bit of a scratchy display from a great talent and looked a bit vulnerable. 5 Sbu Nkosi Exposed for the Adams try and never asked any questions of Welsh defence. 5 Lukhanyo Am Good in defence but unable to display many of his attacking skills. 6 Damian de Allende England will be wary of the centre’s power. Easily the pick of the Bok backs. 8 Makazole Mapimpi Cut through the Japanese defence but unable to get any ball out wide this time. 6 Handré Pollard The match-winner with his place-kicking and break for the try. Very influential. 8 Faf de Klerk Made a couple of errors but always a livewire threat around the fringes. 7 Tendai Mtawarira Decision to replace front row early on was odd given his strong display. 6 Bongi Mbonambi Will come under pressure for starting spot from Malcolm Marx but tidy. 6 Frans Malherbe Scrummaged powerfully and very solid in the setpiece. 6 Lood de Jager Has had an impressive tournament and very strong in the setpiece. 7 Eben Etzebeth Good in the lineout as usual but not one of the lock’s best displays. 6 Siya Kolisi South Africa’s captain led by example with a powerful and unflashy 68 minutes. 7 Pieter-Steph du Toit The flanker got through a monumental amount of work. Their best forward. 9 Duane Vermeulen The No 8 made more carries than any South African forward. Very strong. 7 Replacements Malcolm Marx (for Mbonambi, 47) 6, Steven Kitshoff (for Mtawarira, 47) 6, Vincent Koch (for Malherbe, 47) 6, R G Snyman (for Etzebeth, 52), 7, Franco Mostert (for De Jager, 58) 6, Frans Steyn (for Le Roux, 68) 5, Francois Louw (for Kolisi, 68) 7.