“Well, I was delighted to be asked!” says John Humphrys, on the phone. “I got an email very soon after I left the Today programme asking me to do it. I did get others, but this was the offer that most appealed, simply because it was so different to what I was doing before.” Humphrys is talking about his new gig as stand-in presenter of the More Music Breakfast show on Classic FM. The ex-Radio 4 presenter will be chuntering between tracks every morning this week between 6am and 9am, while Tim Lihoreau is off. How will Humphrys do? More Music is very different from Today. Lihoreau has perfected a cosy, calm atmosphere, his tone welcoming but not dominating, “a chilled start to the morning”, as Lihoreau puts it. Actually, in the first hour, he doesn’t say too much at all, which Humphrys might find a challenge, though there is the serene presence of Moira Stewart to temper his verbosity: she reads the news headlines every 20 minutes. And I can’t imagine Humphrys getting stuck into Lihoreau’s out-of-studio work. A few weeks ago, he dragged an upright piano from the Classic FM studios in Leicester Square to the Albert Hall, as part of Global’s Make Some Noise charity efforts. (Global is the parent company of Classic FM and Make Some Noise funds projects across the UK that help disadvantaged children, young people and their families.) He raised more than £75,000. In short, Humphrys has big earphones to fill. Classic FM now has 5.1 million listeners, its biggest audience in 12 years. More Music Breakfast gets 1.68 million weekly listeners and John Suchet’s morning show, immediately afterwards, tops 2.5 million. When the station works – and it nearly always does – it slightly reminds me of Terry Wogan’s old Radio 2 breakfast programme: there’s a sense of the world getting on with its hectic life somewhere off to the left, while on air a community is provided by the listeners, who email in about this and that, asking for a school run shoutout or telling Suchet about their local rugby team losing by more than 100 points to nil. Classic FM means easy classical music, often the tunes you already know from film scores or TV themes, as opposed to the trickier, more highbrow stuff on Radio 3. It has a live gig twice a year at the Albert Hall, slickly staged and beautifully presented by glamorous hosts such as Suchet and Margherita Taylor. All this might seem comfy and unmodern, but that would not be right. Global, which also owns LBC, Capital, Heart, Smooth and Radio X, is a dynamic – rivals would say ruthless – media company. Eddie Mair, who joined LBC from Radio 4’s PM, described to me Global’s habit of having a company-wide conference, where everyone, from presenter to PR, sits in a big cinema and the managers talk about the Rajar ratings. “They stand at the front and talk about one programme, saying, in front of everyone, ‘Well, you’re doing well, congratulations’ and to another, ‘You’ve got to pull your socks up’ and it’s quite frank. I was amazed the first time I went.” Global’s bosses poach presenters they like: LBC got Eddie Mair; Classic nabbed Moira Stuart from Radio 2 with the offer of a year-round Saturday afternoon show; Capital Xtra has Tim Westwood, Semtex and Ras Kwame, all ex-BBC, while Amanda Holden joined Jamie Theakston on Heart to make a national radio breakfast show that instantly became commercial radio’s biggest, with 4.6 million listeners. The fact that 21 local radio shows were ditched to create the new show was not seen as a problem – more than 70 presenters found themselves without a job. Classic FM, for all its gentility, is a Global station. A year ago, it launched Case Notes, about the murky mysteries of classical music, which promptly won best true crime podcast at this year’s Podcast awards. The station knows Humphrys is a draw and its producers and bosses will ensure they help him find his Classic groove. Or grooviness: after all, a visit to Classic FM is remarkably similar to a visit to Capital Xtra. All Global’s national programmes come from the same studios in Leicester Square. There’s severe security to get through, involving bar codes and photographs before you even get to reception, then a modern hangout cafe, with soft chairs and decent coffee, before you reach the studios. And those studios! So white, shiny and luminous as to almost seem space age… “Yes,” says Humphrys. “The Classic FM studios are very fancy, my goodness! No, I won’t be wearing sunglasses indoors. But they do make the BBC seem like a local news station!” Well, yes, in many ways, they do. Humphrys had better watch out. He’s about to be Classic-ed. • Miranda Sawyer is the Observer’s radio critic • This article was amended on 27 October 2019. An earlier version misspelled Moira Stuart’s name and confused John Suchet with his brother, David. With “5.6 million”, we also overstated Classic FM’s number of weekly listeners by 500,000. These errors have been corrected.