Prep 1 hr 45 minCook 1 hrServes 8 250g plain flour50g icing sugar25g finely ground hazelnuts125g butter, cold and cut into small cubes1 egg, beaten½ tbsp whole milk For the filling100g butter100g icing sugar2 eggs, beaten100g ground almondsZest of ½ lemon4 crisp, sweet eating apples (eg Fiesta or Jazz), peeled, cored and thinly sliced into rounds1 tbsp demerara sugarFor the cider brandy cream150ml double cream25g caster sugar2 tbsp Somerset cider brandy or Calvados To make the pastry, Sift the flour and icing sugar into a large mixing bowl, add the ground hazelnuts and butter, and rub them into the flour and sugar with your fingertips until you get a crumble-like mixture. Add the eggs and milk, and carefully work into with your hands until you have a dough . Be careful not to mix it too much – you don’t want to overwork the pastry. Lightly dust with flour the dough, cover and chill in the fridge for an hour. To make the filling, cream together the butter and icing sugar in a large mixing bowl until light and fluffy. Slowly Gradually add the beaten eggs a little at a time, mixing well between each addition. Gently Fold in the almonds and lemon zest, then set aside. To make the cider brandy cream, whisk the cream and sugar to soft peaks. Slowly add the cider brandy, whisking well in between each addition, then chill until ready to serve. To assemble and bake, take the pastry out of the fridge 30 minutes before you need it. Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4 and grease a 23cm springform tart tin with butter. Flour a smooth work surface. Roll out the pastry large enough to cover the bottom and sides of the tart tin. and put the pastry in the tin, pushing it into the edges with your thumbs. Prick the bottom with a fork, trim the edges off and , then pop in the freezer for 10 minutes before filling. Remove the pastry from the freezer, Add the almond filling, arrange the apple rounds on top and sprinkle with the demerara sugar. Bake in the oven for an hour, or until the apples are golden brown and the centre is cooked. Leave to Cool for at least 15 minutes before serving to allow the frangipane to firm up, then serve warm with a dollop of the cider brandy cream. Prep 20 minCook 1 hrServes 12 175g unsalted butter, at room temperature, plus extra for greasing150g caster sugar200g self-raising flour1 tsp ground cinnamon½ tsp ground ginger1 tsp baking powder4 eggs, beaten100g ground almonds50g sultanas200g crisp eating apples (eg granny smith or Chivers Delight), peeled, cored and sliced For the toffee sauce200ml double cream50g butter175g light muscovado sugar1 tbsp golden syrup1 tbsp black treacle To serveVanilla ice-cream Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4 and grease and line the base of a 23cm round springform cake tin with butter and line with baking parchment. In an electric mixer, Cream the butter and sugar together until pale and smooth, and sift together the flour, spices and baking powder into a bowl. Add the beaten eggs to the butter mixture a little at a time, mixing well in and adding a tablespoon of the flour mix as you go with each addition. Once all the flour has been added, mix in the ground almonds and sultanas until combined. Stir three-quarters of the apples to the mixture and , stir in with a wooden spoon, then spoon the cake mixture into the prepared tin. Arrange the remaining pieces of apple on top of the top of the cake in a circular pattern. Bake in the oven for one hour, until a skewer inserted in the middle comes out clean. Leave to Cool in the pan for five minutes, thenremove the springform ring and transfer to a wire rack to finish cooling. To make the toffee sauce, Put the cream in a saucepan over a low heat to warm, add the butter and sugar and stir until dissolved and smooth. Add the syrup and treacle and stir until melted. Serve the cake with the hot toffee sauce and a hefty dollop of vanilla ice-cream. Prep 20 minCook 25 minMakes 8 For the muffins150g plain flour100g caster sugar1½ tsp baking powder2 tsp ground cinnamon½ tsp freshly grated nutmeg1 pinch salt1 sweet, juicy eating apple (eg cox’s), cored and grated120ml whole milk1 egg, beaten4 tbsp vegetable oil For the crumble50g rolled oats40g butter, at room temperature½ tsp ground cinnamon25g demerara sugar Heat the oven to 190C (170C fan)/375F/gas 5 and grease an eight-hole muffin tin with butter or oil, or line the tin with paper muffin cases. Mix the flour, sugar, baking powder, spices andpinch of salt in alarge mixing bowl, then add the grated apple. Combine the milk, beaten egg and vegetable oil, and gradually add to the bowl, mixing all the time. Once everything is combined, spoon equally into the prepared tins or cases. In another bowl, mix the oats for the crumble with the soft butter, cinnamon and sugar together until well combined. Top each muffin with a spoonful of the crumble mix. Bake the muffins in the oven for 25 minutes until brown and crunchy on top, then leave to cool on a wire rack. They will keep in an airtight container for up to three days. Prep 35 minCook 45 minServes 12 For the apple and vanilla cream1 large cooking apple (eg bramley), peeled, cored and chopped4 tbsp caster sugar½ vanilla pod, split in half lengthways and seeds removed400ml double creamZest of ½ lime For the meringue6 egg whites1 tbsp white-wine vinegar350g caster sugar For the toppingSelection of autumn fruits: apples, blackberries, pears, plumsJuice of ½ lemonTo serveMint, finely slicedZest of 1 lime To make the apple and vanilla cream, Heat the apple, half of the sugar and two tablespoons of water in a pan over a medium heat. Stir until the apple begins to break down, then simmer for five minutes, until you have a smooth apple sauce. Stir in the vanilla seeds and leave to fully cool. Whisk the cream and the remaining sugar in an electric mixer to stiff peaks, then mix in the lime zest. Once the apple sauce is fully cool, briefly stir through the cream to achieve a marbled effect. Heat the oven to 140C (120C fan)/275F/gas 1 and cut three pieces of baking parchment to fit three baking sheets. Draw a 20cm circle clearly on each, piece of parchment, then turn the paper upside down on the baking sheet; you should still be able to see the circles. Now make the meringue. Using an electric mixer with the whisk attachment, For the meringue, beat the egg whites and vinegar on a medium-high speed for two minutes. Add the sugar, a tablespoon at a time, and continue beating until you have very stiff peaks. Using a spatula, Divide the meringue between the three circles and use the back of the spatula to spread the meringue into even discs that fill the circles.. Bake in the oven for 40 minutes, until firm, then turn the oven off, but leave the oven door ajar to cool and harden the meringues – about 90 minutes. To assemble the pavlova, slice and Prepare the chosen fruit. Slice the apples with the skins on and soak in some cool water with the lemon juice for a few minutes so that they keep their colour. Drain, then add to the other fruit. Just before serving, Put one meringue disc on a cake stand and spread a third of the apple cream on top. Add a third of the fruit, Top with the next meringue disc, spread a third of the cream and another third of the fruit. Finally repeat twice more, then garnish with mint and lime zest, then serve. From Apple: Recipes form the Orchard, by James Rich (Hardie Grant, £20). To order a copy for £17.60, visit guardianbookshop.co.uk