With the top two out of action Peterborough were the day’s outstanding achievers, leaping from seventh to third courtesy of a 2-0 victory over Lincoln in which all the notable action came in the last 10 minutes. Louis Reed opened the scoring in the 82nd minute with a vicious drive from just outside the area, and though he was sent off in stoppage time Ivan Toney had by then doubled their advantage with a delicious angled lob. Bristol Rovers, eighth before kick-off, stayed in their slipstream to move to fourth after a 1-0 win over MK Dons, Tom Davies scoring his first goal since November 2015 to secure the points and inflict a fifth successive league defeat on the visitors. Having not won any of their first 13 games of the season in all competitions Wimbledon got a third victory in a week as their recent revival under Glyn Hodges, standing in as manager while Wally Downes deals with an FA charge for breaking betting regulations, continued, They thrashed Southend 4-1, Marcus Forss scoring a hat-trick to take his personal tally to seven in six league games since he moved to the club on loan from Brentford at the start of September and leave the Shrimpers, who have lost 12 of their 15 matches in all competitions this season, marooned in the relegation places. Blackpool 1-2 Rotherham, Bristol Rovers 1-0 MK Dons, Oxford Utd 3-0 Doncaster, Peterborough 2-0 Lincoln, Portsmouth 0-0 Gillingham, Rochdale 2-1 Accrington, Southend 1-4 Wimbledon Crewe leapfrogged to the top of the table on goals scored despite letting a two-goal lead slip in the second half at Carlisle. Leading 2-0 at half-time, Crewe were pegged back to 2-2 within 20 minutes of the restart but they regrouped and scored twice more to win 4-2. With 23 goals, the only league teams to have outscored them are Peterborough (28) and Oxford United (27), both in League One. The teams who started the day first and second ended it second and fourth as the erstwhile leaders, Forest Green, dropped out of the top three after losing 1-0 to Exeter, who are level on points and goal difference with Crewe. Ryan Bowman volleyed the Grecians into the lead in the 11th minute with what turned out to be the home side’s only shot on target. Morecambe, whose only win of the season came back in August, ended a miserable afternoon at the bottom of the Football League after losing 2-1 at home to Bradford City, who moved into third, though Tom Brewitt provided some consolation with a goal in the 94th minute. Stevenage beat Grimsby 2-1, their first league win of the season, to clamber off the foot of the table while above them Scunthorpe also won, 3-0 against Northampton, who had already conceded three times when they went down to 10 men shortly after half-time. Also ending a prolonged run of poor form were Macclesfield – the team responsible for Morecambe’s only victory – whose 2-1 win over Port Vale was their first in eight league games. The most eye-catching result of the afternoon came at Field Mill, where with half an hour played a game of little notable incident remained goalless. Eight minutes later Nicky Maynard had scored twice for Mansfield Town and Oldham had had two players sent off. Though Tom Hamer managed to briefly reduce the deficit, Maynard completed his hat-trick in first-half stoppage time and Mansfield scored three more in the second half as they eased to a 6-1 win. Carlisle 2-4 Crewe, Crawley 2-1 Colchester, Exeter 1-0 Forest Green, Leyton Orient 3-1 Walsall, Macclesfield 2-1 Port Vale, Mansfield 6-1 Oldham, Morecambe 1-2 Bradford City, Salford City 1-0 Cambridge, Scunthorpe 3-0 Northampton, Stevenage 2-1 Grimsby, Swindon 1-1 Plymouth