The actors have become wild things. They gnash their terrible teeth. Pound their feet. The company bringing to life my novel The Panopticon are pushing themselves as hard as they can towards a point of no return. Anna Russell-Martin is playing the lead role of Anais Hendricks, a 15-year-old counterculture outlaw and young offender who has just been accused of a violent crime and placed in the Panopticon. She shoves a circle of actors surrounding her, clears a space for herself and drops to the floor in tears – fierce and sudden. She makes a sound that could be wolfish, it holds rage, strength, frustration. I know that sound. I know how affecting this world can be. This is a story I never wanted to tell about a system I did not choose to be raised in. I walked into more than 30 different placements with strangers before the age of 16. I had four legal names. I lived in every single area of the care system. I was a runaway from the age of 12. I’d had strangers telling me who I was for as long as I could remember. My sense of identity as a kid was so fragmented. I wrote poetry daily from the age of seven, for no other reason than I had to and I didn’t see why I shouldn’t. I was too sensitive by far, but I was also pissed off. I did not see why I should have to accept what was expected from me as a child who had always been in the care system. Some people have positive experiences of care and I am always relieved to hear of them. But I did 18 years in the system and that is not how it was for me. My case was extreme even by care standards. Kids at school took bets on whether I’d make it to 16. I wasn’t sure anyone even vaguely understood me. In the process of passing The Panopticon over to this company, I sit for days on end answering questions about the care system. I hate talking about it but it is necessary. The actors are unsure if they can own this material. I tell them they have to. Finding what ties them to their character will help to humanise a demographic that is almost always discussed as a collective. Children from care are individuals. Just kids. Each brings their own unique self. Their own quirks, strengths, beauty. Theatre is a medium that can make real, raw human experience as stark as it can be. It also holds magic – even on an empty set. I love that. The challenges are many, not least emotionally. I met with the director, Debbie Hannan, many times before we got to the point of rehearsals. We spent a long evening having dinner at my flat, I told her about my upbringing and why I have rarely spoken about it directly. We were able to meet each other as artists and women – people first, storytellers second. It was important. Once we had the measure of what The Panopticon meant to each of us, a foundation of trust was ready to build on. In early discussions with Jackie Wylie (artistic director at the National Theatre of Scotland) and Fiona Mackinnon (associate director of The Panopticon), we discussed how to bring Anais’s huge imagination into a visual medium. I watched a play years ago that had animation throughout the set and it was stunning. They had seen it too. Working with a video designer (Lewis Den Hertog) and an animator (Cat Bruce) clicked as the right approach. We are building the world in layers. It’s so exciting to do. Our set designer, Max Johns, created the cleverest set for this iconic building. A panopticon is a semi-circular institutional building with a watchtower in the middle. The watchtower can see into every cell, but people in the cells cannot see each other, they can only see the watchtower. In that way they feel they are being observed all the time, even if they are not. It was designed by Jeremy Bentham in the 18th century as an experiment in social warehousing and was originally used for prisons, or mental health facilities. It is interesting for me to have watched society become a panopticon. Thanks to social media and CCTV, everyone is living in a system in which we are constantly observing and being observed. We send in our own notes to the watchtower all the time, but we still can’t see into it. The building is a visual representation of Anais’s entire experience of care. When we had our first meeting, Max unpacked a tiny version of the set from a box. It was complete with artwork on the walls, and characters to move around. On stage, it will be an imposing four metres tall, made up of nine triangles, each with two levels. I was captivated. Right there was a tiny world that had come out of my head, out of my childhood, out of a novel, into a play. • The Panopticon is at the Traverse theatre, Edinburgh, until 19 October.