As the importance of detail begins to dawn on those tasked with it, so do the clues move to the nitty gritty, like this one from Brendan … 15d Stuff sent abroad again in middle of Brexit — breaking stories (2-7)[ wordplay: central letters (‘middle of’) BREXIT, inside (‘breaking’) synonym for ‘stories’ ][ EX inside REPORTS ][ definition: stuff sent abroad again ] … for RE-EXPORTS in a prize puzzle for which the annotated solution is now available. Meanwhile, an anonymous Telegraph solver (my money’s on proXimal) echoes the uncertainty … 10ac European Union almost provided backing? It’s unclear (5)[ wordplay: abbrev. for ‘European Union’ & most of (‘almost’) synonym for ‘provided’, all reversed (‘backing’) ][ EU & most of GAVE, all reversed ][ definition: unclear ] … getting VAGUE. And an evergreen from Arachne … 1d Boris yet to exercise temperance (8)[ wordplay: anagram (‘to exercise’) of BORISYET ][ definition: temperance ] … cluing SOBRIETY in a way that shows why her work was given a cameo in the BBC’s State of the Union , on which your thoughts and questions remain welcome. Finally, I shall not mention any of the clues, but there is a staggering amount of topical language in this puzzle from Knut. Recommended. From Matilda’s turn at the quiptic, the Guardian’s stepping-stone puzzle for the curious: 27ac Dull food supplied by member, shortly after the end of business (6) [ wordplay: synonym for ‘member’ missing its last letter (‘shortly’), after (‘after’) last letter of BUSINESS ] [ TODGER missing its last letter, after S ][ definition: dull food ] As you will discover if you don’t mind it in your search history, the synonym for “member” is a lot younger than you might have thought. The answer, though, STODGE, has been with us for a couple of hundred years … as a noun. Before that, pleasingly, STODGE was a verb. Here it is verbing in Samuel Johnson’s Life of Dryden: “Stodged full of meteors.” Yes, STODGE the verb goes back at least as far as 1674. Do you have any favourite nouns that were once not nouns? If I have understood it correctly, mine is the subject of our next challenge. Reader, how would you clue EVENING? Thanks for your clues for POSH, on the etymology of which we have as yet shed no further light. Of course, I enjoyed the Spice Girl’s appearances, especially Porcia’s “Waterway with pipe down to Victoria?” and Dunnart’s “Spice up borscht that’s oddly lacking”. At the other end of the scope of reference, it’s hard to beat Lizard’s “Classy Chambers, the ultimate for wordsmith”. The runners-up are TonyCollman’s elegant “Smarter-than-the-average bear gets a little bit of something for nothing” and Alberyalbery’s deft “Upmarket junk shop”; the winner is Catarella’s poignant “Wannabe singer starts to perform on stage, hopelessly”. Kludos to Catarella; please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition and your picks from the broadsheet cryptics below. From the “it’s about crosswords, but it’s open to all” file, here’s Puck … 8ac Rubbish setter, perhaps, but one with tenacious spirit (7)[ wordplay: synonym for ‘rubbish’ + what setter is an example of ][ definition: one with tenacious spirit ] … cluing BULLDOG in encouraging style.