My old friend Andrew Murray is correct to say that Labour cannot afford to obsess over remain in the election campaign (Labour should stay neutral on Brexit, says key adviser, 31 October). It does not have to. Remain is a decision that should be taken by the people, not the political elites of party leaders and advisers, still less the offshore-owned press and the US-financed outfits that have been campaigning against Europe all this century. Labour now has a clear policy of offering a referendum on Brexit. That is a good democratic offer and strongly supported by Labour leaders like John McDonnell and Emily Thornberry, most MPs and nearly all party activists, as well as the party conference. One can have pointless “how many angels dancing on the head of a pin” debates about Labour’s talks with Brussels in the event of Labour heading a government, but Brussels is used to such processes. Look at Labour’s talks after winning power in 1974 followed by the 1975 referendum, or the Danish and Irish talks on their status in the EU after voters said no in their referendums. Labour’s key message should be “trust the people” after the hopeless mess political elites have made of Brexit since 2016. In effect Labour can make a two-for-one manifesto offer. Vote Labour and you firstly get policies addressing the disastrous austerity legacy of Tory-Lib Dem ministers between 2010 and 2015 and, secondly, you get the right that Boris Johnson will deny you to decide the nation’s future relations with our friends and partners in Europe.Dr Denis MacShaneFormer Europe minister • In your profile of Andrew Murray, Labour’s chief of staff, rightly asserts that “politics takes a while to catch up with economics” but that the financial crash of 2008 has left those wanting a return to New Labour or “business as usual” with nowhere to go. Neoliberalism has run its course. Where he is rather less perceptive is failing to recognise that his own politics have hit exactly the same problem. Lexit, the dream of “socialism in one country”, or even a go-it-alone Keynesianism, ran out of road more than four decades ago. For all European nations the optimal economic area is now continental in scale. All the main production processes rely on integrated supply chains, operating across borders. Everywhere, there has been a huge surge in cross-border commercial activity. That’s why 10,000 freight vehicles a day pass through Dover and around 4.4 million lorry journeys are made between the rest of the EU and the UK each year. For the left and progressives generally, the alternative to hyper-globalisation cannot be a retreat to nationalist boltholes. Rather it has to develop a trans-European strategy that corresponds to the realities of the 21st-century economy and the profound challenges thrown up by the environmental crisis. How long do we have to wait for Andrew Murray’s politics and those of his fellow Lexiteers to catch up with economic reality?Jon BloomfieldBirmingham • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition