The “highly offensive and inappropriate” banner of Divock Origi that was removed from the Liverpool section before the team’s 4-1 victory in Genk on Wednesday was also displayed during June’s Champions League final in Madrid and remained there throughout the game. The Guardian has seen a photograph that clearly shows the banner, in which Origi is depicted with a large penis, at the Estadio Metropolitano. It is believed to have been located in a prominent spot on the night Liverpool beat Tottenham 2-0 to secure their sixth European Cup, raising the question why it was not removed during the most high-profile game in the European calendar but was during a relatively low-key group game in midweek. The banner was taken down just before the players came out to warm up at the Luminues Arena with Liverpool pledging soon after to act against whoever brought it into the away section. Uefa may also take action against the European champions and Premier League leaders given the banner’s obvious racial implications. On Thursday Merseyside police said they had assisted local police in removing the banner from display in Genk and that the person responsible for it had been identified. “We worked with Liverpool FC and the local authorities to identify the person responsible, and the local police in Belgium are now conducting an investigation,” the police said. A Liverpool spokesman said: “The banner is highly offensive and inappropriate. We condemn its use at the game tonight and sought to have it removed as soon as we became aware. We will look to identify those responsible for bringing it into the stadium and act accordingly.” The Liverpool supporters’ union, Spirit of Shankly, has also condemend the banner. A statement read: “Spirit of Shankly oppose all forms of racism. The club took swift action in the removal of the offensive banner that perpetuates racial stereotyping. “Football isn’t separate from society, it is part of it and we all have a responsibility in ensuring people understand there is no room for racism. Simply banning people is not the answer. Education and reaffirming there is no place for discrimination in society has to form part of the solution.”