Monday night’s distinctly underwhelming Manchester United-Arsenal “clash” has inevitably prompted a glut of nostalgia for the times when, we are told, the very fabric of the universe shook when these two sides met under the ferociously focused guidance of Alex Ferguson and Arsène Wenger. Ah Wenger. Might he still be of interest to anyone? Gazzetto dello Sport reckons Milan might be tempted, what with the Rossoneri languishing 16th in Serie A and Marco Giampaolo’s position under scrutiny. Massimiliano Allegri, Claudio Ranieri and Rudi García are among the other names being touted by the Italian daily. As for Manchester United, their current standing may be gauged by the rumour that they’re in competition with Los Angeles FC for a 33-year-old, according to Calciomercato. The 33-year-old in question, Mario Mandzukic, does admittedly have a pretty tasty pedigree but even so … Another rather more youthful United target, Jadon Sancho, could still be in reach though. The Daily Mail talks up the thoughts of Borussia Dortmund’s sporting director, Michael Zorc, who admits the club are unlikely to be able to hold on to the teenager. “No decision has been made,” Zorc told Kicker. “But you don’t have to be a prophet to know he won’t play here for another five years.” Meanwhile, Barcelona are keen on swooping for Chelsea’s Willian when the playmaker’s contract at Stamford Bridge runs out next summer. With the likes of Callum Hudson-Odoi and Christian Pulisic now in favour at the club and Willian over 30, the way could be clear for a move to the Camp Nou, and for “Willian, it was really nothing” headlines if he goes on a free. Having missed out on one Leicester defender in the summer, Manchester City are eyeing another, Caglar Soyuncu, with Fotospor in Turkey reporting that City officials want to open talks with the defender’s representatives over a move to the Etihad next summer. Wolves may have had a poor start to the season, but their players are still attracting interest. Their wideman Adoma Traoré is on Roma’s radar, says Calciomercato. And in other coaching news, Porto coach Vitor Matos is in advanced talks to join Jürgen Klopp’s coaching staff at Liverpool, according to the Liverpool Echo, and the latest name tipped to fill any Spurs vacancy that might be created by the departure of the perpetually speculated-about Mauricio Pochettino is none other than Gareth Southgate. Make of that what you will. But at least Jan Vertonghen looks closer to signing a new deal.