The Golden State Warriors still have a lot to figure out. Stephen Curry scored 23 points on Sunday, making seven of 18 shots while his teammates made just 23 of 74. Golden State were coming off a season-opening 141-122 loss to the Los Angeles Clippers. At least that defeat was against arguably the best team in the NBA – on Sunday they lost 120-92 to the rebuilding Oklahoma City Thunder. Kevin Durant left the Warriors for Brooklyn in the offseason and Klay Thompson is likely out for the season with a torn left ACL. Still, Golden State expected to be more competitive early in the season. “The reality is we fucking suck right now ... We’re just not that good right now,” said Draymond Green after the game. “I don’t know what better way to frame it. I can try in Spanish, but I ain’t really that good at Spanish.” Draymond Green: “The reality is we fucking suck right now...We just not that good right now. I don’t know what better way to frame it. I can try in Spanish, but I ain’t really that good at Spanish.” pic.twitter.com/itJIROvLG1 The Warriors, who have won the NBA title in three of the last five seasons, allowed the Thunder to shoot 56% from the field after allowing the Clippers to shoot 63%. “Everybody loved our offense, but it wasn’t our offense that was making us great,” Green said. “It was our defense. I’ve said that for years. Our defense right now is nonexistent. I don’t even think we know what defense is right now.” It was a heartening result for Thunder fans, who have been looking for something to cling to after the Thunder traded away longtime star Russell Westbrook for Chris Paul in the offseason. The blowout matched Oklahoma City’s largest margin of victory over the Warriors since the franchise moved from Seattle before the 2008-09 season. The fact that the breakthrough came against the Warriors didn’t mean much to Paul. “I think it was more about us, not about them,” he said. “We’ve got to have an identity. How we are going to play defensively and offensively? Pushing the pace, moving the ball and playing with the right spirit.” Now, Paul and Westbrook will face off Monday night in Houston. Paul said it might be a bit awkward, but he won’t make a big deal about it. “It’ll be my first time back there since I got traded so you know, it’s another game,” he said. “Move on. See a couple familiar faces say what up to my man the equipment manager. Keep it pushing.”