The chair of an influential parliamentary committee has launched a blistering attack on the accounting industry, accusing it of being complicit in the failure of Thomas Cook, Carillion and other firms, and called for urgent reform of the sector. Rachel Reeves, who chairs the business, energy and industrial strategy committee, said: “I wonder how many more company failures, how many more egregious cases of accounting do we need? We’ve had BHS, we’ve had Carillion, we’ve had Patisserie Valerie and now we’ve had Thomas Cook. How many more do we need before your industry opens its ideas and recognises that you are complicit in all of this and that you need to reform?” She added: “We can’t rely on you to do the right thing and legislation is needed. We need tougher regulation because your industry is not willing to make the changes needed. Reform is long overdue and the evidence today makes it clear that that moment has got to come and got to come soon otherwise we’ll have more business failures and you will be complicit in those.” Reeves was speaking as MPs on the committee grilled bosses from PricewaterhouseCoopers and EY, which both audited Thomas Cook’s accounts, and questioned them about potential conflicts of interest. Both firms also did other lucrative work for the collapsed travel company, as well as providing auditing services. MPs heard that PwC was paid £21m for providing consultancy and non-audit work for Thomas Cook between 2007 and 2016, which included advising the company on pay for its executives. EY, which took over from PwC in 2017, provided non-audit services totalling £2.4m. Hermione Hudson, PwC’s head of audit, said there are now “significant restrictions” on other work that can be done by a firm’s auditor. She insisted: “I don’t think doing those non-audit services would have impacted the quality of the audit work, but I do think it’s very important that we do have a trusted audit profession.” Reeves asked Hudson whether advising Thomas Cook’s remuneration committee on executive bonuses at the same time as auditing the business, in hindsight, was the right thing to do. Hudson replied: “At the time it was appropriate [but] we wouldn’t do it today even if it were permitted by the rules.” MPs also questioned the auditors about Thomas Cook’s use of exceptional items – one-off costs – that were stripped out of the main income statement, and why they signed off the accounts. Hudson acknowledged that £1.8bn of exceptional items over eight years was “a large number”. Both PwC and EY said they had repeatedly challenged Thomas Cook’s management on the use of exceptional costs. The auditors were also asked why the travel company carried more than £1bn of goodwill – the intangible asset of an acquired company which measures things like reputation, customer base and brand value – on its balance sheet for years, despite its problems, and why it was not written down gradually, rather than being slashed abruptly this year. Richard Wilson, an audit partner at EY, admitted that “with hindsight” the writedown should have come sooner. The £1.1bn writedown of its MyTravel package holiday division pushed Thomas Cook into a £1.5bn first-half loss in May. MPs questioned why Wilson had signed off the firm as a going concern in March, when it had amassed debts of £1.6bn. “Going concern” is an accounting concept that means a company can keep operating for the foreseeable future, usually the next 12 months. He said he did this on the assumption that it secured £300m from its lenders. However, six months later Thomas Cook collapsed into liquidation, with the loss of 9,000 UK jobs and leaving hundreds of thousands of holidaymakers stranded abroad. Diana Holland, assistant general secretary of the Unite union, told MPs in a separate session that there was little support for Thomas Cook workers who had lost their jobs, and that no emergency hardship fund had been set up. Martin McTague, policy chairman at the Federation for Small Businesses, said Thomas Cook had a “lousy payment record” and waited 78 to 90 days before paying suppliers. “They never were a good payer but they got successively worse.”