The British government was due to express regret for the killing of Māori people in New Zealand after the explorer Captain James Cook’s arrival in the country in 1769. But the statement from the British high commissioner to New Zealand, Laura Clarke, expected on Wednesday, to local tribes – known as iwi – is being made in private, and will stop short of an apology. The meetings with iwi in the city of Gisborne, on the east coast of New Zealand’s North Island, comes days before a government-funded commemoration of Cook’s 1769 landing in the city, including a replica of his sailing ship, along with a flotilla of other vessels. The anniversary events have been decried by some Māori groups as insensitive, and protests are expected at this weekend’s events. Clarke is expected to “acknowledge the pain of those first encounters” between Cook and his men and Māori, the British high commission said in a statement. It added that the commissioner would accept that the pain “does not diminish over time” and extend her sympathy to the descendants of those killed. When the British explorer arrived on the east side of the Tūranganui River, near present-day Gisborne, the first encounter between his men and the Māori inhabitants of the land was disastrous, according to an official New Zealand history site, with a leader from the Ngāti Oneone group immediately shot and killed. It seemed likely the local people were undertaking a ceremonial challenge, which the Europeans misunderstood, the site said. At least eight other Māori are believed to have been killed. The British high commission said in its statement that Cook had written of his regret over the deaths in his diary. The high commission said Clarke’s statement had come at the request of the iwi, and that officials had liaised with the groups Clarke will meet “for many months” in preparation. Just a small handful of official statements have been made by the UK government about its actions overseas during the colonial period. In 2013, it expressed regret and announced compensation payments for those tortured in prison during Kenya’s Mau Mau insurgency. And earlier this year, on the 100th anniversary of the Amritsar massacre in India, in which British troops fired on crowds, killing 379 according to official figures, the government expressed “deep regret” – but again stopped short of an official apology. The statement in New Zealand will be made privately during meetings at marae, or Māori meeting houses, visited by a British delegation. The exact contents of the statement will not be made public or put in writing, the high commission said, unless the iwi Clarke will speak to wish to do so themselves. Clarke was appointed to Wellington in January 2018, and has since spoken admiringly of the push towards “righting past wrongs” in the treatment of Māori by New Zealand governments and the UK. She is learning te reo Māori, and last year the high commission recruited its first advisor on Māori affairs. Meng Foon, New Zealand’s race relations commissioner and a former mayor of Gisborne, told Radio New Zealand that the British statement was “significant” and he hoped it would help iwi move forward. But Tina Ngata, a Māori rights advocate who has been leading the opposition to the commemorations of Cook’s arrival, said words weren’t enough without change. Last month, she told radio NZ that Cook was “a murderer, he was an invader [and] he was a vanguard for British imperial expansion.” New Zealand’s prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, will visit Gisborne on the weekend for the official commemorations, but will not participate in Wednesday’s expression of regret.