Dramatic video has emerged showing a high school football coach in Portland, Oregon, disarming a suicidal student then hugging and comforting the teen. The video of the incident, obtained by the CBS affiliate KOIN 6 News, captures the moment when the Parkrose high school coach Keanon Lowe encountered Angel Granados-Diaz. While Lowe’s actions had been extensively reported, the video provided visual documentation of how his quick thinking and compassion potentially prevented a tragedy. At around noon on 17 May this year, Granados-Diaz walked on to campus, carrying a shotgun. He went into a classroom with the intent of killing himself, authorities said, not to kill other students. Lowe, once a star wide receiver for the University of Oregon Ducks, said he was summoned to the fine arts building to get a student, according to prior media reports. The surveillance video revealed that Lowe and Granados-Diaz almost encountered each other in a hallway, KOIN 6 News reported. “I walk in there, I get to the classroom, I’m in the classroom for 15, 20 seconds – you know, I ask the teacher, ‘Is the student here?’” Lowe said. In fact, Granados-Diaz was mere “steps away”. “The door opens – I’m within arm’s length of the door, about 3ft away from the door, and there’s a kid with a gun, a shotgun. In a fraction of a second, I analyzed everything really fast. “I saw the look in his face, look in his eyes, looked at the gun, realized it was a real gun and then my instincts just took over,” Lowe also said. “I lunged for the gun, put two hands on the gun. He had his two hands on the gun and obviously the kids are running out of the classroom and screaming.” Lowe handed the firearm to a teacher and embraced Granados-Diaz, who was then 18. “I just held him and told him that I was there to save him,” Lowe said. “I felt compassion for him; a lot of times, especially when you’re young, you don’t realize what you’re doing until it’s over.” Asked for comment on the footage, the school district official Michael Lopes-Serrao said the TV station should not have shown it. In an email, he wrote: “It is important to know we denied permission for this video. First, we believe it’s a violation of Ferpa (Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act) because this is part of a student’s educational record. “Just as important, this release of this footage has a significant negative impact on our students, staff, and families in Parkrose. We were not warned that KOIN had a copy of this video. We have asked KOIN to take it down. This was a very traumatic event for our community and the release of the video helps no one involved.” KOIN said on its website it obtained the video from the Multnomah county district attorney’s office via a public records request. The TV station declined to comment. The Guardian has removed the video. On 10 October, Granados-Diaz pleaded guilty to two charges of having a loaded gun in public. The gun was purchased legally, Oregon Public Broadcasting (OPB) reported. Prosecutors and Granados-Diaz’s lawyer insisted the incident was not a potential school shooting. The student made a suicidal remark before the incident and was drunk upon arriving at Parkrose, his lawyer claimed. “The evidence he was at Parkrose high school to commit suicide is overwhelming,” said defense attorney Adam Thayne. “It is also overwhelming that he was there to hurt himself and nobody else.” Granados-Diaz did not open fire and only pointed the gun at himself. Under his plea agreement, he will be on probation for 36 months and undergo mental health and substance abuse treatment, OPB reported. “I don’t know if ‘hero’ is the right word but the universe works in mysterious ways and I was meant to be in that classroom and I was meant to stop a tragedy,” Lowe recalled. Lowe, who is from the nearby city of Gresham, was employed as an offensive analyst for the San Francisco 49ers when he found out that his best friend had died from a drug overdose. “That shattered my whole life. That changed everything,’ he said, according to Oregonlive.com. “I said, ‘I’m going back.’” “Life ain’t about me, right? Life is about how I can help other people. So I came to help Parkrose. I came to change lives.” In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 800-273-8255. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.