There is something “girlie” about blusher. Hence, there is an idea it has an age limit. Total nonsense, of course, as shown at Chanel AW19. Yes, it has youthfulness written all over it, but it is magic for a complexion that needs resuscitation. Nailing technique, shade and texture is key. For definition, without the faff of contouring, circular strokes of a powder blush on the cheekbones blended up and out is best. For ease, less density and a freshness that is unsurpassed, go for a cream. Pinks are flattering – paler shades, paler skin; deeper shades, deeper skin – but orange will give you a warm glow. Go easy, otherwise you’ll look like an actual orange. 1. Nars Hustle Cheek Palette £36, narscosmetics.co.uk 2. Shiseido Minimalist Whipped Powder Blush £32, lookfantastic.com 3. Dolce & Gabbana Blush £34, harrods.com 4. Smashbox Planetary Cheek Palette £28, boots.com 5. Chanel Les Beiges Healthy Glow Sheer Colour Stick N°25 £35, chanel.com I can’t remember the last time I met anyone who wasn’t sleep-deprived. Back in the day, this modern epidemic was limited to insomniacs and new mothers. I can remember lacking a decent snooze for so long that I understood why sleep deprivation was used as a form of torture. Nowadays, everyone is functioning on little sleep. Arguably, it’s because we are all so ‘busy’. Busyness has become a status symbol for our age. We are always ‘on’ and it’s becoming impossible to switch off. And that’s why our cortisol levels (the stress-producing hormone) are through the roof. For better sleep, the experts recommend removing electronic devices from the bedroom, exercising during the day and managing your circadian rhythm – the body’s internal clock – by reducing our exposure to bright lights at least three hours before bed. I’ll add another tip. Get yourself a ‘sleep mist’. I know, it sounds ridiculous and a bit basic, but it really helps. This one has blended essential oils – neroli, chamomile, lavender and geranium, all known for their sleep-enhancing properties – in a distilled flower water concoction. Half an hour before bed I go to town and spray it everywhere for good measure. Sleep comes quick and goes deep. I wake up feeling human as opposed to a half-functioning 21st-century bastion of busyness. Aurelia Probiotic Skincare Perfect Sleep Pillow Mist, £24 aureliaskincare.com Age is no barrier Using base oils of prickly pear and rosehip, this intense oil blends jasmine, sandalwood and ginger lily with fatty acids to nourish and decongest. Older skins in particular will love this. De Mamiel Autumn Facial Oil, £80, demamiel.com Smooth operator Don’t be alarmed by the words ‘acid’ and ‘peel’. This resurfacing liquid exfoliator includes ingredients to smooth, clarify and brighten skin. It is incredibly effective without being aggressive. Murad Replenishing Multi Acid Peel, £48, murad.co.uk Skin deep Vitamin C fights pigmentation and protects against ageing. But it can be harsh. This concoction – using 10% L-Ascorbic acid – buffers the impact by including a skin-softening shea butter. Alpha-H Vitamin C Paste, £40, alpha-h.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFetto This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.