It is a great tribute to the supreme court that it called Boris Johnson’s bluff when he tried to prorogue parliament (with the emphasis on “rogue”). Lord Pannick QC, who triumphed in the case brought by the patriotic hero Gina Miller, recalls that he was on safari, watching wild animals in Botswana, when he heard what “wild political animals” were up to in London. “How ironic,” says Pannick, “that the case arose in the context of Brexit, a political policy that its supporters justify by the wish to return sovereignty to parliament and to make our supreme court supreme over the European court of justice.” Undeterred, Johnson and his henchman Dominic Cummings – or should it be Cummings and his henchman Johnson? – reacted by giving every impression of wanting to continue on their lawless path. Yes, the men at present running “the party of law and order” carried on being dead set on “delivering Brexit”, if necessary by lawless means. The joke going around at the moment is that this nation, ruled by a badly advised Queen and this shambles of a government, is no longer the United Kingdom but the United Kindergarten. Thank goodness that Johnson and Cummings were up to their tricks at the Conservative conference in Manchester when I visited No 10 Downing Street last week. I was there for the launch of Jack Brown’s fascinating book No 10 – The Geography of Power at Downing Street, and bumping into my old acquaintance Johnson would certainly have spoiled the evening. Lord Donoughue, head of the No 10 policy unit for the Labour governments of the 1970s, was at the launch and amused the gathering by saying that in his day No 10 was almost certainly bugged. I am not sure that anyone in their right mind would want to bug conversations between Johnson and Cummings. We know quite enough about what they are up to already. Apparently none other an authority than Dominic Cummings has conceded that “there is a strong democratic case” for a second referendum One of the many bizarre aspects of it all is the monstrous lie that their mission is to satisfy a public desire to “honour” the results of the referendum, “get Brexit done” and then spend, spend, spend. The true nature of Johnson’s economic plan was laid bare in an address he gave to American business executives on his recent trip to New York. Instead of meeting the many demands of our austerity-worn economy with a programme of tax-financed public spending, he is planning lower taxes, especially for the more prosperous element in society. True, at last week’s Conservative conference there were all sorts of wild promises about magic money trees providing tens of billions in public spending. But who swallows this guff? Certainly not the independent Institute for Fiscal Studies, or the Office for Budget Responsibility, who are well aware that, thanks to a combination of austerity and the initial effects of the prospect of Brexit on investment and productivity, the scope for fulfilling these wild promises is somewhat limited. Perhaps the absurdity of the so-called One Nation future Johnson promises was epitomised by the way that a pledge of “40 new hospitals” was subsequently translated as the renovation of half a dozen existing hospitals. And, as medical professionals have quite rightly been pointing out in the past week, the really pressing need is to fill the gap in staff shortages in the National Health Service. This has been much aggravated by the distasteful and counterproductive Brexit campaign to make EU nationals on whom the NHS depends feel unwelcome. It remains my strong belief that the only sane course for this country is for better leaders than are at present in the saddle to acknowledge that going ahead with Brexit would be a historic mistake of gigantic proportions. It is not the referendum that should be honoured: it is the interests of the nation. Given all the accusations of “project fear” now being made by the more extreme Brexiters, it is obvious that a straight revoking of article 50 would offend their like – and they would just love to stir up civil revolt. Therefore it would probably be judicious to hold another referendum. Apparently none other an authority than Cummings has conceded that “there is a strong democratic case” for a second referendum. In his view, it would be to ensure public consent for Brexit. In my view, as the extent of Brexit damage becomes more evident by the day, it would be to ensure the reverse. Never forget that a mere 37% of the electorate voted Leave in 2016. Moreover, as the Irish prime minister has pointed out, recent polls now show a shift towards Remain.