Full marks to England for a clinical performance against Argentina. It is never easy playing against a team down to 14 men and I thought that England were patient and ruthless in equal measure. I’ve heard a lot of talk about how it wasn’t pretty, and it wasn’t, but it was effective and being pretty does not win you World Cups. There is also the suggestion that England should be worried because they have not been truly tested yet. For me, that is more of a worry for those people outside of the camp rather than inside. I look at South Africa and New Zealand – they tested each other in their opening match but are now in effect waiting for the quarter-finals to start. England will be content because, make no mistake, Argentina were up for it, as we saw in the first 10-15 minutes. We talk about scenarios in training but it can be very hard because the intensity isn’t the same, the physicality is never the same, so you have to come up with different ways to try and put players under pressure, not just under fatigue but mental pressure – get them to think. I’m sure they would have gone through situations to plan for when the opposition are down to 14. The leaders would have been discussing: “What do we do? Do we play an expansive game and try to beat them on the edges? Or do we just wear them down because it’s happened early in the game and it suits the way we play?” England have got a power game, it’s dominated by linespeed and defence so their aim was to suck the energy out of Argentina and wait for the opportunities to come. To their credit they didn’t think: “Right, let’s switch the razzle dazzle on and try and score 50-60 points.” They knew they needed to get a bonus point but to do that they needed to sap the life out of Argentina. Whenever a team is reduced to 14 men it has a galvanising effect. It doesn’t always last all that long for it does mean that everyone else lifts their game by 10% to compensate. Tomás Lavanini is a tight-five forward so that means Argentina are losing around 15 tackles and at least seven or eight carries with his departure. Automatically that leads to an uplift in intensity from the rest of the team. It is very similar to football when a team is down to 10 men – it can be very hard to break down and I thought England dealt with that challenge well. The key is to recognise, particularly when the red card is early, that the opposition will not be able to keep up that intensity for the rest of the match and provided you stay patient you will reap the rewards. As long as you don’t give them any cheap ball, you make it hard for them, hold on to the ball, and make them make tackles – that will kill the opposition. At the back end of the game, holes start opening up, players start to miss assignments in the defensive system, they are not quite in the right positions and that’s what you’re waiting for. Elliot Daly, Anthony Watson and Jack Nowell can then get into the game – there’s no way Nowell should have scored his try and he would not have if Argentina had not been down to 14 but that’s what happens. Argentina were out on their feet. The game has almost been flipped on its head now. Ten years ago it was the Argentina pack that you were worried about in terms of who was coming off the bench – they were experts at 10-man rugby. On Saturday the rest of the world will have been looking at Joe Marler and Kyle Sinckler and how well they were playing and then all of sudden Mako Vunipola comes off the bench – that is scary. I didn’t think Ben Youngs and Owen Farrell had their best games but they didn’t need to. George Ford was commanding things at No 10 and England used their power game, their set piece and their breakdown work to stifle anything Argentina had. They suffocated them. I’ve been really happy for Ford to get this opportunity. I’ve been a big advocate of his and the Ford and Farrell combination and he has been more of a focal figure than Farrell has so far, notwithstanding all the leadership qualities that Farrell brings. Ford is making that attack hum. It goes back to what England are good at: they use the power game very well and then wait for the moment to use their firepower out wide and get that speed into the game when they need to. But it’s very well controlled. Ford kicks well – he had to against Argentina because Youngs kicked poorly – and having those two at 10 and 12 is such a luxury for that team. Any team in the world would die to have one of those brains. The leadership they give – it’s clear, it’s concise, it’s demanding and it looks like when one of them talks, people listen. Ford is still reasonably young but he took Leicester by the scruff of the neck last season, keeping them clear of relegation, and that has really benefited him as an individual. He was the one who was performing under pressure, making the right decisions. He would have found himself in situations he would not have been in before and he had to make the key decisions. When you lead a team out of a dark situation like that it gives you a huge confidence boost. He has taken that and carried into his England performances and I can’t see any way that Eddie would change it now. We thought Farrell, Manu Tuilagi and either Henry Slade or Jonathan Joseph would be the first-choice midfield but Ford has in effect said to Eddie that he can’t be dropped now. They just look more dangerous with him in the side.