A while back the Guardian did some market research on its sports section. The first question was: is there too much football in the paper? The answer to this was a resounding yes. The second question was: would you like more football in the paper? The answer to this was also a resounding yes. The logic seems fairly clear. Football, in its modern, hyper-inflated state is an addictive phenomenon. The thing that drives you to distraction, which shouts from every surface, blotting out the day, is also the thing you can’t stop wanting more of. This condition is described in dizzying scope and depth by David Goldblatt in The Age of Football. The book is about the wider triumph of the sport, a shared obsession that has in the last 20 years steamrollered every other form of shared human cultural activity in terms of reach and scope and noise. Goldblatt is a heavyweight in this field, and author already of three sizable and celebrated footballing tomes. In his hands, even that portentous title – one that might have been borrowed from a male cologne advertised by Cristiano Ronaldo – delivers on its promise, taking the reader around the world, viewed through the lens of football politics, football economics, football history. It is written throughout with a relentless and sometimes exhausting zest. Look, let’s be straight. There are football books. And then there are football books. Some offer accounts of league title wins and dressing room beefs and the lads all being really great lads. This one starts with a quote from the French philosopher Guy Debord about “the situation”. By the third page, Goldblatt is telling us that “football fever can also serve as a collective insistence that there are other moral logics and priorities in this world, different and more human to the ones we so blithely award the soubriquet of the real”. “Frank McAvennie: My Story” it ain’t. The introduction alone comes in five sections across 28 pages, a tour de force set around the 2014 World Cup final. It is a Dickensian dissection, small details peeled back with furious energy to reveal the machinery beneath. After that, the chapters take us through the Middle East and South America, before a 124-page book-within-a-book on European football called (obviously, Clive) “This Storm Is What We Call Progress”. It’s a scintillating survey of the great 20th-century gold rush, from before the second world war to the boom times of the single European market. Goldblatt is brilliant at evoking the texture of this world. We enter it with Uefa’s executives ranged around a conference table in the “excruciating polished blandness” of their Swiss HQ. The suits are trying to come up with a suitable slogan for Euro 2016, a tournament that will become the first to take place under a state of emergency in the shadow of the Paris terror attacks, and which will be marked at the end by the horrific killings on the Nice esplanade. Eventually they decide on “Rendez-Vous!”. OK then! Ultimately Goldblatt finds a kind of solace in football as Europe convulses around it. Perhaps this feels a little too easy. But then, it makes as much sense as anything else right now. After which we’re off again across Asia, then back to Switzerland for a take on the fall of the house of Sepp Blatter. Goldblatt leaves us finally in the company of President Putin, a populist despot for the world’s great populist sport. This might have been a different book: more ruminative, less densely packed. Instead Goldblatt has given full rein to his high style and an entirely fitting overload of information. It is in its own way a performative book, a 540-page brick of a thing that will block out the light, fill your rucksack, develop an ache in your shoulder, and plunge you face first into the structures and cultural minutiae of an absurdly overblown sport. The age of football really is upon us. It has after all given us The Age of Football, a history that is, for all the familiarity of some of the detail, unlike anything else written on this subject. • The Age of Football by David Goldblatt is published by Macmillan (£25). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.