When celebrities become guest editors of corporate social media accounts, it usually results in dozens of pouting selfies. For this reason, Prince Harry’s takeover of the National Geographic Instagram account to encourage people to “look up” and get lost in the beauty of trees is a weirdly enticing concept. On Monday, the Duke of Sussex curated a set of images of forest canopies each taken by National Geographic photographers, which went out to the publication’s 123 million followers. The idea was to highlight the importance of conservation while spotlighting the Queen’s Commonwealth Canopy campaign, which will result in two national parks being created in South Africa, where Harry is touring. As part of the campaign, 50 countries have either dedicated indigenous forest for conservation or committed to planting millions of new trees to combat climate change. Photo by @sussexroyal | We are pleased to announce that Prince Harry, The Duke of Sussex @sussexroyal is guest-curating our Instagram feed today! “Hi everyone! I’m so happy to have the opportunity to continue working with @NatGeo and to guest-curate this Instagram account; it’s one of my personal favourites. Today I’m in Liwonde National Park, Malawi an important stop on our official tour of southern Africa, planting trees for the Queens Commonwealth Canopy. As part of this takeover, I am inviting you to be a part of our ‘Looking Up’ social campaign. To help launch the campaign, here is a photograph I took today here in Liwonde of Baobab trees. “#LookingUp seeks to raise awareness of the vital role trees play in the Earth’s ecosystem, and is an opportunity for all of us to take a moment, to appreciate the beauty of our surroundings. So, join us today and share your own view, by looking up! Post images of the trees in your local community using the hashtag #LookingUp. I will be posting my favourite images from @NatGeo photographers here throughout the day, and over on @sussexroyal I will be sharing some of my favourite images from everything you post. I can’t wait to see what you see when you’re #LookingUp 🌲 🌳” ••• His Royal Highness is currently on an official tour to further the Queens Commonwealth Canopy, which was launched in 2015. Commonwealth countries have been invited to submit forests and national parks to be protected and preserved as well as to plant trees. The Duke has helped QCC projects in the Caribbean, U.K., New Zealand, Australia, Botswana, Malawi, and Tonga. Now, almost 50 countries are taking part and have dedicated indigenous forests for conservation and committed to planting millions of new trees to help combat climate change. The Duke’s longtime passion for trees and forests as nature’s simple solution to the environmental issues we face has been inspired by the work he has been doing on behalf of his grandmother, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, for many years. A post shared by  National Geographic (@natgeo) on Sep 30, 2019 at 4:57am PDT One image shows Harry flat on his backside, taking a photo of an imposing South African baobab tree, which can live for more than 1,000 years and, due to its size, even sustain its own ecosystem. The Duke has captured its spindly branches with a finesse rewarded by 412,000 likes. The other photographs, which include a red-leafed autumnal British tree and the distinctive strangler fig, with its branches knotted together like a spider’s web, are strikingly beautiful. It is a shame, though, that the accompanying captions – in which Harry describes how the strangler fig’s twisty barks helped it earn its name or why the red leaves of autumn in the UK are special – are so alarmingly redolent of a basic Wikipedia search. Photo by @simoncroberts | “The autumn colours in the U.K. are always beautiful, and I just had to include something to show them off. Thanks to Simon Roberts for sharing this. It was taken at the National Arboretum, which makes it even more special.” —Prince Harry, The Duke of Sussex @sussexroyal Selected by The Duke for the #LookingUp campaign with @natgeo, Simon’s image was taken at the National Arboretum, in Gloucestershire, England, which is a year-round centre of remembrance for those who have served their country. Please keep sharing your own #LookingUp images from your own community, and at the end of the day The Duke will be sharing some of his favourites on @sussexroyal Instagram stories. ... Today, The Duke of Sussex @sussexroyal is guest-editing the @natgeo feed, in an effort to raise awareness around Queens Commonwealth Canopy, in which almost 50 countries have dedicated indigenous forest for conservation or have committed to planting millions of new trees to combat climate change. The images being posted today are all ‘looking up’ at trees from below to highlight the vital role trees play in the Earth’s ecosystem. Post your images of trees, add #lookingup, and at the end of the day, The Duke will share a selection of images that you post from across the world on @sussexroyal Instagram stories A post shared by  National Geographic (@natgeo) on Sep 30, 2019 at 10:48am PDT A few more details on why these trees are so ecologically important might have been a good idea. Fortunately, the National Geographic’s enthusiastic readers don’t seem to mind: one of the top-rated comments is from rappers Cypress Hill, whose use of the tree emoji may allude to sparking up debate about a very different kind of plant. Thanks to its snappy hashtag (#LookingUp) and hundreds of thousands of likes, the campaign will at least encourage Instagram users to find out more about the potential of planting trees. New research predicts that a worldwide planting programme could have a “mind-blowing” effect by removing as many as two-thirds of all the emissions that humans currently pump into the atmosphere. It argues that with 1.7bn hectares of treeless land available, which is roughly the same size as the US and China combined, around 1.2tn native tree saplings could be naturally grown. Suddenly, Harry liking trees seems kind of cool. Photo by @peteressick | “I absolutely love this from Peter Essick. It is a stunning view of a strangler fig as it twists around another tree to head upwards toward the sun, precisely why it got its name! Thanks for sharing this, Peter, and for #LookingUp” - Prince Harry, The Duke of Sussex @sussexroyal Peter’s image was taken in the Yidney Scrub Rainforest on Fraser Island, Australia. Today The Duke of Sussex @sussexroyal is guest-editing the @natgeo feed, in an effort to raise awareness around Queens Commonwealth Canopy, in which almost 50 countries have dedicated indigenous forests for conservation or have committed to planting millions of new trees to combat climate change. The images being posted today are all ‘looking up’ at trees from below to highlight the vital role trees play in the Earth’s ecosystem. Post your images of trees, add the #lookingup, and at the end of the day, The Duke will share a selection of the most beautiful images that you post from across the world on @sussexroyal Instagram stories. A post shared by  National Geographic (@natgeo) on Sep 30, 2019 at 8:11am PDT Critics will surely point to the hypocrisy of Harry fronting an eco-friendly campaign while riding around in a private jet. Nonetheless, in encouraging the public to regard trees as holy beings, rather than disposable wood, his takeover of the National Geographic’s Instagram spotlights the important role these natural giants can play in preserving the future of our planet. Prince Charles, infamously once revealed how he likes to talk to his plants, but Harry’s fascination with trees appears less like a midlife crisis and more like a savvy social media-friendly way to address global warming. After weeks of unflattering headlines about his and Meghan’s travelling habits, Harry’s tree-hugging won’t do much to get them back on side, but in terms of positioning the Duke of Sussex as, well, the Green Prince, it looks like mission accomplished.