The London film festival wraps up this weekend, after nearly two weeks of showcasing choice cuts from the world cinema menu. Many will trickle out into UK cinemas over the next year, some will languish in distribution limbo a while longer, while others will head towards the bright lights of Netflix. The very best of them, however, you can watch at home right now. Mubi has scooped the streaming rights to Russian director Kantemir Balagov’s astonishing Beanpole, and has wasted no time in putting it on its platform, where it will be available to view for four weeks. Don’t miss the window: I’m pretty sure it’s my film of 2019. Beanpole premiered in the Un Certain Regard strand at Cannes in May, where it won the 28-year-old Balagov the best director prize. The festival gossip mill has it that the film was originally set to play in the festival’s premier competition, before being swapped out for a bigger name. Balagov has a whole career ahead of him, I suppose the reasoning goes, though he’s making films with the vision and assuredness of an auteur twice his age. His 2017 debut, Closeness (never released in UK cinemas, but available to stream on Amazon Prime via its Mubi channel), was full of swaggering promise: tough tale of family crisis and religious prejudice that overstepped ethical bounds and beckoned controversy by including actual video footage of the 1999 Tukhchar massacre in Dagestan. That was an error of judgment; the film-making itself was immaculately composed and emotionally immediate. It’s worth watching, but an all-caps trigger warning should precede it. Beanpole, then, is Balagov’s masterpiece in the original sense of the word: the work that consolidates all his fierce talent and artistry, admitting him to the masters’ club of elder compatriots such as Andrey Zvyagintsev, or Ukraine’s Sergei Loznitsa. It’s a second world war aftermath drama, and if that makes it sound inessential – how many more of those must we trudge through? – the perspective of this one is rare and arresting, articulating the post-traumatic stress disorder of female soldiers largely silenced or sidelined by their male peers. In Leningrad, the freakishly tall, battle-shaken Iya (Viktoria Miroshnichenko) gets by as a nurse in a veterans’ hospital, waiting for her fellow soldier and lover, Masha (Vasilisa Perelygina), to return from the fray with a young, bright-eyed boy to care for. One of Iya’s regular seizures results in a tragedy of startling, stomach-punching proportions: Balagov makes nothing easy for his audience, and the film’s circles of trauma spiral out from there. This is a hard watch, no lie, but it’s also no one-note battering-ram of bleakness. There’s tingling sensuality and raucous humour amid the sadness, and wild splashes of colour too, as Balagov counterintuitively paints a war-shredded city in vivid pea greens and blazing oranges, frenzied with sound and human bustle. A big screen is Beanpole’s natural home, but it’s wrenching enough to hit hard on TV. There was no chance of this playing in more than a handful of city arthouse cinemas, so I’m glad it’s available more widely. It goes straight into the canon of great postwar films: at once so pristine and so adventurously expansive that you wonder how its young director can possibly follow it. Still, he has plenty time to try: get in early on what’s likely to be a major career. El Camino: A Breaking Bad Movie(Netflix) If Better Call Saul hasn’t been enough to cure your Breaking Bad withdrawal since 2013, Netflix has your back. This one-off sequel follows the adventures of meth-head Jesse (Aaron Paul) immediately after the tumultuous events of the series finale. 7-63 Up (Network, E) Michael Apted’s landmark documentary series, charting the development of 14 British children from varied social backgrounds over the course of 56 years, gets the comprehensive Blu-ray box set it deserves. The Chambermaid (Drakes Avenue, 15) Mexican film-maker Lila Aviles’s superb debut captures the daily struggles and self-searching of a hard-up hotel maid. Comparisons with Roma are inevitable, but this smaller study has its own distinct point of view. Late Night(Universal, 15) This amiable satire of American late-night chatshow culture has a perky script by Mindy Kaling and a droll performance by Emma Thompson as a queen-bee host – yet it’s oddly defanged, and short on major laughs. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.