Liam Williams Has had an outstanding season for club and country but mainly reduced to defensive duties and coping with aerial threat from France’s tactical kickers. 5 George North The wing’s 90th game for Wales was not his most productive and had little chance to threaten the French defence. Well marshalled by Yoann Huget. 6 Owen Watkin A late replacement for Jonathan Davies. Had a muscular midfield presence but unable to replicate Davies’s attacking guile. Davies’s creatively was badly missed. 5 Hadleigh Parkes Made a vital late try-saving tackle on the bulldozing centre Virimi Vakatawa and his defensive kicking was important. Solid if unspectacular 7 Josh Adams He has scored five tries in the tournament and looked razor-sharp but, like all Wales’s backs, had limited opportunities to run at the French defence. 6 Dan Biggar Has had an excellent World Cup but unable to exert his usual control, particularly when Wales were on the back foot but his conversion settled a heart-stopping game. 7 Gareth Davies Had little opportunity to make sniping breaks but his tactical kicking was important before Tomos Williams made his influential introduction early in the second half. 6 Wyn Jones A very solid hour’s work as part of a Welsh scrum that got stronger as the game progressed. Established as Wales’s No 1 No 1. Tackled tirelessly. 7 Ken Owens The hooker made 19 tackles and looked reluctant to be hauled off after a lung-busting 75 minutes. One of his best games for his country. 7 Tomas Francis The Exeter tighthead may not be first choice at his club but is an important cog in the Welsh machine. Hard-working shift. 7 Jake Ball After the break got through a mountain of bruising carrying work to help haul Wales back into the game. Strong hour. 7 Alun Wyn Jones The warrior captain epitomises the never-say-die spirit and character of Wales. Was influential in the lineout and the loose. 7 Aaron Wainwright His interception try hauled Wales back into the game after their torrid start. Elbow in his face from Vahaamahina turned the game a notch further. 7 Justin Tipuric Worked tirelessly in the back row and one particular turnover in the first half kept France at bay. Just pips Owens as Wales’s best forward. 8 Josh Navidi Replaced by Ross Moriarty before the half-hour mark and the loss of the big ball-carrier was a blow to Wales. More so when Moriarty was then shown yellow card. 5 Replacements Ross Moriarty (for Navidi, 28) 6; Tomas Williams (for Gareth Davies, 54) 7; Rhys Carré (for Wyn Jones 62) 5; Dillon Lewis (for Francis 62) 5; Adam Beard (for Ball 62) 6; Elliot Dee (for Owens, 75) 6. Maxime Médard Ran elusively in what will be his World Cup finale but faded from the game after the break. The Toulouse player is not the force he was four years ago. 5 Damian Penaud The wing has been one of France’s best players after the nightmare of seeing Johnny May score a hat-trick against him in the spring. Always a threat. 6 Virimi Vakatawa A real handful for the Welsh defence. He powered over for a try before the break and made some telling breaks 8 Gaël Fickou A contrast to Vakatawa, he is aslippery, willowy runner and was terrific in the first half before being reduced to defensive duties in the second 6 Yoann Huget He kept the dangerous George North well away from the tryline and was a menace when in space, but lacks speed to be a top-quality finisher 6 Romain Ntamak Limped off at the interval by which time he had been impressive in attack but his sloppy place-kicking ultimately cost France the game 5 Antoine Dupont His tactical kicking and clever passing kept Wales on their toes and the scrum-half did not deserve to be on the losing side 6 Jefferson Poirot A strong first half and he made some telling carries and was strong in the tackle 6 Guilhem Guirado His reported fallout with the coach inspired one of his best displays for France and unlucky to gave a try ruled out 7 Rabah Slimani The tighthead was given an uncomfortable afternoon by Jones in the scrums but made some strong carries 5 Bernard Le Roux Very powerful presence in the set pieces and another who did not deserve to be on the losing side. 6 Sébastien Vahaamahina His elbow into Wainwight’s face cost France the game and earned him infamy. His try will be forgotten and so should he be. 3 Wenceslas Lauret In the first half as France’s forwards rampaged around the field he was exceptional. Carried well and strong in the setpiece.7 Charles Ollivon Another forward who paid a big part in France’s early raids on the Welsh line. The Toulon flanker has a big future. 7 Gregoire Alldritt Made some telling breaks and gave Wales’s defenders plenty of problems. Made some good offloads – France’s best forward. 7 Replacements Vincent Rattez (for Médard, 77) 5; Camille Lopez (for Ntamack, h-t) 5; Baptiste Serin (for Antoine Dupont,72) 6; Cyril Baille (for Poirot 67) 5; Camille Chat (for Guirado, 49) 6; Emerick Setiano (for Slimani, 72, 6), Luis Picamoles (for Le Roux 65, 6), Paul Gabrillagues (for Alldritt 54, 5).