Phil Neville insists his team will not feel the pressure of performing in front of more than 80,000 supporters after the Lionesses coach named his squad to face Germany at Wembley next week. There was no place for Fran Kirby while Ellen White and Georgia Stanway were only judged fit enough to join the training camp. There was however a recall for Toni Duggan and a second call up for Lauren Hemp as Neville named a strong squad for the marquee fixture. Seventeen of the 21-woman squad were selected for the World Cup this summer. “It’s a great end to what’s been a fantastic year for England women’s football”, Neville said of the sell-out Wembley fixture. “I don’t think we will feel any pressure. The experience over the last three or four games suggests the players need these kind of occasions; when the pressure is on it’s where my players want to be.” Kirby is continuing recovery from a knee injury and Neville said he had come to the decision not to select the 26-year-old despite her return to the Chelsea side in the WSL this past month, including an injury-time assist in the 3-1 victory at West Ham on Sunday. “She knows where she is at this moment in time in terms of her own performances and fitness,” Neville said of Kirby. “She’s not played 90 minutes yet this season. If you think of the magnitude of the game next week against Germany you need to be at a certain level in terms of your physicality, confidence and belief and Fran knows that she’s got to get back to that level. I’m working closely with Chelsea and Emma [Hayes], we speak most days about her progression and it’s an ongoing process.” Millie Bright (Chelsea), Lucy Bronze (Lyon), Rachel Daly (Houston Dash), Toni Duggan (Atlético Madrid), Mary Earps (Manchester United), Beth England (Chelsea), Alex Greenwood (Lyon), Lauren Hemp (Manchester City), Steph Houghton (Manchester City), Abbie McManus (Manchester United), Beth Mead (Arsenal), Jordan Nobbs (Arsenal), Nikita Parris (Lyon), Ellie Roebuck (Manchester City), Jill Scott (Manchester City), Lucy Staniforth (Birmingham City), Demi Stokes (Manchester City), Jodie Taylor (Reign FC), Carly Telford (Chelsea), Keira Walsh (Manchester City), Leah Williamson (Arsenal) Kirby’s absence means a potential second cap for Manchester City teenager Lauren Hemp. “[She]’s been called in because she deserves to be. She came on in the last game against Portugal, I thought she was fantastic” Neville said. “She was a training player in the last camp and then got called in for the last game in Portugal, we think a lot of her, two good games where we think she’s got certain qualities that could suit the wide open spaces of Wembley.” The Lionesses will follow their match against Germany on 9 November with another friendly in the Czech Republic the following Tuesday