British athletes will be taught how to wash their hands properly before Tokyo 2020, as hygiene becomes a new frontier in the hunt for marginal gains. The English Institute of Sport is to recommend that athletes use SureWash, an online training programme used by professionals in the NHS, before the Olympic and Paralympic Games next year. It follows long-term research which has found respiratory illness – including coughs and colds – to be the primary cause of lost training days among elite athletes. “We are working with the vast majority of Olympic and Paralympic sports on effective handwashing techniques in preparation for the Tokyo Games, which includes tools such as the SureWash training system and UV light boxes,” said Craig Ranson, director of athlete health at the EIS. “This is hugely important given that respiratory and gastro-intestinal illnesses are two of the biggest health threats to athlete availability for preparation and performance.” Funded by UK Sport, the EIS is based at Loughborough University, but pairs with academics from around the country in research that includes everything from biomechanics to finding the perfect amount of flex in canoeing paddles. The Athlete Respiratory Health initiative is a partnership between the EIS and Imperial College London set up last year in response to data showing that as many as 5,800 days of training were lost to respiratory illness in the two-year period to 20 July 2017. The aim has been to treat respiratory illness as if it were any other sporting injury. Dr James Hull, consultant respiratory physician at the Royal Brompton hospital and one of the initiative’s lead researchers, said: “When you look at all the athletes that travel to the Games and the problems that really scupper their chances or give them problems, nearly always top of the list are respiratory tract problems with infection at the top. So if you think about the strategies around what you might term as marginal gains, clearly you want to remove anything that might cause problems for them. “It’s akin to thinking about injury where you might use things like special shoes to reduce impact. We want to get better at trying to detect those who are at risk of respiratory problems and then to try and reduce that risk.” This includes identifying potential triggers, such as sleep deprivation and psychological stress, while also mitigating the risks brought about by tasks athletes cannot avoid, such as travelling in confined spaces and shaking the hands of any number of strangers. “We spent a lot of time thinking about how we can reduce exposure,” Hull said on Tuesday on what is, in fact, global handwashing day. “It sounds relatively easy to say it but essentially most people don’t know how to wash their hands properly. Given the fact that most respiratory viruses are exposed and then shared through contact, it’s vitally important. “There is a system called SureWash which trains you electronically. You follow video and you have to go through the WHO hand-washing stages and it marks you on your ability to conduct those and it trains you. We’re then able to assess the athletes to see if they are able to recall the stages and then be effective in remembering it.” According to Hull, it is not necessarily that people do not know how to wash their hands properly, but that they quickly forget. “We’ve done some work that shows people’s recollection of how to wash their hands is actually very poor,” he said. “Within a two‑week period you can hardly remember at all how to go through the stages. The other thing is that people are fairly unaware that the alcohol gels need a contact time of a minute. If you spray it on your hand and rub it off within 15 seconds it’s not really been effective.”