Last week, FFA’s Greg O’Rourke confirmed the news that Australian football fans had long suspected, and long feared: Matildas taliswoman and captain Sam Kerr will not be returning to the W-League for the 2019-20 season. The move comes as no surprise to anyone who has followed Kerr’s meteoric rise over the past few years. She’s broken every record and seemingly won every individual award available between the W-League and the NWSL, including her third consecutive Golden Boot in a league featuring the likes of Megan Rapinoe, Alex Morgan, and Marta. She has finally hit the grass ceiling of what these two leagues can offer her both personally and professionally. It was inevitable that Europe would come knocking. Media reports have been all aflurry with speculation about her final destination (Chelsea? PSG? Barcelona?), but it almost doesn’t matter. Wherever she goes, Kerr won’t be here. And that’s something Australian football must now contend with. After the dominance of Asia and the USA throughout the first four decades of its life, the traditional European giants—particularly England, Spain, France, Germany, and Italy—are finally recognising the potential of women’s football. It’s no wonder that seven of the eight teams that made the quarter-final of this year’s Women’s World Cup were from western Europe; these were the same nations that had begun to invest more seriously in their domestic leagues over the past World Cup cycle. Despite the frenzy around Kerr’s departure, Europe is not an unprecedented move for Australia’s female footballers. In 1990, former Matildas Julie Murray and Carol Vinson became the first Australian women to play in Europe when they signed for Fortuna Hjorring in Denmark. Since then, dozens of Australians have plied their trade across the continent. But there is something different about this new wave of Australian migration, which includes Victorian teenager Jacynta Galabadaarachchi at FA Women’s Super League side West Ham, former Melbourne Victory winger Emily Gielnik at Bayern Munich, Matildas veteran Lisa De Vanna at Fiorentina, and former Adelaide United midfielder Alex Chidiac at Atletico Madrid. Where most players returned from Europe to play in the W-League in the past, we’re now seeing a crop who are choosing to stay there. Kerr, arguably the most recognisable and successful footballer Australia has produced in the women’s game, is about to join them. Why? Well, besides the lure of a full-time contract and Champions League football, she could also earn one of the biggest salaries in the history of the women’s game. Professional football careers are extremely short (the PFA estimates eight years for men, but there is no precise figure for women given the precarity and recency of football as a profession, so players must maximise their earning potential while they can to set themselves up for the rest of their lives. Even if Kerr doesn’t develop as a footballer, the pay packet alone would justify the move. But she will develop. As the World Cup showed, the more top players Europe produces and attracts, the better the football itself becomes. This is true of Australia’s national team, too: the Matildas’ rise up the world rankings has gone hand-in-hand with its players garnering experience in top leagues overseas. If Australia wants to be the best, its players have to play against the best. Kerr is also desperate to win team trophies, which have been few and far between in her career to this point. So where does this leave the W-League? Kerr’s inaugural marquee contract last season was Australia’s best attempt at capitalising on their biggest star. And it worked: game attendances grew, the competition attracted more television viewers whenever she was playing, and Perth Glory jerseys bearing her name outsold those of any player at the club. The Glory will suffer the most from her departure, losing their top goalscorer, their captain, their biggest financial asset, and the spearhead of their playing style all in one fell swoop. But while the money and the eyeballs that Kerr takes with her will be missed, the league is in a unique position to turn her departure into the start of its own new chapter. Just as the A-League produced Aaron Mooy, Matthew Ryan, Tom Rogic, and Daniel Arzani, so too did the W-League produce Kerr, Galabadaarachchi, Gielnik, De Vanna, and Chidiac. These women embody the potential the W-League has in producing top-quality players, flying the Australian flag by virtue of their very presence in Europe. The current moment should be seen as a celebration of the league’s possibilities as much as an acknowledgement of its limitations, and a commitment to moving beyond them. Kerr’s departure comes at a critical time for Australian football. In the midst of its transition to independence, we’re now witnessing a new generation of Sam Kerrs emerge, from Queensland wonderkid Mary Fowler to Thai refugee Susan Phonsongkham, World Cup debutante Karly Roestbakken to rising stars Leticia McKenna, Nia Stamatopolous, Jada Whyman, and Shadeene Evans. Kerr’s absence means W-League fans and Australian sports media can now focus on these new characters, providing them with a spotlight that might not have been available had they continued battling amongst themselves for column inches in Kerr’s awesome shadow. Whether these players follow in her footsteps or stay in Australia won’t be known for some time, and much will depend on what the W-League can offer them. But what matters most, surely, is that they now have the choice—and that can only benefit Australian football in the long run. Kerr remains the finest example of what the W-League and Australian football can offer, while her impending move to Europe shows us what we must do to keep up with the rest of the world. How we get there is no longer a matter of ‘if’ but of ‘when’. This is rightly being treated as a watershed moment for an Australian woman who may go down in history as one of the greatest players of the sport. Although we may not see Kerr back on our shores any time soon, her departure is an opportunity to recognise how lucky we have been to watch her get there at all, opening the world’s door for players still to come.