A cherrypicker has arrived to help rescue a man stuck 270ft up a chimney. Police were called at 2.22am on Monday to reports of a man trapped on the top of Dixon’s Chimney in Carlisle, Cumbria. His condition is not known but he has been trapped upside down at the top of the structure for several hours. Cumbria police said while there had been no contact with him for some time, it was being treated as a rescue. A Coastguard helicopter attempted a rescue earlier on Monday but the operation was aborted because of the man’s precarious position. Cumbria fire and rescue service made a public appeal for a cherrypicker or aerial work platform and one arrived shortly after 2pm. Supt Matt Kennerley of Cumbria police said: “We are looking at various options to rescue this man safely. So far, the multi-agency response has seen us utilise technology including drones. “A helicopter has been used to try to rescue the man and efforts have been made to try to drop a technical rescue team on to the chimney to rescue him. These two attempts have not been successful so far due to concerns over how securely the man is attached to the ladder at the top of the chimney and the potential danger of backdrafts from the helicopter. “These concerns over how securely he is attached have also prevented us from sending someone up the ladder from the bottom. The ladder is also damaged.” He added: “This is an extremely complex and rare incident and requires the specialisms of all the agencies to work together. We are very concerned about the man involved and all those involved in this operation are working tirelessly to bring this to a safe conclusion for all.” He said officers were with the man’s family offering them support. “We would like to thank the public for their patience as we work to safely rescue this man. We are doing all we can to minimise disruption to the public and businesses,” Kennerley said. Roads around the structure, a prominent local landmark built in 1836, have been closed. It is a Grade II-listed building and when built was the largest chimney in the country, according to a citation on the Historic England website. Local reports said shouts and wailing could be heard coming from the chimney in the early hours of the morning before police arrived.