When Rassie Erasmus took charge of South Africa last year, his first message to his players was that his decisions would be based on merit, not colour, experience or favouritism. There would be no hierarchy; everyone was equal. In the past, South Africa’s management and squad have been allocated numbers for their baggage and check-in lists for hotels. The head coach was always given No 1, but in Japan Erasmus has 43, with the order decided alphabetically, starting with the players, so the centre Lukhanyo Am has 1 on his cases. A team that were so hopelessly divided for two years after the 2015 World Cup, when performances reflected a chaotic selection policy, have become as one again. Erasmus started with defence and within eight months of his taking over South Africa celebrated their first victory in New Zealand for nine years. They have not been the most entertaining team at this tournament, relying on forward might and the tactical probing of their half-backs, together with the opportunism of their back three when opponents make mistakes. But they resemble the Springboks of old: ruthlessly hard, cold-blooded, unyielding and difficult to beat, with Erasmus proving a better selector than his immediate predecessors. Sunday’s semi-final opponents, Wales, are chiselled from the same rock. Erasmus is the youngest head coach in the semi-finals, and the least experienced in international rugby, but his approach is similar to that of his opposite number in Yokohama, Warren Gatland: his players come first and he inspires loyalty. Wales before Gatland tended to get overheated and emotional but a feature of their current run of 19 consecutive victories in the Six Nations, summer tour and autumn internationals is their ability to defend a lead and to come from behind in the final quarter. The only tier-one nation they have not faced in that sequence are New Zealand. When the South Africa fly-half Handré Pollard said: “It is not a gameplan with a lot of flair in it,” he could have been talking about the Springboks rather than Wales. He was not being derogatory but showing appreciation for a side that have learned from painful experience that the route to victory lies in being true to yourselves, not trying to live up to someone else’s ideal. Any excitement generated on Sunday is likely to be through the closeness of a contest that promises to be as tight as the 1999 semi-final between South Africa and Australia, which the Wallabies won after extra time by eight penalties and a drop goal to six penalties and a drop goal. It was a rugby world away from the free-scoring match between New Zealand and France the previous day but equally compelling. Wales are the more battle-hardened of the sides, having overcome Australia, Fiji and France on their way to the last four, while the Springboks followed their opening defeat to New Zealand with romps over Namibia, Italy and Canada before ending Japan’s jolly last Sunday by closing down the space of a side that looked to run the ball from everywhere. Wales will be the opposite to Japan, kicking when there is no clear opening and looking to play in South Africa’s half. They were far from their best against France and, unusually, surrendered the early initiative, but they found a way to win, even if they had a man advantage for the final 32 minutes. A feature of their past two World Cups was an inability to close out tight matches: South Africa in the group stage and France in the semi-final in 2011, and Australia in the pool game and South Africa in the quarter-final four years ago. Wales were undermined by injuries in 2015 but here, already without Gareth Anscombe and Taulupe Faletau, they have lost Cory Hill, Josh Navidi and Liam Williams yet have reached the point where players are so comfortable with the system that no one is irreplaceable, although Gatland would not want to test that further by losing his talismanic captain, Alun Wyn Jones. They have not been the most attractive side to watch in that time, but they have gained strength in unity and South Africa will meet a side hardened by the same resolve. It is set to be a match dominated by the boot, a kick-fest as Gatland predicted. Not just in the air, where both back-threes can expect to be looking upwards for much of the evening, but off the tee. It may be decided by a drop goal, as tight matches in the World Cup often have been, and it was a ploy twice used by Wales in their pool match against Australia that proved to be the difference between victory and defeat. South Africa have armed themselves with a fresh set of tight-five forwards on the bench so there will be no letup in their physical onslaught. Wales, whose two centres are carrying injuries, have gone for a 5-3 split between forwards and backs, relying on their conditioning to move the point of attacks. South Africa’s best under Erasmus is still to come, with time needed to sharpen their attack, but in his final days with Wales, Gatland seems touched by destiny. He was relaxed in his final media conference before the match, his time not so much up as come, suggesting the Springboks will be the ones packing their newly numbered bags.