Dina Asher-Smith believes that her stunning world 200m victory can be a springboard to Olympic glory next year – and expects to get even stronger and faster for Tokyo. She became the first British woman to win a global sprint title with a dominant display in Doha, charging home in 21.88sec to take gold and break her own national record in the process. It was her second medal of these championships to go with her silver in the 100m. But when the 23-year-old was asked whether it meant she was the finished article, she shook her head. “The Olympics is less than a year away so we’ve already been thinking about it,” she said. “But my coach John Blackie and I still have some things to work on. In the 100m I didn’t run the race I planned. I am still getting stronger and more experience physically and mentally. So hopefully there is more to come and it should be an exciting journey.” Asher-Smith’s victory has propelled her into the stratosphere of British sport but afterwards she promised global success would not change her. “Not really because being an athlete is very humbling anyway,” she said. “I train six days a week and I am still going to push myself to the limit. It’s very unglamorous when you’ve got lactic [acid], and you’re on the floor. Ultimately you’re only ever as good as your last performance.” Twitter: follow us at @guardian_sport Facebook: like our football and sport pages Instagram: our favourite photos, films and stories YouTube: subscribe to our football and sport channels She added: “Athletics is a very unpredictable and at times unforgiving sport. “I could run the same time next year and finish fifth in the Olympics – that’s just how it goes. So I have to really keep my feet firmly on the ground and keep working hard.” Asher-Smith also paid tribute to her parents and Blackie, who has guided her career since she began training at the age of eight. “Even when I was little and I would try to jump over hurdles and do the long jump he said ‘please watch yourself’. He told me we could do some special things. He’s been careful with my progression to hold me back. This medal is dedicated to his patience, intelligence and wisdom.”