The absence of a “take it or leave it” demand in Boris Johnson’s conference speech has offered some hope in Brussels of a prime ministerial U-turn on what EU officials have described as unworkable proposals for the Irish border. Downing Street had briefed before the address in Manchester that Johnson would use his platform to make a “final offer” to Brussels, but the rhetoric appeared in the end far more conciliatory than billed. Johnson instead stressed the UK was making a fair proposal which would avoid extra checks on goods on or near the border and that the EU should “compromise in their turn”. The prime minister’s proposal for a time-limited period of regulatory alignment between Northern Ireland and the Republic Ireland but with the whole of the UK leaving the EU’s customs territory is seen in Brussels as being “fundamentally flawed”. It is hoped Johnson will come to recognise that the EU cannot accept a proposal that creates a customs border on the island of Ireland due to the risks to the single market, the all-Ireland economy and peace in the region. Given the UK is proposing a four-year time limit on alignment between Northern Ireland and the EU standards, there is some hope the British government might move on customs too. The EU is open to a Northern Ireland-only backstop that would keep the province in the customs union and under swathes of single-market legislation. There are yet to be discussions on putting a time limit on such an arrangement but some EU sources have suggested Dublin could be put under pressure to accept such a deal if it was clear that the Commons would accept it. The more likely outcome, EU sources suggested, was that there would not be a deal and that the UK would be seeking an extension to its membership beyond 31 October. “This cannot be his last plan,” said one senior source close to the negotiations. “It is unworkable to dissociate customs from the regulatory regime. No point in even considering a time limit on something that is not workable.” A second diplomatic source added: “At least he didn’t say in the speech it was his final offer. So we’ll be listening very carefully to see if there’s scope to bring it back somewhere reasonable.” Following a meeting with the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, in Berlin the Dutch prime minister Prime Minister Mark Rutte said the EU’s member states “look carefully at the proposals”. Merkel reiterated the comments but added that it was important that the EU27 stuck together in a sign that Dublin’s reaction will be key. “We trust in (EU negotiator) Michel Barnier, and we will discuss it further”, she said. Johnson’s chief Brexit negotiator, David Frost, formally presented the UK’s legal text on the Irish border to the European commission later on Wednesday afternoon. The prime minister is expected to make a series of calls to EU leaders, including the commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, in the hope that there can be a period of intensive engagement on his proposals before a crunch summit on 17 October. There are, however, grave doubts about Johnson’s sincerity in wanting a deal and suspicion that the UK is engaging in “blame game management” ahead of a general election. On Wednesday morning, the Irish deputy prime minister, Simon Coveney, told reporters he was concerned by the UK’s direction of travel. He said: “Essentially, if he’s proposing customs checks on the island of Ireland I don’t think that’s going to be the basis of an agreement. But let’s wait and see the detail on that before we make a full judgment on it. “If there is a proposal that involves customs checks on the island of Ireland, that in itself is bad faith given the commitments the British government has given both to Ireland and the EU over the last three years. “We’ll have to wait and see. Obviously we’ll study any proposal carefully, but if the reports are true it doesn’t look like the basis of an agreement, that’s for sure.”