“We provide help in disaster areas all around the world,” says the aid agency volunteer serving warm samosas. “Not usually in Yorkshire, though!” That natural disasters can and increasingly will affect not just people in rolling news stories a long way away but anyone, anywhere, is at the heart of Rain, a love story that’s also a flood story. The samosa-bearing aid worker isn’t the only person on unfamiliar ground: with its tight contemporary focus, Rain is something of a departure for Mary and Bryan Talbot too. Two of Britain’s finest graphic novelists, the husband and wife team have previously covered the Paris Commune and imperialism in the South Pacific (The Red Virgin and the Vision of Utopia) and the women’s suffrage movement (Sally Heathcote: Suffragette). Bryan’s Grandville series stars a steampunk badger; and while his magnum opus Alice in Sunderland may start in modern Britain, its twists and turns connect prehistoric beasts, Humpty Dumpty and Sid James. And the pair’s finest hour, the Costa-winning Dotter of Her Father’s Eyes, slips between Mary’s childhood and the troubled life of James Joyce’s daughter Lucia. Rain, the tale of a budding relationship between two women set against the 2015 floods in the north of England, might seem a straightforward story by comparison. But this passionate, explicitly political book is heavy with significance, a desperate appeal on behalf of our land, our lives and the lives of our “non-human fellow earthlings”. Cath is from London and Mitch from the fictional Thrushcross, a friendly, well-ordered town of stone and slate set below the bare hills of Brontë country. Its backdrop is a beautifully drawn patchwork of rolling fields, dry-stone walls and craggy rocks, with grouse erupting in the pale skies above. And when Cath heads north to visit Mitch, she finds a woman obsessed with the land. Mitch is worried about packaging, weedkillers and the water table, and she wants to head out to a local campaign launch rather than have a romantic evening in. But, as the frustrated Cath soon finds out, Mitch is right. Thousands of lead-laden grouse will soon lie dead in a pit, good for nothing but burning. Illegal traps for hawks, laid by gamekeepers, are waiting in the fields. Heather-burning and chemical sprays are turning a joyously fertile blanket bog into a toxic, denuded wasteland. And around Thrushcross, a landscape that once held water in a fond embrace is poised to release a grim cascade that will flood streets and houses. Rain follows Cath’s political awakening through arguments, cheerful nights down the pub and demonstrations. It’s a portrait of pettiness, humour, warm hugs, seemingly unsolvable rows and moments of joy on the hills, with the pair drunk on beauty and hope. Bryan Talbot’s cleverly framed panels home in on body language then flash back to regrets and reminiscences, and the hills around catch the eye again and again, their muted beauty enlivened by bursts of colour. It is not a subtle book: often the dialogue feels as though it’s in service of the political cause rather than character development. The gamekeepers exist only as nasty archetypes, and scenes are set up so a character can talk about Victorian grouse shoots or the importance of copses. A farmer disagreeing with a conference speech about sustainable agriculture gets the shortest of cameos, his words paraphrased, finger pointing and face twisted with rage. “It’s not just Yorkshire it’s affecting, is it? It’s increasing the UK’s carbon emissions a lot, and that’s bad for everybody,” explains Mitch at one point, her eyes fixed in the reader’s direction. Then again, this is a work not of balance or diplomacy but of love and rage. The powerfully rendered flood that drowns Thrushcross is both a dramatic plot tool and a reminder of a real disaster that shattered communities. To see the streets that we’ve watched Mitch and Cath walk down drowned in brown, surging water, as rubbish flaps past shattered windows, is to feel deep sorrow. Towards the end, the artwork takes a dive into the soil, abandoning naturalism for a portrait of subterranean abundance, a world of roots and worms and beetles that we rarely see but could not live without. The idea of local connections that build into great networks is at Rain’s core, and its account of a couple trying to live well and make a difference is both a small story and a vital part of a very big one that connects sea levels in Vanuatu, plastic waste in India and upland drainage in Yorkshire. This flawed yet inspiring graphic novel is one more compelling voice in a swelling chorus of protest. • Rain is published by Jonathan Cape (£16.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.