It feels like there are two different Ireland sides in this World Cup, one with Johnny Sexton, which thumped Scotland, and the one without, which lost against Japan. Against Russia, we saw both. Sexton played the first 40 minutes and Ireland led 21-0 at half-time, then Joe Schmidt wrapped him in tissue paper and popped him back in his box to keep him safe for the next game. Jack Carty came on and Ireland laboured horribly against a side who spent 13 of the next 20 minutes playing with 14 men because they had two players sent to the sin-bin. Right now, Sexton is holding this campaign together. Ireland won 35-0, which sounds better than it looked. Not least because they suffered a number of injuries along the way. Joey Carbery pulled out just before the match because he had aggravated an old ankle injury and Rob Kearney had to go off in the second half because he was “a little tight in the groin”. Schmidt reckons they will both be fit to play their final group match a week on Saturday. He will be more worried about Jordi Murphy, who has just joined the squad as a replacement for Jack Conan, but had to go off after half an hour. Murphy, Schmidt said, “may have popped a rib”. Sexton was captaining Ireland for the first time, which is a sign of how much they have come to rely on him. He made two tries, one by orchestrating a dummy loop move, which he then set up with an inside pass to Kearney, and the other by kicking a grubber for Peter O’Mahony. He nearly made three more, one with a kick that whistled across field to Keith Earls, who spilled the catch in a clash, another with a flat throw to Andrew Conway rushing up the wing (the referee called that one back because of a forward pass) and a third when he charged down a clearance. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales Otherwise, Ireland made a lot of mistakes, more slips, blips, misses, and fumbles than they would get away with against a better side. At one point Russia almost scored when Kearney, Conway and Garry Ringrose let the ball bounce between the three of them in their own 22. But it was the handling errors that really cost them. There were a couple of horrid knock-ons as they were closing on the try-line. It was the 62nd minute before they got their bonus point, when Earls put Conway through after catching Carty’s chip. Garry Ringrose added a fifth in the final minutes, after a crisp bit of work by Earls and Jordan Larmour. Schmidt blamed it on the humidity. “Speaking to guys who played here the last two times, the longer game goes on the more moisture there is on ball,” he said. “I’m pretty realistic about how tough conditions were.” England and Scotland had struggled at this stadium too, he said. But in truth the conditions Ireland played in weren’t nearly as severe as they had been during those matches. There was a storm right before the game, and the temperature fell with the rain. It was as cool and dry as it’s been in Kobe yet. “I’ve heard it cools off in October,” Schmidt said, “so I’m hopeful we’ll adjust.” But really, he needs his team to warm up.