Hearts have opened an investigation after reports that Rangers striker Alfredo Morelos was racially abused during Sunday’s 1-1 draw at Tynecastle. The Edinburgh club have say they will ban any fan found guilty of racism after it was alleged that the Colombian was abused after scoring a 39th minute equaliser. The club is aware of an incident of alleged racism and is currently investigating it,” read a Hearts statement. “It goes without saying that Heart of Midlothian Football Club utterly condemns any form of racism and any individuals found guilty of such an offence will face an indefinite ban from Tynecastle Park.” The incident follows reports of racism at an FA Cup game between Haringey Borough and Yeovil and in the Championship match between Luton Town and Bristol City in the week where England players were racially abused in a Euro 2020 qualifier in Bulgaria. In the game itself, the final score meant Rangers missed the chance to return to the top of the Scottish Premiership after Old Firm rivals Celtic thumped Ross County 6-0 to regain top spot on Saturday. Rangers found themselves on the back foot early on as Hearts flew out of the blocks in a breathless first half, hitting the crossbar inside the first two minutes before opening the scoring four minutes later through Ryotaro Meshino Steven Gerrard’s team got back on level terms six minutes before half-time when Morelos fired a shot across home goalkeeper Joel Pereira and into the net to score his 15th goal in all competitions. And despite creating a flurry of second-half chances, Rangers had to settle for a point which takes them level on 22 points with leaders Celtic. Hearts made a lightning-quick start to the game and not have to wait long for the opener as Meshino expertly chipped in the rebound after Mulraney had been denied by visiting goalkeeper Allan McGregor in the sixth minute. The visitors almost hauled themselves level in the 34th minute when Steven Davis’ diving header from outside the box spun towards goal but it nestled into the side-netting. Rangers continued to threaten and eventually got their reward in the 39th minute when Morelos coolly slotted in at the back post after Borna Barisic’s corner had been knocked down into his path by Nikola Katic. There were huge cheers from the 3,045-strong away following in the 62nd minute when winger Ryan Kent stepped off the bench to make his return from a hamstring injury. And the summer signing from Liverpool created his first opportunity four minutes later when he beat two Hearts defenders before rifling a fierce shot wide. Rangers felt they should have had a penalty when Scott Arfield’s path was blocked in the box following good build-up play between the Canada international, Kent and Morelos. Hearts goalkeeper Pereira made a smart save to keep out Connor Goldson’s header in the 80th minute as Rangers stepped up their search for a winner. A quick counter-attack from Hearts petered out as Rangers were able to clear in their box after Ikpeazu had been played in by substitute Andy Irving. The home side could have won it late on when Christophe Berra nodded towards goal in added time but it was straight at McGregor.