A runner has died after taking part in the Cardiff half marathon on Sunday, organisers have said. The participant was treated by a medical emergency team on the course, and then taken to the University Hospital of Wales where they died, according to Run 4 Wales, the not-for-profit organisation that runs sporting events in Wales. The organisers said everyone connected with the race was “devastated” and a full review would be carried out. They have not released the runner’s name. The chief executive, Matt Newman, said: “Our deepest sympathies go out to the family of the runner who tragically passed away after taking part at the event. “The emergency services reacted to this terrible situation with great speed and professionalism. Everyone connected with the race is devastated.” South Wales Police’s chief constable Matt Jukes tweeted: “Terribly sad news. My thoughts are with all those affected”. The incident is the third death at the Cardiff half marathon in two years. Last year Ben McDonald, 25, from Cardiff, and Dean Fletcher, 32, from Exeter, died after taking part in the race. They both went into cardiac arrest and collapsed after crossing the finishing line within minutes of each other. A coroner’s investigation ruled they had both died from natural causes. Drew McDonald, who ran the race this year in memory of his brother, Ben, found out after he crossed the finishing line that a runner had again died in similar circumstances. According to reports, he said: “As a family we are shocked and devastated that another family has to go through the same process that we have been dealing with for the past year”. Ben’s family walked the route this year in his honour. His mother, Ruth, told ITV that they were doing it “to talk about him, to remember him, to walk in his footsteps. We just want everyone to know how amazing he was.” The family have chosen to support Welsh Hearts, who install defibrillators and offer heart screenings across Wales. The race, sponsored by Cardiff University, is Wales’s largest mass participation event and the second largest half marathon in the UK. This year, a record 27,500 runners were taking part in the 13.1 mile course.