Vontaze Burfict has long been considered the NFL’s dirtiest player. And not in a misinformed, yearning for the good ol’ days, don’t-we-all-sneakily-enjoy-it way. His play is not tough but fair – it is vicious and violent. He does not look merely to tackle opponents, he often appears to be seeking to harm them too. So it’s little surprise that the 29-year-old has been suspended for the remainder of the 2019 season, after he delivered a barbaric head-to-head shot to Indianapolis Colts tight end Jack Doyle on Sunday. Raiders LB Vontaze Burfict has been ejected for this hit 🤐 pic.twitter.com/Gdx4xMp3Uf Burfict’s suspension will likely be reduced on appeal, as was the case with his five-game ban in 2017, which was later reduced to three. But this is more about messaging than the particulars of the ban. As the link between football and brain trauma grows, the NFL is trying to crack down on head injuries. Punishing him heavily is an easy, fan-friendly decision. But it’s also one that sends a strong message to every other locker-room: in the modern game, this type of violence not be tolerated. “There were no mitigating circumstances on this play,” Joe Runyan, the NFL’s vice president of football operations said in a letter to Burfict. “Your contact was unnecessary, flagrant and should have been avoided. For your actions, you were penalized and disqualified from the game.” The criticism escalated. “You have continued to flagrantly abuse rules designated to protect yourself and your opponents from unnecessary risk,” Runyan wrote. Never has the league office offered such a forceful rebuke of a player’s on-field conduct. The NFL edged as close to publicly labeling Burfict a pariah as a corporation can possibly do while reprimanding a unionized employee. During his time in the NFL, Burfict has missed a total of 22 games due to suspension, roughly 19% of his career. In monetary terms, he’s cost himself $4.6m in salary and has been fined nine other times, costing $411,000. That’s over $5m of his career earnings washed away by reckless play. Burfict’s troubling pattern of behavior stretches back to high school. He was the top high-school recruit at his position in the country. Recruiting site 247 Sports listed Burfict as the 11th best prospect in the country and one of the 250 best prospects in the history of high school football; he still ranks as the 39th best player to ever come out of the talent-rich state of California. But Burfict received few elite-level college scholarship offers, and he ended up at Arizona State, a third-rate program. The best of the best had heard all about Burfict’s reputation: he had serious anger issues, the story went. One by one they chose to pass. In football, passing up on a linebacker because he has anger issues is like passing on The Beatles because their music is too catchy. Linebackers are the tone setters in a brutish, collision-based sport. Find a linebacker with anger problems and you’ll see a trail of 40 coaches scuttling behind, certain in their belief that they’re the ones who can help channel that violence into controlled aggression. That wasn’t the case with Burfict. He had obvious first-round potential in the NFL draft, and teams loved his athleticism, instincts and tenacity. Yet he went undrafted. High school whispers had become facts in college, and he failed a drug test at the NFL combine. Executives and coaches across the league didn’t want to take the risk on a player with so many red flags. Those worries were realized once he signed as an undrafted free agent in Cincinnati. His years with the Bengals were marred by spells on the sidelines as suspensions and fines stacked up. The list speaks for itself: - September 2013: Fined $10,000 for striking an opponent in the groin and an additional $21,000 for a hit on a defenseless receiver in the same game. - October 2013: Fined $21,000 for spearing a receiver. - October 2014: Fined $25,000 for twisting the ankles of Panthers quarterback Cam Newton and tight end Greg Olson. - December 2015: Fined $69,000 for two unnecessary roughness penalties and diving at Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger’s knee. - January 2016: Fined $50,000 for hitting a defenseless receiver on the chin. - January 2016: Suspended three games and forfeits $500,000 in salary for a headshot on defenseless wide receiver Antonio Brown. - October 2016: Fined $75,000 for stepping on Patriots running back LeGarrette Blount. - November 2016: Fined $12,000 for giving the middle finger to Bills fans. - August 2017: Suspended three games – reduced from five – for a hit on a defenseless player. - October 2017: Fined $12,000 for kicking an opponent. - March 2018: Suspended four games for violating the NFL’s substance abuse policy. - October 2018: Fined $112,000 for multiple examples of unnecessary roughness in a game against the Pittsburgh Steelers. No other player in the league has that kind of rap sheet. The Bengals finally had enough at the end of last season, and Oakland’s so-called brain-trust snapped him up, handing out a fat free-agent contract and making him a team captain. Adding Burfict to a locker-room that included Antonio Brown and Richie Incognito, men with their own troubled histories, was supposed to spur the Raiders back to their glory days, to encourage a ferocious, old-school playing style. These were not cheap-shot artists, the Raiders insisted, these were misunderstood, blue-collar football players. Burfict’s time in the NFL has been a parade of grisly hits and cowardly acts. Oakland rewarded him, promoted him as a figurehead of their Make Football Great Again movement. The NFL enabled his behavior, too: we are only a week removed from Burfict randomly punching players at the end of a play. Finally, the league has seen sense and taken Burfict off the field, for the health of its players and to safeguard the future of the sport.