Australia have continued their perfect start to World Cup qualifying with a 7-1 hammering of a spirited Taiwan side in Kaohsiung. Adam Taggart, Jackson Irvine and Harry Souttar each scored twice while Jamie Maclaren notched his fourth goal in a week for the national team. The win keeps Australia comfortably on top of Group B with three victories in as many matches ahead of November’s clash with Jordan in Amman. Graham Arnold made six changes to the team that defeated Nepal 5-0 in Canberra last week, with Taggart given the nod ahead of Maclaren, who scored a hat-trick in that game. The Suwon Bluewings striker repaid Arnold’s faith with a first-half double – just as he did the last time Australia played Taiwan back in 2012. The 26-year-old nodded home a Rhyan Grant cross in the 12th minute for his first goal in six years before a slick one-two between Awer Mabil and Brad Smith down the left freed Smith to give Taggart a tap-in seven minutes later. After the strong start came a shock, as Taiwan’s Chen Yi-Wei got between central defenders Milos Degenek and Souttar to send a bullet header past Mat Ryan in the 21st minute. It was the first goal conceded in the qualifying campaign by the Australian goalkeeper, who was captaining his nation for the first time in his 58th appearance. Australia restored their two-goal advantage in the 33rd minute when a great crossfield ball by Aaron Mooy found Grant in space and his right-wing centre was smashed home by Irvine. The Hull City midfielder added his second three minutes later when he headed home a teasing Mabil cross in the 36th minute, ensuring Australia went in at half-time with a healthy 4-1 lead. Irvine had a chance to claim a hat-trick after the restart following more good work by Smith and Mabil, but blazed over the bar from inside the box. Arnold’s decision to replace the ineffective Brandon Borello with Ajdin Hrustic proved the source of a late flurry by the Socceroos. Hrustic twice found the head of Souttar – who now has three goals from his first two Socceroos appearances – and he also set up Maclaren’s second-half strike as Australia delivered the ruthless edge Arnold has been demanding all campaign. Despite the comprehensive scoreline, Arnold admitted there were structural aspects that would need work before the Socceroos face their main rivals Jordan. “I was pretty happy with the performances but at times we were sloppy defensively,” he said. “I felt there was an improvement on the Nepal game that we were more ruthless in front of goal.”