Rodrigo Duterte, the 74-year-old president of the Philippines, has hurt his hip and suffered scratches in a motorcycle accident, senior aides have said. Duterte, whose health has been the subject of intense public speculation, suffered the mishap at the Malacañang presidential palace compound late on Wednesday, according to his spokesman, Salvador Panelo. The crash came 10 days after Duterte – the oldest person to be elected Philippine president – disclosed he is suffering from myasthenia gravis, an autoimmune disease that could potentially have serious complications. Panelo said in a statement: “The president was reaching for his shoe when he fell off his motorcycle that resulted in a minor injury, particularly light bruises and slight scratches, to his elbow and knee.” Senator Christopher “Bong” Go, Duterte’s former assistant and close aide, earlier told reporters that the president had “crashed” and complained of hip pain after the accident, but was not hospitalised. Panelo, citing Duterte’s partner, Cielito “Honeylet” Avanceña, said the president’s injury would not require major treatment, adding there was “nothing to worry about”. Duterte was trying to park the vehicle after driving around a courtyard, Panelo said, adding the leader was now resting at the palace. Go later shared a video showing Duterte, wearing formal clothes – without a helmet or other protective gear – riding on a paved drive at night. The accident was not shown in the clip. WATCH: A video provided by Senator Bong Go showed that President Rodrigo Duterte rode his motorcycle in the PSG compound. | via @reyaika pic.twitter.com/5J6b7Gi3o4 Panelo declined to explain why there were two versions of the accident, stressing: “Whatever the story is, what is important is he is in good hands – no major injury.” Questions about Duterte’s  health have swirled since he took office in 2016, with the president at times skipping events and meetings or discussing his various ailments during long and rambling speeches. The Philippine constitution requires the handover of power to the vice president if the leader dies or is incapacitated. Duterte revealed in 2016 that he used to take fentanyl, a powerful painkiller, because of a spinal injury from motorcycle accidents.