Some things you just can’t learn from books. Even the 51-page guide to Japanese manners and customs the local organising committee distributed to visiting officials and journalists before this Rugby World Cup. It includes all sorts of hints and titbits like “make sure you don’t have holes in your socks” (page 19) and “many consider it impolite to sit with legs crossed and one foot pointing towards another person in the room” (p24) and “you may be greeted with a handshake, or you may be greeted with a traditional Japanese bow, do not attempt to do both at the same time” (p23). But – and I’ve been through it three times now – it has nothing on the correct etiquette for handling the animals in one of Tokyo’s new micropig cafes. Turns out that while you’re very welcome to stroke and pat the micropigs scuttling around your feet, you should never try to pick them up because they are scared of heights. Like so many of the mistakes you can make in Japan, you’ll figure out this one the very minute after you’ve committed it, because the pig will squeal loudly. So, now you know. Be warned though, because, as Peter Carey writes in his book Wrong About Japan, after a particularly humiliating encounter in which he tried to impress an interviewee with his half-baked theories about manga, “half knowledge is sometimes much worse than complete ignorance”. Knowing that it is rude to put your towel in the water at the public baths, for instance, only makes it that much more embarrassing when you accidentally do. And since the only spares are kept back by the front desk, there’s no way out that won’t leave you feeling awfully soggy and sheepish. So far, after nine matches in six cities, five of them in the space of just seven days, and three thousand-odd miles of air, road and rail travel, the World Cup has been a beginner’s course in the all the many mistakes you can make while navigating your way around Japan. You might think that if you’ve tackled the London rush hour on a regular basis you can cope with anything the Tokyo subway can throw at you in the morning. But the third time you get elbowed aside by the little old lady you were trying to let by you realise that this is an entirely different, and far more vicious proposition, one which only a lunatic would attempt while carrying a large backpack and suitcase. And you may know that it is essential to have a well thought-out karaoke strategy, that the classic English technique of getting hammered and singing badly isn’t going to cut it after your host has just knocked out a near-note-perfect Sinatra number. Best, then, to consider your limitations while you’re still sober and pick out a selection of well-known songs that you’re quite sure fall within your vocal range. I was talking about exactly that with a colleague from another newspaper just the other night. He’d been thinking about it and had settled on “something by Johnny Cash”. Perfect. “Now why didn’t I think of that?” I thought to myself, jealously. The only problem was, we discovered together later that same evening, that it doesn’t much matter what you think you want to sing if someone else is controlling the karaoke machine. We’d blundered into the same biker bar – “this place looks interesting” – as half of the local rugby team, and their big winger, who’d smacked the microphone down on the table in what felt less like an invitation and more like an order, wasn’t impressed by my friend’s suggestion. “Johnnycash?” he repeated back to us incredulously. He rolled it all into one word, which made it sound even more ludicrous. “Johnnycash!” his teammate, the No 8, repeated, and they both fell about laughing. It seemed to be one of the funniest things they’d ever heard. The funniest, for sure, that either of us two Englishmen had said all night, even if we had no idea exactly what the joke was. The big winger bluntly insisted that we instead attempt I Want It That Way by the Backstreet Boys, and then I Don’t Want To Miss A Thing by Aerosmith. We butchered them both, which was less amusing. They grinned awkwardly. “Smiling not only indicates happiness,” I noted later, looking in that World Rugby handbook, “but is also used to hide unpleasant emotions in public” (p24). For the most part, though, the half a million rugby fans here all seem to be muddling along just fine. There haven’t been any major scandals so far, at any rate. There was a small upset about the fact that ITV’s pundits were wearing shoes on the tatami mats in their TV studio. And one English journalist ended up in the local papers because he wore his swimming trunks into the hot springs, and then got called out on it by Joe Marler in one of the England team’s press conferences. “Apparently you lot have offended the Japanese culture,” Marler said, with some glee. “It says specifically no shorts. I wore a vest to cover my tatts, and socks, but nothing here. Because I didn’t want to offend them. And yet you’re swanning about the place in swim shorts, it’s ridiculous!” There were some stories, too, about how upset some Japanese social media users have been by the way some fans are behaving on the trains to and from the ground. Best reassure them, then, that the England fans’ chant of “Billy! Billy Billy! Billy Vun-i-pola!” to the tune of 2 Unlimited’s No Limit loses its charm pretty fast, whatever country one happens to be in.