Taking off the steamer lid and tearing into these soft and fluffy buns is a joyful moment. To simplify these, don’t add the panda faces, and don’t fill the buns. You can also change the filling, although it’s best not to use anything too watery. Try chocolate or a thick creme pat. Makes: 12-14 Ingredients:300g plain flour3g fast-action instant yeast60g caster sugar90g tepid whole milk (will work with plant-based milk, too, to make it vegan)80g tepid water1 tbsp vegetable oil Plus:Black gel food dye100g red bean pasteExtra water and plain flour Put the flour, yeast and sugar in a large bowl (or stand mixer, if using). Stir together. Add the milk, water and vegetable oil. If using a stand mixer, knead the bread with the dough hook attachment until smooth and elastic. If working by hand, use a spoon to stir the dough into a rough mass, then turn out on to a floured surface and knead by hand until smooth and elastic. Tear off a small piece of dough (about 30-40g) and knead in black gel food dye, until the colour is well distributed. Place the doughs into separate oiled bowls, and cover with cling film. Leave for about an hour, or until about 50% increased in size. Divide the plain dough into 12 38-40g pieces. To shape the bao, use your fingers to press a piece of dough into a small circle (thinner at the edges than the centre). Then spoon a teaspoon of red bean paste into the centre. Gather the edges upwards and press together to seal in the filling. Turn the bao smooth side up. Try to make sure the surface is as smooth as possible. It helps to rotate the bao while pressing the palms of your hands together, to ensure it is nice and tall to start with (as it will spread sideways when steamed). Brush the bao with a little water, then attach small pieces of black dough to create the panda’s face. Ensure the ears are stuck on well by squeezing firmly to attach them to the white dough. Place the finished bao on a small square of baking paper, and place in a bamboo steamer. Cover lightly with cling film or the steamer lid. Repeat, but don’t overcrowd the buns in the steamer, as they need space to rise. Leave the bao to rise for about 30 mins (it may be much quicker or longer, depending on the room temperature), until about 50% bigger than their original size. Heat a pan of water until just starting to bubble, then turn down to the lowest heat setting and place your bamboo steamer on top of the pan (ideally, the steamer will fit on top without a gap). Wrap the lid in a tea towel, then fit over the base (this soaks up any steam, preventing it dripping on to the bao). Don’t open the lid while steaming. Steam for 10 minutes, then turn off the heat and leave in the steamer for five minutes. Remove the lid and eat the bao straight away.