Born in Salford, Eccleston, 55, trained at the Royal Central School of Speech and Drama in London. He starred in the 1996 television series Our Friends In The North and was nominated for a Bafta. In 2005, he was cast in Doctor Who as the ninth Time Lord. He has just published a memoir about his father called I Love The Bones Of You. Divorced, he has two children and lives in London. When were you happiest?Now. I am father to Albert, seven, and Esme, six. I’ve never experienced happiness as complete as caring for them. Which living person do you most admire, and why?Elsie Eccleston, my mother, for her emotional intelligence, kindness, intense curiosity, and chicken and leek pies. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?Not listening and insisting on being heard. What was your most embarrassing moment?Trapping my foreskin in the zip of my corduroy jeans when I was 14 and having my brother Keith release it; it took two hours. I was in an agony of existential embarrassment because, shortly before my brother came in, I’d been doing what teenage boys do and was surprised, pulled the zip up and nearly circumcised myself. I bear the scar to this day. What makes you unhappy?Greed, hypocrisy and lies. What is your most unappealing habit?Greed, hypocrisy and lying. Also, speed-eating leading to flatulence. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you?The mother of my children once said that I dance like I’m straight out of the box and recently assembled. What single thing would improve the quality of your life?A little more spiritual enlightenment. What do you most dislike about your appearance?How long have you got? I am not anorexic now – but I would say dysmorphia is still very present. To whom would you most like to say sorry, and why?To my children, because their mum and dad’s relationship failed, and I know that has caused them great sadness. What does love feel like?I think I’ve only really experienced it on a parental level, and it feels like the rhythm of nature. Have you ever said ‘I love you’ and not meant it?No. What has been your biggest disappointment?Falling off the stage in the third preview of Macbeth at the RSC. How often do you have sex?It’s not been a vintage year. What is the closest you’ve come to death?During my severe clinical depression in 2016. I was at Piccadilly station in Manchester and a train was coming. What has been your closest brush with the law? In about 1986, I spent the night in the cells for being drunk and disorderly. What song would you like played at your funeral?Hot Legs by Rod Stewart: I’m going to be cremated. How would you like to be remembered?As a loving father. • For help and advice on eating disorders in the UK, contact Beat on 0808 801 0677; in the US, contact the NEDA on (800) 931-2237; and in Australia, contact the Butterfly Foundation on 1800 33 4673. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.org.