There’s something vainglorious about trying to sum up a city in a book. (I know: I’ve tried it.) The idea that you can bend something so vast and multiple, with so many aspects and trajectories, into an overall story, requires some chutzpah. It is still more difficult if you give yourself a historical sweep, from foundation to the present. In what meaningful way is modern London like its Roman zygote? Both are, or were, trading cities, you could say, with an associated culture of openness, but not much more than that. One approach is to be avowedly personal and restricted in range, as in Nairn’s London, in which the alcoholic architecture critic Ian Nairn rhapsodised about his favourite landmarks and pubs. Another is the fine The London Encyclopaedia, first published in 1983, which offers information without the pretence of narrative. Or you can try something like Peter Ackroyd’s weighty London: The Biography, which presents itself as a sequential work but is best read as an encyclopedia of a personal kind, something you can dip in and out of. At 339 pages, Simon Jenkins’s A Short History of London is a low-calorie Ackroyd, in which the author’s interests and beliefs similarly make themselves felt. His version of London history is more political, literary and architectural than, say, social or technological. He is centre-centric: although he promises to look at the city’s outer suburbs, he does so lightly. His preferred theme is the continuous rivalry and interplay of business and government, represented respectively by the City and Westminster. It is no bad thing to be reminded that Piccadilly Circus and Covent Garden were nearly swept away He is sceptical of the journalistic tendency to announce crises and of the governmental tendency to announce plans to “solve” them, an instinct that makes him somewhat blase about current housing problems. He underplays such momentous state interventions as Joseph Bazalgette’s 19th-century installation of a city-wide sewage system. He prefers the earthy wisdom of a Samuel Pepys or of ordinary Londoners to the theories of officials and experts. The strongest part of the book is that most personal to Jenkins. His formative years as a journalist were at a time when the great postwar project of reconstruction, of clearing swaths of urban fabric to build mass housing and large roads, was foundering on the opposition of residents and conservationists. Jenkins reported and campaigned on the side of the resistance. His sympathies remain clear now. Some projects of this period, in the 1960s and 70s, now inspire nostalgia and revisionism. The Barbican complex, which Jenkins detests, is now loved by many and listed for its historic and architectural interest. Its fans wouldn’t recognise Jenkins’s description of it as depopulated and lifeless. Other modernist housing developments – Kate Macintosh’s Dawson’s Heights in East Dulwich, Neave Brown’s Alexandra Road in Camden, Powell and Moya’s Churchill Gardens in Pimlico – are similarly valued. There is renewed appreciation for a period when affordable housing could be built in large quantities to confident and (in the best examples) thoughtful designs. For Jenkins, though, the dominant story of these times is one of politicians and public bamboozled by planners, transport engineers and, especially, architects made rigid by Corbusian dogma. He celebrates the reaction – the preservation of Covent Garden, the introduction of conservation areas in 1967, which Jenkins describes as “a planning tool with greater impact on London’s appearance than anything in its history”. I’d quibble with his animus against 60s architects – it was politicians who incentivised both the building of tower blocks and the use of flawed industrial techniques to build homes. Some of the early criticisms of modernist excesses were from within the profession. Jenkins claims that architects never apologised for their mistakes: my own memories of the aftermath of this period is that they were agonised by self-flagellation. But it is no bad thing to be reminded that St Pancras station, Piccadilly Circus and Covent Garden were nearly swept away, along with countless numbers of old streets that could have been cost-effectively repaired. Or that a “motorway box”, a sort of inner M25, was going to be driven through the city. No amount of misty-eyed concrete-lust can alter the fact that these were truly terrible ideas. Jenkins tells these stories well, as he does the ways in which property developers got stupendously rich by manipulating naive government planning policies. Jenkins’s handling of the preceding two millennia is clear and informative. Perhaps inevitably, it can get sketchy and sometimes lapses both into disconnected lists of events and into cliche. Do we really need to be told again the Samuel Johnson saw that a man who is tired of London is tired of life? But there are also nuggets and insights – for example, that hostility to the accumulation of wealth is not new: at the time of the South Sea bubble in 1720 it was demanded that bankers be “tied up in sacks filled with snakes and tipped into the murky Thames”. A great book, if a less publishable one, would offer a fuller account of those crucial postwar decades. What we have is a hybrid – an accessible history that is, if a little skimpy, efficient, clear and readable. • A Short History of London: The Creation of a Wealth Capital by Simon Jenkins is published by Viking (£25). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99