I have acted as presiding officer at many local and national elections and referendums. I do not believe there is any justification for imposing photo ID requirements on electors (Conservatives accused of suppressing voters’ rights with photo ID plans, 14 October). As you have reported, there is no evidence that “personation” is a significant issue. One angle that hasn’t received attention is how the people who work in polling stations might feel about it. If such a requirement is imposed, I will not put myself forward for further polling station duties. I disagree with the proposal, and also I do not want to spend my time arguing with voters about the quality of their ID. Polling station work simply does not pay enough to make such disputes worthwhile. Such a requirement would, I believe, open up an area for confrontation between polling staff and electors. It would also impact on turnout. If there is an issue to be solved in our electoral system, I believe measures to increase turnout, particularly in local elections, would be a better use of resources. I hope the practical considerations of the task that would be imposed on polling staff will be taken in to account during any debate on this proposal.Graham TurveyKempston, Bedfordshire • The government’s pretext for introducing voter ID requirements is a flimsy excuse for the well-known Republican and Trumpian tactic of voter suppression, and is a denial of a basic democratic right. (Ironic considering how dedicated this government is to respecting democracy, but only of course when it gets the result it wants, as in 2016.) It would be perfectly reasonable if, as a matter of course, all citizens had been issued with ID cards – but that is not the case. I only hope that outrage among those affected, or even the possibility the government has misjudged the way the newly disenfranchised would have voted, will come back to bite it.Adrian CoskerHitchin, Hertfordshire • I share the deep concerns about the implications of requiring voter photo ID but, in terms of disenfranchisement, this is nothing compared with the effective disenfranchisement of a very high proportion of voters through the first-past-the-post (FPTP) system. We urgently need to address this by a reform of the electoral system to one based on proportional representation, preferably a single transferable vote. One argument often put forward against this is the fear of it leading to unstable government. With the fragmentation of voting blocs that we have been witnessing, this is surely no longer a valid argument – FPTP has not led to stable government in recent years! We need a reform that will make people feel that their vote does count, and that does not make voting so meaningless in many constituencies.Laura JonesLangley, Cheshire • New research from the British Election Study shows the UK is heading into the most unpredictable and volatile general election seen in decades (Johnson’s desperate for a general election, but he faces an unpleasant surprise, theguardian.com, 10 October). The situation is made worse by a voting system that turns our elections into a rigged lottery. As Professor Rob Ford tells the Guardian: “Tiny shifts in votes can upset an avalanche of seats, with no relation between the national vote and number of seats won.” Westminster is now isolated among advanced democracies for using FPTP – a decrepit, binary voting system – for its main elections. In fact, Westminster is isolated even in the UK – Scotland and Wales use proportional voting systems and are reforming politics, whether through expanding the franchise to 16- and 17-year-olds in Wales or involving voters in democratic reform through Scotland’s citizens’ assembly. If we’re to truly restore faith in politics and move power away from the Westminster system, we have to move our processes into the 21st century. To open up those dusty corridors to the diversity, skills and experience of the country – with proportional representation and a modern, fully elected, parliament that we can be proud of.Josiah MortimerHead of communicationsElectoral Reform Society • I heard my MP, Rebecca Pow, say on TV that voter ID is a good idea. Obviously, she has not given much thought to the consequences of the proposed policy (The real voter fraud is this government’s new ID plan, Journal, 16 October). Perhaps she would like to accompany me to the polling station at the next election and explain why someone who has voted in every election since she was 21 (I am old), served as a councillor for 20 years, had the honour of being mayor and experienced the challenge of being a parliamentary candidate, may be refused her democratic right to vote because she is unable to produce a passport or a driving licence.Jean HoleTaunton, Somerset • The government wants to introduce voter ID checks to “protect our elections”. Does this mean there has been wide-scale voter impersonation in previous elections? If so, then surely any recent ballot where the difference between the votes was less than 5% must be declared invalid and untrustworthy. Votes like the referendum, where the difference between remain and leave was less than 4%.Leon DuveenWorksop, Nottinghamshire • If only the Tories were even half as zealous in tackling tax fraud.Pete DoreyBath, Somerset • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition