What were you hoping for?A fun evening with someone nice. First impressions?She looked stylish. What did you talk about?Living in London/Brighton, bad housemates, our jobs, travel stories, why we like cycling, and how good at her job Crystal the server was. Any awkward moments?When I dropped guacamole in my drink – I don’t think she noticed, though. Good table manners?Excellent. Best thing about Olivia?She’s fun, and she introduced me to negronis. Would you introduce her to your friends?I would be happy to. Describe Olivia in three wordsFriendly, stylish, funny. What do you think she made of you?I think we got on well, and she said I was a sweetie at the end of the night, so I’ll take that. Did you go on somewhere?I had a train to catch. And... did you kiss?We didn’t kiss. A peck on the cheek when we said goodbye. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I would have probably put the band in another room. It was quite hard to chat with someone playing the drums 6ft away. They were very good, though. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?I’d be happy to if our paths crossed. What were you hoping for?A sudden romance or exciting crush. First impressions?Big business guy. He wanted to order steak for starters and steak for main. What did you talk about?He was a great conversationalist. We spoke about everything from bikes and terrible flatmates to Naples and negronis (he had his first that evening). Any awkward moments?There was some great live music, but there was a period where we couldn’t hear what the other was saying without leaning in quite intimately. I think I’m an awkward queen, though. Good table manners?He was up for sharing food, which I rate. But he got up to go to the loo while I was still eating. Best thing about Patrick?He had really great chat, asked thoughtful questions and was interested in loads of different things. Would you introduce him to your friends? Not as a love interest. Describe Patrick in three wordsCurious, open-minded, fun. What do you think he made of you?He probably thought I was a weirdo. Did you go on somewhere?No. I had work early the next day and he needed to get to Brighton. And... did you kiss?A friendly peck. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I would probably have made the date a different night so we could have gone on somewhere. It’s difficult to know after one dinner. Marks out of 10? 6 as a love interest. The night was a high 9. Would you meet again?We didn’t swap numbers. • Patrick and Olivia ate at the Curtain, London EC2. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com