Celtic regained their place at the top of the Premiership with a sizzling 6-0 rout of Ross County. Mohamed Elyounoussi fired the home side ahead from 16 yards in the fourth minute and the champions pummelled their opponents for the rest of the half but somehow failed to add to their lead. Four goals in 10 minutes at the start of the second half from Odsonne Édouard, Callum McGregor, a header from the French striker which went in off Ross County’s Liam Fontaine, and James Forrest’s goal in the 54th minute blew away Ross County. Elyounoussi added the sixth from close range in the 72nd minute to leave the men from Dingwall devastated. Celtic had taken only one point from their previous six before the international break to trail Rangers by two points but this was Neil Lennon’s side back to their best, albeit Steven Gerrard’s men get their chance to go back to the summit against Hearts at Tynecastle on Sunday. Jeremie Frimpong, the 18-year-old full-back, started his first league game and Tom Rogic was in for the suspended Ryan Christie as the champions began the match in whirlwind fashion. Elyounoussi had already had a drive saved by County keeper Ross Laidlaw when, following another slick move, he guided the ball in to the far corner of the net. Ross County, with Josh Mullin and Ross Draper back in the team, had to go into survival mode. Laidlaw made saves from Édouard and Forrest before a low drive from the French striker following a McGregor corner was cleared off the line by defender Richard Foster. Édouard was again denied by Laidlaw after he barged his way into the County box, with Elyounoussi missing the target from the rebound. From another Celtic corner, Foster cleared a header from Christopher Jullien off the line and the visitors breathed again. Moments later, a flowing move involving Édouard, Boli Bolingoli and Elyounoussi ended with McGregor smacking the post with a shot and Édouard knocking the loose ball wide, before he again tested the overworked Laidlaw with an effort. Celtic made sure there would be no nervy second-half as they blitzed County from the beginning. Within a minute Édouard took advantage of a mistake by County’s Keith Watson to slip in his 10th of the season before he set up McGregor to run through and confidently knock in a third. Then, in the 50th minute, Édouard’s header from Forrest’s cross hit Fontaine on its way in and the crowd was still catching its breath when Frimpong’s cut-back was lifted high into the net by Forrest from six yards. Vakoun Issouf Bayo replaced Édouard in the 65th minute and from his cross Bolingoli’s shot was redirected in by Elyounoussi to complete a sparkling performance. It took another good save by Laidlaw to stop Bayo making it seven when he broke clear late in the match. Lennon spoke in glowing terms of his charges afterwards. “It was exhilarating at times,” he said. “I put a challenge out to the players at half-time and they responded with a volley of goals. That’s the most complete performance we’ve had since I returned here and close to the most complete I’ve had as Celtic manager.”