As full league debuts go, Ben Wilmot’s was the stuff of dreams. The defender spent the second half of last season on loan at Udinese in Serie A, playing against Juventus and Milan at San Siro, but there was arguably no better surround for Wilmot to score his first career goal. The Swansea defender, borrowed from Watford for the season, scored the only goal of the game here as Swansea overcame their bitter rivals Cardiff. Wilmot, making his first league start in a Swansea shirt in place of Joe Rodon, the Swansea boy born up the road from this rocking stadium, headed in a Wayne Routledge cross as Swansea earned derby victory over their south Wales rivals. Steve Cooper, who geed up his fans approaching five minutes of stoppage time, had steered his side to a priceless victory against a Cardiff team who remain without an away win this season. This match, the 108th meeting between the teams, was never going to be short of needle; not so long ago away fans were banned from attending this fixture and, 10 years ago at Ninian Park, the game was halted after coins were thrown on to the pitch. After a fairly tetchy start Cardiff invited Swansea to build momentum, with the goalkeeper Neil Etheridge off-colour, including a poor clearance that led to Bersant Celina trying his luck from halfway. Etheridge, who also allowed a routine back pass to trickle under his feet, dived to head Celina’s shot away, though the goalkeeper insisted he made no contact with the ball. Then, from a corner that Swansea played short, Routledge dinked a cross into the box and Wilmot, who drifted towards the penalty spot unmarked, glanced a deft header into the corner of Etheridge’s goal. Cardiff were static, Swansea ecstatic as the stadium erupted and Wilmot wheeled away towards teammates warming up by the corner flag in celebration. Swansea deserved to double their lead and Andre Ayew almost punished another Cardiff defensive lapse but headed over unmarked from a Matt Grimes corner. Ayew is Swansea’s highest earner, his wages of around £80,000-a-week astronomical at this level but the striker was arguably the difference, a constant menace to Sean Morrison, the Cardiff captain who required strapping on his wrist after falling awkwardly early on. Cardiff, by comparison, were blunt and lacked a focal point with Robert Glatzel ineffective. Ayew was the catalyst for Swansea and, seven minutes before the interval, his cross created chaos in the Cardiff box, with Joe Bennett almost inadvertently scoring past his own goalkeeper before Etheridge scrambled the ball to safety, bear hugging his defender in the process. Morrison was presented with Cardiff’s best sight of goal, forcing Freddie Woodman into an instinctive stop, while Glatzel’s replacement, Omar Bogle, at least gave Mike van der Hoorn something to think about. Woodman had to be alert to keep out Gavin Whyte’s volley at the back post after a dangerous Joe Ralls delivery but a supercharged Swansea held on.