Northamptonshire police have sent officers to the US to interview the woman who claimed diplomatic immunity following her alleged involvement in the death of Harry Dunn. The 19-year-old died when his motorbike crashed into a car driven by the American Anne Sacoolas outside RAF Croughton in Northamptonshire on 27 August. “Yesterday the family were told the police had passed their file to the [Crown Prosecution Service] yet tonight were informed that the police were travelling to the USA to interview Mrs Sacoolas,” the family’s spokesman, Radd Seiger, tweeted. “Those two statements appear to be contradictory on the face of it further compounding the family’s misery.” Dunn’s parents, Charlotte Charles and Tim Dunn, will on Tuesday meet the shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry, who is expected to call for a parliamentary inquiry into the teenager’s death. On Monday, Dominic Raab, the UK foreign secretary, told the Commons he had commissioned a review into immunity arrangements for US personnel and their families at RAF Croughton in light of the case. Raab said there were “no barriers to justice being done” for Dunn. He also said the UK government believed diplomatic immunity “clearly ended” for Sacoolas, 42, when she left the country for the US shortly after the crash. He added it would be for the Crown Prosecution Service and police to decide what steps to take, telling MPs he was not aware of any obstacle under the UK/US extradition treaty. Dunn’s parents have cancelled a meeting set for Wednesday afternoon with Nick Adderley, the chief constable of Northamptonshire police, after it became clear his intention was not to answer a series of key questions the family had scripted, Seiger said. News agency PA Media was told the force’s chief contacted the family to “provide clarity” that the meeting would be only a private and personal visit to express condolences. Announcing the decision to cancel the meeting on Twitter, Seiger said: “The time for condolences has long since passed and the answers to the many questions about Anne Sacoolas’s departure and next steps are long overdue! “Every moment that passes without those answers only compounds the family’s pain and misery. Totally unacceptable!” Charles and Tim Dunn travelled to the US last week in an attempt to put pressure on authorities to return Sacoolas to the UK. The visit included talks at the White House with President Trump, during which the family was told that their son’s alleged killer was in a nearby room and prepared to meet them. They refused the meeting, insisting such an encounter take place in Britain.