The black and yellow stripes on Manchester City’s away shirts were meant to be an uplifting homage to Manchester’s cultural heritage, but the choice of design now risks becoming a chip on the team’s shoulders. The team’s jersey is embroiled in a controversy after Ben Kelly, the man who originally designed the stripes for famed Manchester nightclub the Haçienda, complained in a recent interview to Gaffer magazine that he was not credited or consulted by the creators of the football apparel. When Manchester City and Puma launched the team’s 2019/20 kit last July, they said in a press release that the uniform paid tribute to the “Madchester” years of the late 1980s and early 1990s, when the city in north-west England became a hub of alternative music and dance culture. According to them, the stripes on the shirt’s right shoulder were inspired by the iconic graphic identity of the Haçienda; they described the venue as a “legendary cultural icon that was the heartbeat of the city”. During the 15 years the venue remained active before it was forced to shut down in 1997, the Haçienda was sponsored by New Order and hosted a number of heavyweight artists including the Smiths and Madonna. Kelly, who was the Haçienda’s interior designer, told Gaffer that the nightclub “was quite empty when it first opened” and that its most successful phase followed the surge of celebrity DJs, house music and ecstasy. Even though the venue was long reviled for its association with drug consumption and violent crime, Manchester City football club’s acclamation of the Haçienda is a sign that its cultural impact still reverberates. “All of those things came together in the Haçienda and it went mental … It’s a space that changed people’s lives. It sounds like a cliché but it’s true,” Kelly said. “There’s not a week that goes by in my life where I don’t get a phone call from someone, somewhere in the world – students, journalists, a fan, whoever – asking about the Haçienda,” he added. The black and yellow stripes featured on the nightclub’s columns are among Kelly’s most iconic creations, to the point of being duplicated in a football jersey decades after its inception. “Design copyright is all you have as a designer … Ultimately, I can’t copyright stripes. I would be a very rich man if I could,” Kelly said. “I’m looking at it and now I’m thinking, ‘Let’s put stripes on a ball and kick that bloody thing around,’” he joked. Kelly says he thinks Manchester City’s decision to feature his work without his prior knowledge is “beyond appropriation”, and he believes he could have provided invaluable insight in the design of the jersey. “It could have been beautiful,” he said. Puma declined to comment on the issue, and Manchester City’s press office told the Guardian that “Puma sought the necessary copyright to use the Haçienda in reference to the away kit”. The team’s Haçienda-inspired shirt is sold online for £65.