England are poised to name their new head coach for the men’s national team, with Chris Silverwood widely expected to emerge as the successful candidate. Ashley Giles, the director of England cricket, has spent the weekend mulling over who should replace the now departed Trevor Bayliss and is believed to have plumped for the man who has spent the past two years as the team’s fast-bowling coach. Silverwood, 44, may be well known to the setup in his current role but has always had designs on the top job, having previously been head coach at Essex and masterminded the county’s first championship title for 25 years in 2017. Such credentials were cited by Giles back in February when he talked up Silverwood as a contender for the impending vacancy and stated his desire to appoint an Englishman given just one, Peter Moores, had been full‑time head coach (twice) in the past 20 years. So while Gary Kirsten flew in from South Africa for an interview last week boasting a strong CV at international level, and other overseas hopefuls including Ottis Gibson and Andrew McDonald were similarly considered, the original home-grown frontrunner has seemingly won out. The decision may have been less clearcut had Alec Stewart, the Surrey director of cricket, not withdrawn from the process because of family commitments. Kirsten, who is down to coach Welsh Fire in the Hundred next year, had also expressed reservations over the schedule. Confirmation of Silverwood would see England able to make an immediate fresh start when they travel to New Zealand at the end of the month, a tour of five Twenty20s and two Tests that he was already down to oversee in an interim capacity had Giles not completed the recruitment process in time. While he maintains a low profile, the former Yorkshire and England seamer is highly regarded in the current setup and not least by the Test captain, Joe Root, who has encouraged him to take a more central role in team talks and meetings over the past 12 months. The pair’s growing relationship will define how the Test team fare in the coming years, with Root looking to challenge for the World Test Championship and regain the Ashes in 2021‑22. Eoin Morgan’s limited-overs team have T20 World Cup campaigns in 2020 and 2021. Graham Thorpe is expected to remain as batting coach, leaving two assistant roles now vacant. Paul Collingwood has previously held one of these on a contract basis and may now be appointed full-time, while Silverwood’s expected promotion will leave a vacancy overseeing the bowlers.