Aston Villa ruthlessly swept aside an injury-hit Norwich City to move out of the bottom three and leapfrog their opponents in the Premier League table. It was the first time Villa have scored five goals in an away Premier League fixture since they won 6-0 at Derby in April 2008. Aston Villa’s record signing Wesley struck with two early goals as the visitors won in emphatic fashion, and were ahead after just 15 minutes. The £22m striker has come in for criticism since his move and had just two goals from seven matches before the trip to East Anglia, but the Brazilian struck again on the half-hour mark to really spark Villa. “I can’t criticise him, I thought he was a handful,” Villa’s manager Dean Smith said. “He showed what we see in him and why we brought him to the football club. But he still has a lot of work to do to get better.” Wesley should have had a hat-trick just before half-time but his penalty - and rebound - were brilliantly saved by third-choice goalkeeper Michael McGovern on his first Premier League start. Villa only had to wait until three minutes after the restart for their third, with captain Jack Grealish scoring his first league goal of the season, before Conor Hourihane and Douglas Luiz added the gloss. Norwich managed to break through the Villa defence in the 87th minute, with substitute Josip Drmic scoring. The deadlock was broken after just 15 minutes when Wesley found himself in space in the centre of the box after a ball from Anwar El Ghazi, and he expertly controlled it on his chest before slotting home. Another error from Norwich in midfield gifted Villa another chance, but John McGinn’s effort went wide. The home side had their own opportunity soon after, with Tyrone Mings going to ground to deny Teemu Pukki. Villa doubled their lead when Wesley tapped home a Hourihane cross from between Norwich’s centre-backs for his second of the match. But Northern Irish goalkeeper McGovern made a brilliant double save in the 39th minute to deny Wesley the chance to complete a first-half hat-trick from the spot. The 35-year-old dived low to his right to save the penalty and then stood up to prevent the rebound crossing the line too. Three minutes after the restart Villa hit their third. Grealish played a clever one-two with El Ghazi before hitting the ball into the bottom corner. Norwich’s task was made all-but impossible in the 61st minute when Matt Targett won the ball back just outside the box before letting Hourihane take the shot, which he expertly struck into the goal for Villa’s fourth. The visitors did not let up as the second half progressed, with substitute Luiz scoring arguably his side’s best goal of the game in the 83rd minute, a curled effort from outside the box and past the outstretched McGovern. Norwich managed to pull one back in the closing stages when substitute Drmic pounced on a defensive error from Mings, challenged goalkeeper Tom Heaton for the ball and rolled it into the empty net. “We will need to take a good look at ourselves,” said Norwich’s captain, Ben Godfrey, after a dismal afternoon for the club that finished 18 points ahead of Villa last season.