‘I’m Danny Dyer and this is The Wall – the ultimate game of risk and reward!” So begins the newest chapter of Britain’s most unexpected national treasure, and the moment is notable for a couple of points. The first is that, as he says this, Dyer somehow manages to manspread extravagantly, despite standing alone on an empty stage the size of an aircraft carrier. And, second, The Wall is definitively not the ultimate game of risk and reward. Rather, it’s an identikit, luck-based Saturday night BBC One gameshow, which means it doesn’t even scrape into the top nine tenths of risk v reward. Going outside in October without an umbrella is risk v reward. Brexit is risk v reward. Committing to a poo before checking for toilet paper is risk v reward. This is just a barely warmed-up version of one of those convoluted parlour games they used to pad out the results of the National Lottery draw. It could quite easily have been presented by Shane Richie, or Jason Manford, or Rylan, or a spoon with a face drawn on it. But we wouldn’t be talking about The Wall if it was presented by any of those people. Instead, it’s presented by Dyer, which makes it infinitely more fascinating. What a turnaround Dyer has had. It wasn’t so long ago that, as the star of dreck like Run for Your Wife, he was the biggest joke in town; a swaggering, puffed up, straight-to-DVD nimrod who flip-flopped between bad films and worse documentaries, coasting along on an unearned fart cloud of errant self–mythology. Unless you were there at the time, it’s hard to imagine what a mess Dyer was. Even if you were, it’s still fun to revisit via the medium of Mark Kermode’s film reviews. But then came EastEnders, and Who Do You Think You Are?, and Love Island, and Calling David Cameron A Twat On The Telly, and we as a nation now find ourselves in the uncomfortable position of actually liking Dyer. His self–awareness has emerged. His edge has been dimmed. His rough and ready demeanour has softened into something approaching charm. He is now, undoubtedly, a celebrity. As a result, Dyer finds himself elevated to the point where broadcasters offer him the sort of nothingy vanity project usually lobbed at the likes of Sue Perkins or Joanna Lumley. This explains this year’s Danny Dyer’s Right Royal Family curio. In time you assume it will also explain The Wall. The Wall is based on an NBC gameshow of the same name, one that has been variously described as ‘an addictive combination of trivia, chance and interpersonal anguish’ and ‘gross and unfulfilling’. There’s a giant four-storey pachinko board that randomly gives or steals various amounts of money to people while they test their ability to recollect basic trivia. That’s it. There is nothing clever or new about The Wall. It will not change the way you see the world. It will not become anyone’s favourite show. It will exist, and then it will disappear, and then you will forget about it completely. But you will watch it, and the reason you will watch it is Dyer. The sheer vibrating Dyerness of Dyer on The Wall is something to behold. Within the first three minutes, he repeatedly exhorts “let’s get on with it” to nobody in particular, like he just wants this to be over so he can go and watch an illegal stream of a football match on an iPad with his hands down his trousers. He tries to emotionally empathise with the contestants by bellowing in their faces. At one point he shouts – and I can’t rule out the possibility of this being eventually engraved on his tombstone – “GIVE US LOADS OF READIES YOU MUG”. For the sake of clarity I should point out that he shouts this at a wall. Dyer doesn’t even get to ask the questions on The Wall, for that task is taken by The Dispassionate Voice Notes of Angela Rippon. Instead, he just clomps around the stage, getting arbitrarily furious at walls. It’s almost overwhelmingly stupid. Realistically, Dyer doesn’t need to be on The Wall at all. The show would move along just as well without him. But the fact that he is there, and that he ends up being the only thing you care about, might make The Wall his greatest professional achievement yet. The Wall starts on BBC One at 8.35pm on 12 October