Pat Brown will further his Twenty20 education by playing for Melbourne Stars in the second half of Australia’s Big Bash League. The 21-year-old Worcestershire seamer, who is down to make his international debut in England’s opening Twenty20 against New Zealand, has signed up to replace South Africa’s Dale Steyn midway through the campaign. With next October’s Twenty20 World Cup being played in Australia, the deal for eight group fixtures and any knockout games that follow represents a golden chance for Brown to experience the conditions and press his claims to make England’s 15-man squad. It also continues the upward career trajectory of a seamer who first shot to prominence back in 2018 when he finished up as the leading wicket-taker in the T20 Blast with 31 victims from 16 games as Worcestershire went on to lift the trophy. After recovering from a stress fracture last winter, the right-armer’s 2019 Blast campaign was less profitable with 17 wickets. But he still shone on Finals Day as the Rapids finished runners-up, before Birmingham Phoenix made him a local ‘icon’ for The Hundred draft with a £60,000 contract. On top of speeds in the mid-80s and a well-honed off-cutter, Brown’s mastery of the knuckle-ball – a slower delivery that wobbles through the air – is a significant point of difference, earning praise from England’s captain, Eoin Morgan, at the start of his first international tour. “His skill level is certainly up to scratch and since he’s arrived [in the England set-up] he’s impressed,” said Morgan. “He’s a proper athlete and a modern-day cricketer who can do everything. His variations are his strength. Having faced him in the nets, his knuckle-ball is not that easy to pick. “For such a young guy he’s taken to leading Worcestershire’s attack with great responsibility and clarity.” England meanwhile are waiting to discover the full extent of the ankle injury that saw Joe Denly ruled out of the Twenty20 series opener at Hagley Oval. The 33-year-old batsman, who is also part of the Test squad, rolled the joint while taking a high catch during training on Thursday. He will be assessed by the medical staff over the weekend.