At the state funeral of Winston Churchill, one of the pallbearers was Clement Attlee, his wartime deputy. The massive TV audience witnessed a deathly frail Attlee stumble as the lead-lined coffin was carried up the steps of St Paul’s Cathedral. It was a mark of their deep mutual esteem that Churchill had asked for Attlee to be one of his bearers and Attlee had insisted on performing the honour despite his ill health. Thrown together in the dark hours of 1940, the two men forged the cross-party coalition that saved their country from the menace of Nazism and then, when Hitler was done, contested each other at the ballot box for mastery of postwar Britain. In this terrific account of an extraordinary double act, Leo McKinstry rightly contends that their relationship was “unprecedented in the annals of British politics”. A five-year wartime partnership between two leaders, followed by a decade of peacetime competition between them, is unlikely to be repeated. One of the author’s easiest tasks is painting the contrasts. Churchill was charismatic, buccaneering, humorous, impulsive, inclined to lachrymosity, often erratic in his conduct of government and employed his genius with the English language to rouse the nation at its time of gravest peril. He was always the largest character in any room. Attlee was shy, dry, taciturn, cautious, even-tempered, orderly, unsentimental, never a captivating orator and often dismissed as a nonentity. “A funny little mouse”, as Clementine Churchill called him, he spent much of his life in the shade of more obviously gifted contemporaries. The self-effacing socialist was a man of radical politics, but conventional tastes. The flamboyant Tory was a man of conservative politics, but a romantic temperament. His friend FE Smith once remarked: “Winston is easily satisfied with the best.” Churchill, whose extravagance often put him on the edge of bankruptcy, liked to holiday on the French Riviera. For the austere Attlee, it was Frinton. Churchill loved to sit up late with his cronies consuming prodigious amounts of alcohol; Attlee’s favourite evening drink was a bedtime cocoa with his wife, Violet. Churchill believed, from a very early age, that he “walked with destiny”. He was not surprised to find himself prime minister, only that he had to wait so long. Until it happened, few thought Attlee had it in him to lead Labour to a landslide election victory in 1945 and then preside over a radically reforming government that would change Britain for decades to come. The contrasts, vivid though they were, ultimately mattered less than the deeper commonalities that bonded them. Both had a great love of their country that expressed itself in a profound patriotism, but not a narrow nationalism. We can only guess what Attlee would make of Jeremy Corbyn or Churchill of Boris Johnson, but you have to doubt that they would be impressed. Both had backgrounds as social reformers, Churchill as a Liberal cabinet minister under Lloyd George, Attlee as a welfare worker in the East End of London. Both had strong marriages that sustained them through the bleak stretches of their careers. Both were rather accidental leaders. Attlee secured the Labour leadership mainly because of the vices of more trumpeted rivals. Churchill became prime minister, despite the great reservations of many Tories, because there was no other figure of stature on their benches who had not been discredited by appeasement. Both were infused with a humanity that allowed them to appreciate the qualities of the other man. Attlee played a pivotal role in guaranteeing that Churchill took the helm after the fall of Neville Chamberlain, ensuring that Britain was led by the ideal wartime prime minister. The Labour leader did so in the face of resistance in his own party because of Churchill’s previous crusades against socialism. He later explained: “What once earned him the reputation of being a reactionary and a warmonger was the same quality that enabled him to save civilisation from the greatest dangers it has ever faced.” Even during the most harrowing chapters of the war, when Britain knew only defeats and Tory intriguers schemed to replace Churchill, Attlee was staunchly loyal. Churchill had earned that fidelity. In the interests of forming a coalition with as much support as possible, he invested Attlee with considerable authority in the novel constitutional position of deputy prime minister and was generous in the allocation of cabinet posts to Labour. The presence of Labour ministers running big domestic departments responsible for the economy, workforce and postwar reconstruction helped establish the party’s fitness for power in the minds of voters. That their partnership survived all the vicissitudes of war “was partly a reflection of Churchill’s greatness and partly of Attlee’s patience”. They did row at times. On one occasion, Churchill speechified to the cabinet before declaring: “Well, gentlemen, I think we can all agree on this course.” Attlee tartly interjected: “You know, prime minister, a monologue by you does not necessarily spell agreement.” Both had a capacity to raise their eyes about the petty squabbles of partisanship in the service of the national interest At the 1945 election, Churchill was conveyed on a national tour in sumptuous style by special train and limousine. Attlee was driven around by his wife in their humble Hillman saloon. The contrast between the grand Tory patrician and the modest Labour man of the people now worked to Attlee’s advantage in a Britain that wanted a more equal society. That campaign was acrimonious, but there was never between them any of the vicious personal antipathy that flowed between Disraeli and Gladstone or Asquith and Lloyd George. Churchill let fly with fiery denunciations as the Attlee government founded the NHS and expanded the welfare state. Yet when the Conservatives returned to power in 1951, it was a measure of both Attlee’s achievements and Churchill’s good sense that his One Nation Tory government did not seek to dismantle Labour’s postwar settlement. Dual biographies are a tricky endeavour. McKinstry rises to the challenge brilliantly. His account is elegantly structured, his prose is lucid, he explains complex events with clarity, his anecdotes are telling and often funny, his judgments are assured and he brings to gripping life the characters of the leading men and the rest of the cast. While never blind to their flaws, he rightly finds huge amounts to admire in both men. “If Churchill was the giant of the war, Attlee was the hero of the peace.” I suppose you could argue that we don’t need telling that these were titans. What we might need help remembering is why. In war and peace, both had a capacity to raise their eyes above the petty squabbles of poisonous partisanship and fix their gaze on the wide horizon in the service of the national interest. At a ceremony in Churchill’s honour, held shortly before they both retired from the front rank, Attlee delivered a glowing tribute to the man he called Britain’s “daring pilot in extremity”. When a Conservative MP referred to the Labour leader as “silly old Attlee” in Churchill’s presence, he erupted with a thunderous response: “Mr Attlee… played a great part in winning the war. Mr Attlee is a great patriot.” Surveying the stunted political leadership that blights contemporary Britain, there is some consolation in remembering a time when giants guided the destiny of this sceptred isle. This review is from the Observer • Attlee and Churchill: Allies in War, Adversaries in Peace by Leo McKinstry is published by Atlantic Books (£25). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99