If England are going to beat New Zealand in Saturday’s semi-final, they could be well served taking a trip down memory lane, revisiting tactics used 16 years ago by another England team that had profound consequences for a Rugby World Cup campaign. England defence coach John Mitchell should remember them well. He was All Blacks coach on a night in Wellington where Sir Clive Woodward’s team put on the ultimate go-slow to achieve England’s second Test victory on New Zealand soil. The momentous result helped fuel the belief required for the Red Rose to annex the World Cup in Australia, five months later. During their 15-13 win, where England at one point defended its goal-line against a series of five-metre scrums despite having two players in the sin bin, the visitors consistently frustrated the All Blacks by stopping the game at every opportunity. By full-time, there had been 18 injury or other breaks in play forced by England, which had seriously impeded New Zealand’s ability to burn off its opponent through the sheer pace and continuity of the All Black game. Fast forward to 2019 and England, this time with Mitchell in its bunker, face another All Blacks team whose game revolves around speed. The high tempo, high energy strategy remains, as potent now as it was then, as the All Blacks showed to see off South Africa before blowing away Ireland. For Sevu Reece and George Bridge, teaming up at the back to cause mayhem playing off Beauden Barrett, read Doug Howlett and Joe Rokocoko, the fleet-footed try-scoring assassins of the 2003 cast, being fed by the sorcery of the Barrett-like Carlos Spencer. After spending their night in Wellington hard on the brakes, the All Blacks spent much of the rest of that year on fast forward, running up large scores against almost everyone they met, in a not dissimilar manner to how this year’s class has run amok, averaging 55 points per match since the opening Bledisloe. Mitchell’s men were ultimately stopped in the semi-finals of their World Cup by his current boss. Eddie Jones’ Wallabies did a job on their All Blacks counterparts at the breakdown to stop their game flow and reverse a 50-pointer suffered against the same opponent four months earlier. Australia had been written off before that game, but came with a plan, executed it well, and it was the All Blacks who were ultimately burned. Some rules have changed between then and now. Others are applied a little differently, but a core maxim hasn’t: the best way to win a game is by denying your opponents their strengths. Dictate the game, don’t let them play, and the odds in your favour increase dramatically. England excel drawing their opponents into an arm wrestle. Jones and Mitchell also know it is the type of rugby the All Blacks have been shown to be the most vulnerable trying to combat in recent times. The selection of the ‘kamikaze kids’ in the loose trio appeared from the start to have, at least in part, the All Blacks in mind, with the England coach knowing that the Sam Underhill/Tom Curry combination had the potential to stifle his opponent’s breakdown, in the same manner as the Phil Waugh/George Smith partnership did when Jones last plotted New Zealand’s World Cup downfall. England will also look to be smarter with their field kicking than either South Africa or Ireland. They both rolled the dice with kicks that too often were poorly executed and weren’t contestable, effectively inviting the All Blacks dangermen at the back to carry against a fractured chase line. Boot the ball 10 rows back into the stand, as Jonny Wilkinson did so expertly all those years ago, and the All Blacks can’t restart quickly, which will ensure England’s defensive line is well set when they do. England has a greater variety of attacking threat than Ireland, and are better equipped to chase down points if they fall behind, but it seems unlikely Jones would want to try to go toe-to-toe with the All Blacks in a full-throttle, stoppage-free spectacular, unless he had to. Great viewing it would be, for sure, but probably not England’s best chance of success. If England are to bring the All Blacks to heel by managing the speed of the game, they will need their new generation of big men to reprise the roles of Lawrence Dallaglio and Martin Johnson from the previous world-conquering team. Who are going to be the tough troopers who will impose themselves both physically and mentally, do the work, not give an inch, and grind down their more athletically skilled opposition? If England find the answer to that, an upset is on again. Achieve it and England could have the world at their feet. 