While I would never look down on someone just because he’d been to Eton, there are times in Nicholas Coleridge’s memoir when one’s appetite for tales of the gilded life is sorely tried. Committee man and genial godhead of the Condé Nast magazine empire in its pomp, Coleridge swans and swanks about his Arcadian years with just enough self-deprecation to save him from being insufferable. But it’s a close-run thing. Equipped with the instincts and enthusiasms of a good journalist, he knows how to tell a story and when to move things along. The best part of The Glossy Years doesn’t involve his career at all – it’s his schooldays, usually the period of a memoir I find least involving. Born into a Forsyte-ish clan of moneyed patricians (his father was chairman of Lloyd’s), Coleridge describes his time as a deeply unpromising prep-school boy with a Waugh-like sense of the ludicrous. Without a gift for anything but scripture, “I was soon firmly embedded in the dimwits’ stream, along with barely English-fluent sons of ambassadors and a pair of bedwetting twins”. Later, at Eton, he and his great pal Craig Brown, another divinity scholar, slip bogus verses “from Isaiah or Ezekiel” into their essays and get a big tick from teachers who don’t bother to check the sources. Happy days and so long ago (early 1970s) that their other mate Charles Moore, future biographer of Mrs Thatcher, was canvassing for the Liberals. And how about this for a reminder of those barely credible times? Having squeaked into Trinity College, Cambridge, to read theology, Coleridge is invited by the master to a meet-and-greet for the alumni of “the top public schools”, where champagne is served. It transpires there are two more such parties, the second for those from the lesser public schools and grammars, where it’s red and white wine. The third is for the state sector, who would be served beer and cider. “It says a lot about us – and nothing good – that I don’t remember any of us finding anything odd in this arrangement.” It says quite a lot about Coleridge’s honesty that he mentions this at all. Many wouldn’t have. He is quite a strange mixture: in one way, the signet-ringed toff, in another, the raffish bohemian – like his hero David Bowie he took mime lessons from Lindsay Kemp. One detects a strain of camp in him not standard issue for his class. The combination won him admirers. At Harpers & Queen, he was taken under the wing of the inimitable Ann Barr (though he somehow fails to namecheck her beloved parrot, Turkey) and later helped Tina Brown transform Tatler from the in-house mag of deb-collectors and dowager aunts into a sleek, new “upper-class comic”. His cheek and his connections propel him onward. Hired by the Evening Standard as a feature writer, he got his first story at a birthday party in Windsor Castle, not among the chinless guests but by disguising himself in cap and uniform to hang out with the chauffeurs downstairs as they bitched and gossiped about their bosses. I had forgotten that it was Coleridge who also got the “14 pints a day” scoop from William Hague. Eventually, the siren call of the glossies lured him back: “I have always liked magazine people, with their defining characteristics of faddishness, alertness and a predilection for diva-like behaviour.” The feeling has plainly been mutual. As he rises to the top of the tree at Condé Nast, a blizzard of name-dropping sets in; the tone becomes more diplomatic and the book somewhat less interesting. For all his mischief, Coleridge is a company man right down to his (I’m guessing) monogrammed underpants and he won’t risk offending his influential circle. He isn’t a scintillating portraitist, even when his heroes are on view. He gets to see Bowie at Wembley and has this to say: “The show was brilliant, he played all the classic tracks.” He also has a bit of a tin ear. He recalls that the late GQ style editor John Morgan, who was gay, teetered on the brink of coming out “but never quite took the plunge”, an unfortunate expression, given the tragic thing about Morgan was that he fell or jumped to his death from his flat. He is gracious in paying tribute to his various PAs, nannies, colleagues, friends and wife (a psychic healer). And it’s hard to resist his Woosterish amiability. I was once leaving a London party with a friend, the exit being a long walk down to the road. As we set off, a chauffeur-driven Daimler stopped, the passenger door opened and Coleridge popped his head out: “Can I give you a lift?” We were perfect strangers but he budged up and we got in. I don’t recall anything we said – only his pinstripe suit, a mirthful air and a grin like a friendly alligator’s. • The Glossy Years by Nicholas Coleridge is published by Penguin (£25). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99