Despite a couple of serious bumps in the road, Jonjo O’Neill Jr is in the lead in the race to be champion conditional jockey, which is the main ambition this winter for the young star of the jumps weighing room. A combination of suspension and injury means he has missed two months since the season began back in spring but he is fit again and full of determination as the quality chasers and hurdlers return to Britain’s tracks. There is really nothing to be said for breaking your jaw, as the 21-year-old did in a fall at Southwell in August. But O’Neill points out that, if that hadn’t happened, and if he hadn’t been given a 19-day totting-up ban by the stewards in May over whip use, he would have had more winners this summer and would then have lost his conditional status when his licence renews next month. “The way it’s worked out has just been lucky,” he reflects on a rare day when he has no business at the races. “I nearly would have ridden out my claim by now. Everything does happen for a reason.” Continuing that theme, O’Neill notes that he may not have been a jockey at all, as he showed early promise as an open-side flanker in rugby and was keen to take it further. “I played for Cheltenham College’s first team and then I was going to do trials, for Gloucester and a couple of others.” Illogical as it may seem, what tipped him towards racing was a nasty riding incident that sent him to hospital. At the age of 17, O’Neill took part in the famously fearsome Dromin-Athlacca charity ride in County Limerick, in which dozens of the brave and foolhardy take on a 15-mile course of fences, ditches and dry stone walls. “It’s like hunting without the hounds, they just jump from field to field. It was good fun, but I broke my leg,” recalls O’Neill, an attitude that confirms he belongs in the weighing room. He came to grief at a bank, the top of which was slathered in mud after being traversed by a large number of others. His mount slipped over the top and both ended up in the ditch on the other side. “It was just one of those things. Wouldn’t happen any other day.” Phlegmatic though he was, the injury effectively ended his time in rugby, because of the missed playing time and the bulk he lost as a result. After his leg healed, he set his mind on jump racing and began to attract attention as an amateur the following year. Even with the support of his famous father, the original Jonjo, who trains many of the winners that young O’Neill rides, the path to success has hardly been smooth. He suffered a grievous hand injury while gaining experience of riding in France a couple of years ago, as a result of which there were k-wires supporting his ligaments for months. Not long after his return, a fractured vertebra sent him back to the sidelines for most of 2018. But when he got a clear run last winter, there was no stopping him. O’Neill got a lot of attention for landing the Lanzarote Hurdle on the 16-1 shot Big Time Dancer. A first success at the Cheltenham Festival, on Early Doors in the Martin Pipe, helped build his reputation. Now his focus is on the conditional title which got Bryony Frost so many headlines when she won it in April. Frost is now a fully fledged professional, so O’Neill’s main rival is Connor Brace, based just a few miles away at Fergal O’Brien’s stable. Whatever happens, the two young men have promised not to fall out over it. “He’s one of my best friends. I had dinner with him last night. We never really talk about it.” Musselburgh 1.20 Not On Your Nellie  1.50 Ollivander 2.20 Tarboosh 2.55 Jewel Maker  3.25 Montatham (nap) 4.00 Tamleek  4.30 Luna Magic Windsor 2.00 Hermocrates 2.30 Twice As Likely 3.05 Tambourine Girl 3.35 Spanish Star 4.10 Skyman 4.40 Dawry 5.10 Be More Yarmouth 2.10 Freshwater Cliffs (nb)  2.45 Donnybrook 3.15 Society Lion  3.50 Dreamboat Dave 4.20 Lord Howard  4.55 Swiss Cheer 5.30 Stallone Wolverhampton 5.25 Precious Plum  5.55 Be Ahead 6.25 Tucson 6.55 Zafaranah  7.25 Untouchable Beauty 7.55 Scoffsman  8.25 Forbidden Dance