Jamie Joseph has hit out at Scotland for threatening legal action against World Rugby if the typhoon approaching the Tokyo area forces the cancellation of the fixture against Japan in Yokohama on Sunday, saying the hosts want the game to go ahead just as much as their opponents. The Japan head coach made a statement before he announced his team to face Scotland, saying he had been unhappy with articles he had read in the preceding three days and comments he had heard. “These reports have undermined the significance the match holds for Japan,” he said. “We have won three Tests so far and put ourselves in the best position in the pool. I would like to remind everyone that this is not a fluke but is down to a lot of hard work by a number of people. “This team has been in camp for the last 240 days. While the majority of the players are professionals with company-based teams, as a rugby team Japan is amateur. Other than $100 a day [expenses], no one gets paid for being in camp. I will let you guys do the maths and make comparisons with other teams. “Everyone in our camp, players and staff, want to play the match against Scotland. We all want to earn the right to be considered one of the elite teams in the world. It is important for us to wake up on Monday and understand we are a worthy top eight team or not good enough. My team is motivated by achieving something that is great, not avoiding an embarrassment.” Hogg; Seymour, Harris, Johnson, Graham; Russell,Laidlaw (capt); Dell,  Brown, Nel, Gilchrist, Gray, Bradbury, Ritchie, Thomson. Replacements: McInally, Reid, Fagerson, Cummings, Wilson, G Horne, P Horne, Kinghorn The Scottish Rugby Union issued a statement after World Rugby announced it would decide whether the match would be played after the damage from the typhoon was known, saying it expected contingency plans to be put in place. There were reports they would consider legal action if the organisers stuck with their protocol of not moving a called-off match to another day. “All the talk of legal proceedings around something uncontrollable like a typhoon ignores how significant this match is for us,” said Joseph. “I would say it is the most significant in our history. We have never made the quarter-finals before and we have never beaten Scotland. We want to have the chance to achieve those firsts, but we know it will be difficult against a good, experienced team. “We have worked very hard to get the team to where it is. The best players in the world, and I would include the All Blacks in that, are able to adapt and influence when it really counts. It is labelled as cheating by some, but good players are able to do it and that is what we have given ours. What we have now is a real team.” Joseph restored Michael Leitch to the captaincy after giving the flanker a break from the duty to allow him to concentrate on his game.