Pep Guardiola admitted his Manchester City players were “nervous” as they were beaten by Wolves at the Etihad Stadium thanks to two goals from former Barcelona player Adama Traoré. The 23-year-old – who began his career under Guardiola at the Camp Nou – scored twice in the last 10 minutes in a reverse that leaves the champions eight points behind Liverpool, having lost twice already in their opening eight matches. That represents their worst start to a season since 2013/14 under Manuel Pellegrini, although the current manager admitted it is best not to look at the table due to the chasm. “It was a bad day, sometimes it happens,” said Guardiola. “We started quite well and after we conceded two situations in our build-up where it’s impossible to defend, we got a little bit nervous. We controlled them better in the second half but at the end with us attacking and people up front, we lost balls in positions [where] it is so difficult and they were clinical. Before that we hit the post, but the way we played was not good. It was not a good day.” Pressed as to why City were nervous Guardiola said: “It sometimes happens. We spoke about this: ‘Come on guys, a lot of games [still] to play, we did it [last season] and we’re going to do it again’. We lost to a good team that were really well-organised, good physicality, strong in the air and so fast on the counter-attack. We knew it.” Of the deficit to Liverpool he said: “It is a lot of points. They didn’t drop points [due to] many circumstances. I had a feeling we were not quite bad. Today was the day we create less than the other matches, even in the loss at Norwich we create a lot. “We face many teams defending with deep systems and more or less we found a way to do it but today we had a problem. It is better not to think that one team is eight points ahead.” Guardiola remains trustful of his players. “I know these guys,” said the Catalan. “Still they are incredibly involved [committed] and can do it. What happened, happened. Most of the teams who won [the Premier League] in the past, the year after, don’t win [unlike his City]. Today was the day not our level. The previous games were good. But the distance is big. I know that. Liverpool is not dropping points. But we are in October, still a lot of games and competition. Nuno Espírito Santo, the Wolves manager, said: “I am very proud, it was a very good performance.”