Former US television morning news show host Matt Lauer allegedly raped a colleague in 2014, according to a new book by journalist Ronan Farrow. In the book, Catch and Kill, Farrow reports that Lauer, the longtime face of the NBC Today show, assaulted former NBC News employee Brooke Nevils at the Sochi Olympics. Nevils told Farrow that Lauer penetrated her in his hotel room, despite her repeatedly declining sex. Lauer, who was fired from NBC in November 2017 after the network received a complaint from one of his colleagues about inappropriate sexual behavior, denied the allegations in a statement, saying the report “defied common sense”. The allegations in Farrow’s book are the first time the specific rape accusation has been reported. Variety  obtained a copy of the book ahead of its release on 15 October. In the book Farrow also alleges NBC News prevented him from publishing a story about alleged sexual abuse by former film executive Harvey Weinstein. Farrow ultimately published the story in the New Yorker in October 2017. Nevils told Farrow that she was covering the Sochi Olympics when Lauer invited her to his hotel room. She had taken six shots of vodka, Farrow writes, but “had no reason to suspect Lauer would be anything but friendly based on prior experience”. Once in the room, Nevils said Lauer pushed her onto the bed, “flipping her over, asking if she liked anal sex”. Farrow writes: “She said that she declined several times.” “Lauer, she said, didn’t use lubricant. The encounter was excruciatingly painful. ‘It hurt so bad. I remember thinking, Is this normal?’” Farrow continues, according to Variety. “She told me she stopped saying no, but wept silently into a pillow.” Lauer then asked her if she liked it. She told him yes. She claims that “she bled for days”. Nevils told Farrow that she had sex again with Lauer in New York after the alleged Sochi assault. She said she had told multiple people about the incident, but said she was concerned about the influence Lauer could have on her career. In a letter provided to Variety and published elsewhere, Lauer denied Nevils’ account. “It is categorically false, ignores the facts and defies common sense,” Lauer said. “I had an extramarital affair with Brooke Nevils in 2014. It began when she came to my hotel room very late one night in Sochi, Russia. We engaged in a variety of sexual acts. We performed oral sex on each other, we had vaginal sex, and we had anal sex. Each act was mutual and completely consensual,” Lauer said. “The story Brooke tells is filled with false details intended only to create the impression this was an abusive encounter. Nothing could be further from the truth. “There was absolutely nothing aggressive about that encounter. Brooke did not do or say anything to object. She certainly did not cry. She was a fully enthusiastic and willing partner.” Farrow writes that after Nevils reported the incident to NBC News, her “work life became torture”. In a statement released on Wednesday, NBC News said it had acted swiftly after receiving a complaint in 2017. “Matt Lauer’s conduct was appalling, horrific and reprehensible, as we said at the time. That’s why he was fired within 24 hours of us first learning of the complaint. Our hearts break again for our colleague,” it said.