With a sixth Formula One world championship tantalisingly close, Lewis Hamilton has been studiously careful in taking nothing for granted going into Sunday’s Mexican Grand Prix. He can close it out at the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez but expects a tough task on a track he has called the achilles heel of his Mercedes team. For Hamilton, then, this is another challenge on his march to the title but for the man who created this circuit, every meeting here is a moment to savour with pride. Hamilton goes into the race 64 points ahead of his teammate Valtteri Bottas – the only two drivers still in the running. A 78-point lead after the race would be enough for the world champion to retain his title. He won his last two championships in Mexico but only with a ninth place in 2017 and fourth in 2018. Mercedes have not won in Mexico since Hamilton took his sole victory at the track in 2016. Hamilton’s team have struggled here following the 2017 regulation changes. The thin air at altitude in Mexico City reduces downforce and cars with strong aero qualities can take advantage. Red Bull’s Max Verstappen has won the last two races, while the long straights play to Ferrari’s engine strengths. Hamilton knows this stacks up against him. “Mexico is our achilles heel, our worst race of the year, so it is going to be a tough one for us,” he said. “The last few have been pretty shocking, even though we’ve won the title here. I think it’s going to be very hard to beat the Ferraris.” The circuit is a hurdle to his title hopes – for this weekend at least – but its very existence and composition is a story of perhaps the unlikeliest evolution of a track in F1 history. The 93-year-old Óscar Fernández, is looking forward to attending on Sunday. The Mexican will be an honoured guest of the promoters who have recently installed a plaque at the track honouring him. Recognition only lately publicly conferred on Fernández who designed this circuit as his university thesis in 1953. “I am very proud of the track,” he says. “But I have never received anything from the government, they have not recognised me for over 60 years, that I was the designer. Recently the newspapers found me and revealed my thesis and from that moment the world knew. Now a lot of people see me and say: ‘You are Óscar Fernández, the guy that designed the track’. You can’t imagine how proud I feel.” Having worked with his father on cars while growing up he went on to study civil engineering and wanting to combine the two fields, decided to design a race track to conclude his degree. “I went to Indianapolis to study it and the Avus circuit in Berlin, and studied as much as I could from books,” he explains. What followed was, by modern standards, the almost fantastically implausible creation of Mexico’s first purpose-built track. The university had no one they deemed qualified to evaluate the thesis, so Gilberto Valenzueal, the director of Mexico City’s public works, was asked to do so. “He found it so interesting at the end of the examination he said: ‘What about if we make it?’” recalls Fernández. “I said: ‘OK, let’s do it.’ So the government did, based on my thesis.” Defined by its glorious 180-degree banked turn Peraltada, the track was immediately popular with drivers and fans alike. The fearsome corner has been truncated for safety reasons in its modern incarnation but the passion that Fernández’s design inspired has never gone away. F1’s first championship race here was in 1963 and it is sold out this weekend, as it has been almost continuously since returning to the F1 calendar in 2015. The fans still flock here every year and the promoters, who have extended their contract to 2022, have a success story many soulless, empty meetings can only envy. “When I was a youngster we had no races at all,” says Fernández. “This track was the first one in the country and in Latin America. The whole of Mexico wanted to see race cars, the people of Mexico love the race.” The very first race here was in 1959, the Mexico City 500 Miles, and it remains Fernández’s favourite. It was, appropriately, won by Pedro Rodríguez with his brother, Ricardo, in third, Mexican heroes whose later untimely deaths while racing led to the circuit being named in their honour (hermanos means siblings). Hamilton described the track this past week as unique and Fernández repaid the compliment by placing him in exalted company indeed. “My favourite driver was Jim Clark, he was so good,” he says. “Nowadays it is Lewis Hamilton who is the great driver.” For Fernández, every race here is a celebration and Hamilton will hope that he may yet share in the Mexican fiesta on Sunday.