The Betterment sounds like a four-day Californian wellness retreat where everyone floats about in white, floor-length linen and a hose is sporadically placed up your bottom to wash out all the bad juju. The Betterment sounds like a Gwyneth Paltrow home-learning seminar series, where for $800 you can learn six life-enhancing ways to arrange a radish plate. The Betterment is, in fact, the new restaurant from Jason Atherton, who, like the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, now also has an empire that the sun never sets on. Atherton is everywhere in London, and he’s in Shanghai, Dubai, Doha, New York, Cebu and St Moritz, too; doing everything all of the time, excelling at innovative, dramatic cocktails and luxury dining that doesn’t befuddle. He spreads himself thin and aims big, never truly messing up, and never looking anything less than bushy-tailed and dapper in public. This has led me to wonder if there are three, or possibly four, Jason Athertons out there, and if so, one of them is hellbent on incessantly winding up his former employer, Gordon Ramsay. This may well be why Atherton’s newest place is directly opposite Ramsay’s ironically titled Lucky Cat, which I’d rather dine on a Felix duck and lamb in jelly wet pouch than visit again. More sensibly, Atherton is a master at choosing and delegating to great staff. Here, chef Paul Walsh, ex of City Social, and the diligent front-of-house team make what could have been a stiff, corporate-focused, fine-dining borefest into a thoroughly acceptable night. In any other top-name chef’s mitts, The Betterment, inside the The Biltmore hotel on Grosvenor Square, could be a horrible mess, regardless of the steak tartare with beef dripping croutons the size of roast potatoes or the very delicious onion “flower” with chive emulsion (it’s a deep-fried onion, splayed to resemble a sort of floral octopus, with fancy mayo, and definitely a must-order). Nevertheless, the Biltmore is the sort of hotel no one who is remotely from Planet Earth ever stays at. It’s a vast, showy, 251-room, 57-suite luxury, Hilton LXR collection, Mayfair rich-person’s mothership, close to Selfridge’s, where the rooms start at £600 a night and you’d stay only if money was simply an airy concept over which you heard other people worry. The Betterment, to be blunt, is a slice off the back end of this. In fact, if you’re sitting in its very prettiest, starriest section – al fresco, under heaters, romantically lit, next to an Instagram hotspot greenery wall – it will strike you after a while that you’re essentially sitting in a repurposed car park, watching hotel guests arrive and leave. Some of the inside tables, closest to the front of the hotel, are awful, like a drab, grey breakfast room. But I did enjoy The Betterment, and I would go back. It is a new place with old-school glamour, with receptionists in off-the-shoulder LBDs and handsome, besuited males foisting warm sourdough and salted butter under your nose, following on from a cocktail containing something strong with Dubonnet and Silent Pool gin and named Tea Time With The Queen. With dinner, I drank the cheapest Can Sumoi Xarel·lo at £12 a glass, and well aware that this was possibly disappointing for the sommelier. Our meal is much more hearty than the menu suggests, because on paper it is a cacophony of snow pea, langoustine crudo and horseradish velouté. In actuality, chalk steam trout and potato cake with curry sauce is a tarted-up fishcake in a puddle of light, coronation-style liquor: delicate, fishy and finickity in design, but still dinner. John dory with a sauce of coco de Paimpol beans and bordelaise sauce is really very little to get het up about. Short-rib with Montgomery cheddar does exactly what it promises: it is an assertive, umami-heavy, emotional battering of bone marrow-encrusted, meaty, cheesy decadence; if you have that with the fried onion and some of The Betterment’s “chips”, which are fried in beef dripping and come with a ketchup laced with truffle, you may find yourself in need of a sedan chair. This won’t be aided by a slice of the generously portioned dark chocolate tart with glorious, deeply scented Tahitian vanilla ice-cream, which I thought to be world-class. Jason Atherton may not have opened the best restaurant in the West End of London this year, but he has opened a more delicious one than Gordon Ramsay. The battle isn’t over, but this time Atherton has got The Betterment of him. • The Betterment 44 Grosvenor Square, London W1, 020-7596 3200. Open all week, lunch noon-2.30pm, dinner 6-10.30pm. About £70 a head à la carte, plus drinks & service. Food 7/10 Atmosphere 7/10 Service 7/10