Andy Murray’s comeback continued at a surprisingly swift pace in Beijing as he backed up Tuesday’s victory over US Open semi-finalist Matteo Berrettini by edging Britain’s Cameron Norrie 7-6(6), 6-7(4), 6-1 to reach his first ATP 500 quarter-final since he sobbed into his chair in Washington last August. Ever since Murray returned to singles competition in August after his hip resurfacing surgery in January, the Scot has been determined to approach the unlikely extension of his career with sober caution. He is putting no pressure on himself and expects nothing. Just last week in the Zhuhai Championships, an ATP 250 event, after an encouraging three-set battle with in-form No 31 Alex de Minaur, the 32 year old made himself clear. “The level in Beijing is a little bit higher in terms of the quality of players, so I’m not playing Top-20, Top-30 tennis right now, I’m probably playing Top-70, Top-60, sort of level. So it’s not going to be that easy for me to win matches there,” he said. By no means has it been easy, but Murray badly underestimated himself. After Murray’s 7-6(2), 7-6(7) win over big-serving Berrettini, Norrie also forced the former No 1 into two tiebreak sets, but the match-up could not have been more different as Murray relied heavily on his variety of shot to see him through lengthy, grinding points that tested his movement and durability. “I’m tired, I just had a sleep before coming,” Murray told the ATP. “I’m really tired. That’s the first time I’ve had to do that since I came back... It’s something that I need to kind of get used to again, especially playing at this level and that intensity.” After failing to serve out the first set at 5-3, Murray recovered to take the first set on a tiebreak. In the second set, it was 24 year old’s turn to squander a 5-3 lead, but he showed similar resilience to recover and take the second set on a tiebreak. It was in the seventh game of the second set that the most telling point of the match occurred. At 4-2 0-15 to Norrie, the pair played a brilliant 37-stroke rally , with Murray dictating throughout and then finishing off with a slick volley winner. Norrie had covered more ground, but as he immediately returned to the baseline, already preparing to serve, Murray was bent over and gasping for air. Murray has made a career out of breaking his opponents, but this time he was broken. Murray never recovered physically from that single rally. He spent much of the rest of the match barking towards his team and telling them he was physically finished. But his cries have never stopped him from winning. Looking dead on his feet, Murray recovered after the second set and blitzed his countryman in the final set with aggressive, efficient tennis to see out the win. Even now, five tournaments into his comeback, it is still difficult to tell what the future holds for Murray. It has been striking that his main impediment at this level has not been his hip or his movement. He simply lacks match fitness after restarting his singles career without a proper period of fitness training and only nine matches under his belt. It shows both in his physical fitness and his inability to consistently maintain his level. Both will be pushed to the limit, and should really be exposed when he faces Dominic Thiem in Friday’s quarter-final. The No 5 beat wildcard Zhang Zhizhen 6-3, 6-3 to reach the last eight. No matter how rationally Murray approaches the rest of his career off the court, what will never change is his inexorable chase for perfection once he steps into a match. After holding his nerve to win the first set, Murray sat down into his seat with a scowl on his face and curses on his mind. “Poor, very poor,” he said, shaking his head towards his team. It was absolutely not poor. But the entire reason he is still out there, still pushing himself to the limit and still succeeding, is because he always wants more.