Counter-terrorism police are leading an investigation into a series of stabbings at the Arndale shopping centre, Greater Manchester police have said. Five people were stabbed and taken to hospital in the attacks on Friday morning, according to North West Ambulance Service. GMP said “multiple people” had been injured in the incident, and that a man in his 40s had been arrested on suspicion of serious assault and was being questioned. In a statement, GMP said: “In these early stages we are keeping an open mind about the motivation of this terrible incident and the circumstances as we know them. “Given the location of the incident and its nature, officers from Counter Terrorism Police North West are leading the investigation as we determine the circumstances.” MI5, the domestic security service that leads on counterterrorism investigations, is also monitoring events in Manchester following the stabbings. Video footage and photographs showed armed police officers deployed around the Exchange Square side of the shopping centre. One clip showed officers using a Taser and holding a man to the ground before arresting him. In other clips and pictures posted on Twitter, a large number of emergency service vehicles were seen arriving at the centre. It is unknown whether the attacks have resulted in any fatalities but an ambulance service spokeswoman said paramedics had treated four people. Footage showed people being taken away on stretchers, and members of the public were asked to stay away from the shopping centre. It is unknown whether any of the attacks have resulted in fatalities but a spokeswoman for North West Ambulance Service said paramedics had treated four people. People were seen being taken away on stretchers and members of the public were asked to stay away from the centre. Armed police officers wearing face coverings were stationed outsidethe shopping centre as a long queue of ambulances arrived and a police helicopter hovered overhead.Plainclothes detectives arrived at the scene while uniformed officerstold people the Arndale would be closed for some time. A shop worker, who gave his name as Jordan, told the PA Media news agency: “A man was running around with a knife lunging at multiple people, one of which came into my store shaken with a small graze. “Soon after, security staff told all retail staff to close their doors and move the public to the back of the stores.” Jordan, 23, who has been working at the centre for only a few months, said the attack took place on the ground floor. Freddie Houlder, 22, from Market Drayton, was also in the centre when he heard “a load of screams just outside” the shop he was in. He said a woman came inside and told others “a guy just ran past the shop and tried to stab me”. Houlder added: “Luckily she had quite a thick jacket. She thought originally it was a fake knife because of how easily it grazed off, but police came in and said it was a real knife and she burst into tears.” He said he was evacuated several minutes later. The UK’s threat level is severe, meaning an attack is highly likely. In recent days, there have been suspected terrorist attacks in France and Germany, but other incidents in the UK suggest motives can be hard to determine in the immediate aftermath. Placing the north-west counter-terrorism unit in charge of the investigation of the Manchester stabbings is a precaution at this stage. Rapid inquiries into the person in custody will determine whether it stays in the lead, or whether the incident passes back to regular police.