Frances Hardinge is on dazzling form in Deeplight (Macmillan), a fantasy adventure of gods, monsters and mythology. On the islands of the Myriad archipelago, street urchins Hark and Jelt scavenge the deep waters of the undersea for relics of long-dead gods. A dangerous discovery challenges the boys and their friendship to the very core. Hardinge is best known for Costa book of the year The Lie Tree, which was grounded in Victorian society, but here the freedom of an entirely imagined landscape showcases her staggering originality. A masterclass in world-building. It’s a brave debut author who writes their novel from a first-person viewpoint and in a phonetic dialect, but Liz Hyder does just that in Bearmouth (Pushkin) – and pulls it off. Since early childhood, protagonist Newt has lived in the oppressive darkness and hard labour of Bearmouth mine. The arrival of new boy Devlin lights a spark of “revolushun”, kickstarting a gritty but thrilling tale of power and rebellion. Don’t be fooled by Newt’s naive voice; the novel becomes ever darker as the nightmarish conditions are exposed, including the threat of sexual violence. A bold, arresting first book. Award-winning children’s writer Kiran Millwood Hargrave makes her young adult debut in The Deathless Girls (Orion). It’s a prequel, of sorts, to Bram Stoker’s Dracula, the untold backstory of his brides, depicted here as sisters who are stolen from their traveller community. This isn’t a bloodthirsty horror book – indeed, Dracula himself makes only a cameo appearance – but a feminist origin story of sisterhood, fate and survival certain to bewitch teenage readers and beyond. In contemporary fiction, the #MeToo movement has sparked a run of excellent titles exploring gaslighting and coercion. Holly Bourne manages to make an intense topic utterly page-turning and relatable in The Places I’ve Cried in Public (Usborne), which chronicles an increasingly toxic and abusive teenage relationship through clever use of flashbacks. Jenny Downham’s Furious Thing (David Fickling) is equally powerful, revealing the impact of a controlling stepfather on a 15-year-old girl and her family. Elizabeth Acevedo became the first writer of colour to win the Carnegie medal earlier this year with her narrative verse debut The Poet X. Her second book, With the Fire on High (Hot Key), is another coming-of-age triumph, written this time in lyrical prose. High-school senior Emoni is mother to a toddler, struggling to balance school, family and her dream of becoming a chef. A resonant and nuanced portrayal of a young woman forging her own identity, enriched by complex female relationships and delectable descriptions of food. Finally, Katharine McGee serves up a soapy, escapist blockbuster in American Royals (Penguin). In an alternative US where George Washington became king, not president, the House of Washington is still going strong 250 years later. McGee doesn’t dwell on the politics; this is all about the drama, scandal and romances of the impossibly glamorous young court. An unashamedly frothy romp, and enormous fun. • To order any of these titles for a special price, click on the titles, go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99