In politics, feelings are powerful. We are used to the idea that politicians can harness our anger, or our fear, to get us to believe certain things and behave in certain ways. But more and more, it is not our anger or fear that politicians appeal to, but our exhaustion. Exhaustion has become a rhetorical weapon for both sides of the Brexit divide: from some Brexiteers embracing the slogan “Bored of Brexit, Pass The Deal”, to the remainers claiming that only revoking article 50 will avoid years of wrangling over our new relationship with the EU. Equally, it is a political cudgel against MPs (remain or leave) who refuse to take an “easy” way out of Brexit, demanding more time for scrutiny of the deal, or a more careful, deliberative process for the public to have their say. This works because Westminster seems to believe it. For political journalists, “Brenda from Bristol” remains a symbol of the public mood – “I can’t stand this – there’s too much politics going on at the moment,” she said when Theresa May called a snap general election in 2017. Knocking on Brenda’s door has become a strange new ritual for political journalists whenever new elections are rumoured. But with yet another general election six weeks away, exhaustion does not capture how we really feel about politics. In fact, the era of “too much politics” – which began after the 2015 general election – has seen a heightened level of interest in politics, reversing a sharp decline in the early 2010s. According to the Hansard Society, Brexit and the recent wave of elections have acted as “electric shock therapy” for political engagement. Recent months have also revealed the public’s willingness to consume politics: viewing figures for BBC Parliament have spiked, especially during key moments in the Brexit process. The public, on balance, actually welcomes the snap election. Across a swath of polling data, the most direct questions indicate that opposition to an election is running at just 20-30%, while support is in the 40s. There are nuances to this: in other polls, people narrowly back a referendum over an election, while remainers tend to be most favourable to having any electoral event (an election or referendum) take place. However, none of the data supports the idea that we are a nation of Brendas. Indeed, even in 2017 Brenda was an outlier: after Theresa May called the election, voters said it was the right thing to do by a 3:1 margin. Why, then, is Westminster so willing to believe that Brenda speaks for Britain? The first reason is that in recent years politicians and journalists have treated “apathy” as a key challenge to the political system in Britain. That began with the 2001 election and its very low turnout, and continued in 2015 with Russell Brand’s call for mass abstention. This way of thinking has dominated most political journalists’ careers, and has likely informed their view of how the average Briton feels about politics. The second is Westminster’s growing anxieties about its isolation from a “real Britain” outside London. Because national politics is so centred on the capital, political journalists fear that Westminster seems alien to the large majority who live beyond the M25. Giving prominence to the Brendas among us, then, is intended to show that political obsessives can understand how people feel outside the bubble. But in doing so it overcorrects, exaggerating public disengagement. Of course, rising public interest in politics doesn’t guarantee that turnout will increase or even hold up. Indeed, there are valid concerns about what a bleak midwinter election could do to turnout. Britain so rarely has general elections in winter that it is hard to judge. Research has shown that at council by-elections, which do take place throughout the year, turnout is between three to nine percentage points lower in December than in any other month. Yet with the heightened stakes of a general election, voters might feel it is worth the effort to brave the cold and the dark. The public, then, is still engaged with politics, and ready for whatever an election may bring. If anything keeps people away from the polls this winter, it’s more likely to be snow than “Brexhaustion”. Of course, we may eventually reach a point where political exhaustion does set in – but it may be that passions and fears over Brexit prevent that moment from ever arriving. At a time when the Brexit outcome has become so important to our political identities, can there ever really be “too much politics”? • Lawrence McKay is a PhD candidate in politics at the University of Manchester