Boris Johnson has planned an emergency Saturday sitting of parliament on 19 October to allow MPs to decide the next step forward after a European council meeting that starts two days earlier. Here are some of the options he could pursue. Should he secure a deal with Brussels, Johnson could put this to a vote in the House of Commons. If it were to pass, the UK would leave the EU on the terms he has secured on 31 October. Tell parliament he will abide by the Benn act in full after all and send a letter to the EU requesting an extension to article 50. This takes a no-deal Brexit off the table. There is also a theory that he could send a letter requesting an extension while also threatening to make the UK even more uncooperative with the EU in an attempt to make Brussels budge on his deal further down the line. Johnson could say he is going to ignore the Benn act and leave with no deal on 31 October. The opposition and leading anti-Brexit figures outside parliament would immediately begin legal proceedings against him. At the same time, Jeremy Corbyn could call a vote of no confidence in the prime minister and try to form a caretaker government. Show the Benn act is void because the government has come up with a legal loophole. Opposition MPs are convinced the bill is watertight. Hold a vote on no deal in parliament to see if he has support for it. The Benn act then falls away and it would show the EU the prime minister has full backing for such a move. However, this vote would not be likely to pass. Johnson could table a motion of no confidence in himself as prime minister using a one-line bill, which only requires a simple majority to pass. If he were to lose, opposition parties would have 14 days to find an alternative government. If they could not then a general election would be triggered. However, opposition politicians would still be worried a no-deal Brexit could happen and so are unlikely to support this. Go to the Queen to resign and suggest Michael Gove, Sajid Javid or Geoffrey Cox take over as prime minister as the Conservatives remain the largest party. Labour has previously said that if Johnson does this, the party would immediately send Corbyn to the palace to make his own representation.