Mauricio Pochettino said his team struggled to recover from the early blow of a serious injury to Hugo Lloris after Tottenham crumpled to a 3-0 defeat against a hugely impressive Brighton side. “Of course. We cannot lie,” the manager said. “To concede after two minutes then lose our captain was massive for the team. It was an emotional game. The team was affected, we started to play but never showed our real performance. I don’t want to take credit from Brighton but of course the team suffered a massive impact. “In the second half we tried to find a solution. But [at] 3-0 we saw there was nothing to be done in the game. I feel sorry for our fans, I want to say thanks for the effort to come here, we know how they feel, we are disappointed too. We need now to find a way to stay together.” Pochettino said Spurs will go into the international break in a state of mild shock after two crushing losses, defeat here following the shellacking against Bayern Munich in midweek. “In the last five days we were really punched by football, 7-2 and 3-0. You don’t feel good in those moments. We hope that the break will offer us a chance to change the dynamic and the energy.” It was also put to Pochettino that another defeat will lead to calls for change at the top. “I accept the criticism,” he said. “I don’t need to show my commitment. It is there after five and a half years. Of course pundits need to talk and have opinions. In my position I have to accept it, same as it is when we are praised.” For Graham Potter victory brought a sense of the season starting in earnest with a first home win. “You need luck, which we got with the first goal,” the Brighton manager said. “But overall I’m really happy with the performance. We defended well, attacked well, and when we made mistakes we recovered.” There was praise for 19-year-old Aaron Connolly, who scored twice. “Aaron gave us another dimension because that’s what his qualities are. He wants to run towards goal and he wants to score.” Potter said his team had not practised the move for Connolly’s second goal, a jink in from the left in a manner similar to one of Serge Gnabry’s efforts on Tuesday. “That’s coincidence,” he said. “We don’t tend to say to our players: ‘Be Bayern Munich players.’”