Barcelona’s attacking trident of Lionel Messi, Luis Suárez and Antoine Griezmann all got on the scoresheet for the first time together in a 3-0 win away to Eibar which took the La Liga champions top of the table for a few hours at least. Barça lead the standings for the first time this season on 19 points after nine games although Real Madrid, who have 18 from eight, can retake top spot when they visit Real Mallorca later on Saturday. Griezmann put Barça ahead in the 13th minute after a route-one move from his side. Clement Lenglet launched the ball from the heart of the defence to release the France forward, who calmly slotted inside the near post. The three forwards all combined for the next two goals in a sign that the trio are finally gelling after a stop-start season interrupted by injuries to Messi and Suárez. The latter brought the ball into the area for Griezmann to slide it across for Messi to score in the 58th minute. Griezmann was the architect of the third goal, rolling the ball from deep into the path of Messi, who then squared for Suárez to tap into an empty net in the 66th. Atlético Madrid’s frustrating La Liga run continued as Daniel Parejo’s stunning late free-kick earned Valencia a deserved 1-1 draw at the Metropolitano It had looked as if Diego Costa’s 36th-minute penalty would earn Diego Simeone’s misfiring side their second win in six league games aand put them back into back into third. Atlético dominated the first half but Costa and his strike partner, Álvaro Morata, both missed decent chances. Costa broke the deadlock when Denis Cheryshev was adjudged via a VAR check to have blocked a cross with his arm and the striker sent Jasper Cillessen the wrong way with his spot-kick. Valencia were more dangerous after the break and Russian striker Cheryshev spurned a great chance when he fired against the bar from close range. There was an edginess in the hosts’ ranks after Parejo’s dipping free-kick in the 82nd minute gave Jan Oblak no chance and Parejo went close to snatching the win late on. In Germany, Augsburg’s Alfred Finnbogason scored a stoppage-time goal to snatch a 2-2 draw against a wasteful Bayern Munich and deny them the top spot in the Bundesliga. Augsburg shocked Bayern with a goal after 28 seconds when Marco Richter volleyed in from a Rani Khedira header. Yet Bayern forward Robert Lewandowski continued his stellar scoring run to bring them level in the 14th minute, heading in a perfect Serge Gnabry cross for his 12th league goal. Gnabry, who also hit the post late in the first half, curled a superb left-footed low shot past Tomas Koubek in the 49th to give Bayern the lead and Koubek then made a string of superb saves to deny Kingsley Coman, Lewandowski and Philippe Coutinho. Thomas Müller could also have sealed a win for Bayern in the 90th minute but he fired wide and they were punished in stoppage-time as Finnbogason tapped in from a cutback to earn a point. Borussia Dortmund edged past leaders Borussia Mönchengladbach 1-0 thanks to Marco Reus’s second-half winner to cut the gap at the top to one point. The captain broke the deadlock in the 58th minute, slipping the ball through the legs of Yann Sommer for a goal that gave Dortmund their first win in four league games. Wolfsburg remained second after Wout Weghorst’s 82nd-minute equaliser rescued a 1-1 draw against RB Leipzig. This story will be updated