This quiche feels fresh and will remind you of summer, thanks to its key ingredient. Once roasted, the cherry tomatoes are packed full of flavour. Makes: one rectangular tart to yield five generous portions For the pastry:250g plain flour135g salted butter (cubed, room temperature)1-2 tbsp cold water For the filling:450g cherry tomatoes5 garlic cloves3 tbsp olive oil1 ½ tbsp balsamic vinegarSalt and pepper2 eggs250ml double creamA handful of basil leaves Plus:A few more basil leaves1 larger tomato1 nori sheetEdible glue (or similar) Heat the oven to 180C/160C fan/350F/gas mark 4. Grease a 36cm x 13cm (14in x 5in) rectangular tart tin. Prepare the filling. Halve the cherry tomatoes and chop the garlic into thin slivers. Place on a baking tray/roasting tin and drizzle over the olive oil and balsamic vinegar, then sprinkle on 2 big pinches of salt, and pepper to taste. Toss together a few times to combine. Roast for 45 minutes, checking halfway through to make sure everything is OK. Meanwhile, put the flour and butter in a large mixing bowl. Rub the butter into the flour using your fingertips. Add enough water to combine the pastry into a ball. Roll out the dough as thinly as possible on a lightly floured surface. Roll it loosely around a rolling pin, then drape it over the tart tin and press the pastry into all the edges. Trim the top of the pastry. Prick the base of the tart all over with a fork. Place in the freezer to chill for 10-15 minutes. When the tomatoes are ready, take them out of the oven and leave them to cool. Leave the oven on. Cover the tart tin with foil and fill with baking beads. Blind bake for 10 minutes with the foil on, then remove the foil and beads and bake for a further 10 minutes. Whisk together the eggs and double cream until just combined. Tear and add the basil leaves. Scatter half of the roast tomatoes over the base of the tart. Pour over the egg/cream filling and top with the rest of the tomatoes. Bake for 20-25 minutes, until just set (with a very, very slight wobble in the middle). Leave to cool for 10 minutes in the tart tin, then remove and transfer to a cooling rack. Top with a sprinkling of salt and pepper, a drizzle of olive oil and fresh basil leaves. Cut the bottom off the larger tomato so that it has a flat base, and place in a corner of the tart. Slice the removed section of tomato into two thin strips, and arrange to form arms. Cut eyes and a smile from the nori sheet, and secure on to the tomato using edible glue. Baking with Kim-Joy: Cute and Creative Bakes to Make You Smile is published by Quadrille. To order for £15.84 (RRP £18), go to bookshop.guardian.com or call 0330 333 6846.