There is a clear link between the provocative language used by ministers and other politicians and the increase of threats to public figures. Everyone knows it, which is why politicians of every stripe have asked urgent questions in parliament that all focused on Boris Johnson’s use of inflammatory language as a deliberate strategy. Instead of answering them, junior minister Kevin Foster shrugged off the concerns, and relentlessly bridged back to what has become the Tory party conference motto: “get Brexit done”. Only after that, we are told, will the hate and the division in our country subside, as if an election and a promised spending splurge could repair the damage that’s been done to our public square over three years. We will soon get be in the no-man’s- land between violating our code obligations to obey ministers, and breaking the law by defying the will of parliament Civil servants don’t believe a word of it. A nasty, no-deal Brexit followed by an even nastier “people v parliament” election campaign will further imperil not just our public figures but our institutions too, with dire consequences for public services over the coming months. I see three main threats. First, Dominic Cummings. Remember what first triggered alarms about his appointment? He is a self-confessed shock doctor whose goals reach beyond Brexit and the winning of the next general election. Brexit’s dark lord has longer-term plans to change the whole way the business of government is delivered. The last few weeks of havoc provide us with ample evidence to suppose that his best hope for doing that starts with a disorientated, destabilised civil service. That is deeply connected to the second reason: the civil service’s no-deal planning leaders have been leaving in droves. Matthew Coats is the latest to resign – reporting directly to Michael Gove, he was the director-general of the Department for Brexit’s border delivery group, in charge of delivering “frictionless borders”. That magical phrase may have something to do with his departure, which follows the self-defenestration of similarly senior no-deal planning figures such as Coats’ former boss, Karen Wheeler, who resigned in June, and Tim Shinner, director of policy and delivery coordination. Philip Rycroft, the department’s permanent secretary retired at the end of March after little more than a year at the helm. What’s the matter with these civil servants? Don’t they believe in Brexit? If they do, they shouldn’t. They are professionals whose task is to carry out government policies through plans built on logic and evidence, not Orwellian doublethink. But there is cause for concern: I recently came across a job description for a senior no-deal planning role in a Brexit-facing department – it told applicants that essential attributes were an “ability to handle complexity and ambiguity”. I’m the first to recognise that Operation Yellowhammer has actually done a lot to put in place plans for no-deal Brexit mitigation, even if it’s clear that they won’t be nearly enough. But more recent plans are disintegrating before our eyes. For example, assurances from the health secretary, Matt Hancock, about the flow of medicines were only last week contradicted by the National Audit Office. The ink was barely dry on Johnson’s press release about his £3bn investment in 40 hospitals before health experts found serious holes in the proposals. And Department for Education ministers are facing questions  over the very existence of its no-deal Brexit planning. Most of all, the government still refuses to be honest about the true cost of a no-deal Brexit. The third threat to our public institutions is the looming constitutional crisis brought about by the prime minister’s determination to evade the provisions of the Benn Act (requesting a Brexit extension from the EU). This places civil servants in a unique quandary. As civil service union bosses have pointed out several times, we will soon be caught in the no-man’s land between violating our civil service code obligations to obey ministers, and breaking the law by defying the will of parliament. That way lies paralysis. That’s why we need Sir Mark Sedwill, the cabinet secretary and the head of the civil service to mitigate the worst of the damage while he still can. He’s the government’s most senior non-political adviser and oversees, among other things, the ministerial code that governs the conduct of cabinet ministers, and the prime minister himself. He also may be the person who ends up asking the EU for a Brexit extension. Mark is a busy man. Just in the last couple of weeks, he has been asked to investigate the prime minister’s alleged sexual misconduct, as well as the claims that the Johnson’s backers will benefit from a no-deal Brexit. He is currently on a “listening tour”, according to his leaked letter to senior civil servants, which may explain why he’s been a bit quiet lately. But, whether in private or public, we need Mark to quickly take action – he alone has the mandate to ensure the civil service is in one piece for whatever happens after 31 October. He can’t have missed Nigel Farage’s appalling exclamation about taking a knife to “non-neutral civil servants”. Like all civil servants, Mark’s job is not to be neutral, it is to be truthful. In the meantime, civil servants like me have to stay anonymous – we can’t go on the Today programme to explain how a no-deal Brexit is going to be hard enough without worrying about how the courts, a future Brexit inquiry or angry hi-vis mobs will come after us. We aren’t traitors or remoaners – we just want to get on with our jobs. • The civil servant works in a Whitehall department and was part of Operation Yellowhammer