It is not an obviously promising sign for a young dramatist when the artistic director of an off-Broadway venue sends a 1,000-word email of sympathetic explanation to those who left at the interval appalled by the slowness and length (three and a quarter hours) or content (sections where the stage is left empty) of their play. Six years on, though, Annie Baker has triumphantly overcome this unnerving experience. The work that led the venue Playwrights Horizons to reassure its riled subscribers – The Flick, set in a shabby, old-fashioned Massachusetts cinema – went on to win the Susan Smith Blackburn prize and was staged at the National Theatre in London, where it has been followed by two more Baker plays: John, and, opening this week, The Antipodes. Baker, a rare and reluctant interviewee, eventually agrees to have an email conversation. Although she engages generously – even while looking after a new baby, and struggling with a bug caught in London – the precise replies suggest that her public reticence may come from a fear of being over-specific about details that the work blurs. The 38-year-old is the most original and significant American dramatist since August Wilson, but her plays should still be avoided by people who like plot and theme clearly signposted. John, set in a weird B&B near an American civil war battle site, has a trick ending that led to people walking out who hadn’t meant to. The Antipodes depicts a corporate brainstorming session for an unspecified product (movie? political party?) and ends in a startlingly unexpected place. Has Baker had to fight for the right to be trusted to defy conventions? “I have always tried to make the kind of theatre I want to see,” she says, “and although I haven’t always succeeded, it’s obvious to me that, if you’re making a choice from a place of fear or obedience, it’s the wrong choice. I know at times this has frustrated people.” One thing that frustrates her detractors but excites her admirers is her defiance of generic categories. John has developments that could be seen as supernatural, and if a film is ever made of The Antipodes, different scenes could be classified as arthouse-indie and horror. “I’m not really that interested in genre,” Baker admits. “I guess it goes back to my resistance to rules and conventions. If people say my plays span or incorporate different genres, I hope that just means they’re surprising. I do think both John and The Antipodes start out as somewhat innocent-seeming and then get a bit more mischievous, but that happened naturally.” References to the external world are also oblique. Characters in The Antipodes observe “how messed up everything is right now” and reflect on the “crazy weather”, and there are clear undercurrents of discussion about gender and race in the workplace. Audiences seem likely to take these lines as allusions to Trump, Brexit, the climate emergency and #MeToo. But, where other dramatists might specify the background, Baker prefers to allude to them. To what extent does she see the plays as political or social reflections on what is going on? “My plays are very much that,” she replies. “It’s funny, though. I wrote this play before #MeToo and before Trump was elected, and yet it does seem to incorporate both events, and anticipate them somehow. I think of my plays as incredibly political, but I have no interest in trying to convince anyone of anything.” When I wonder if references in The Antipodes to an off-stage character who found everything “offensive” might be taken as a reference to a culture some people think is prone to over-sensitivity, Baker’s wily reply is: “The guys in the play claim she found everything offensive. We never find out if she actually did.” In both her cagey explications and the beguiling ambiguity of the narratives, she reminds me of Harold Pinter, and of Edward Albee, who, when asked what his play was about, liked to reply: “about two hours.” In Baker’s The Antipodes, we never find out what the business meetings are about, and, in John, a character’s climactic speech of apparent revelation can be interpreted as a fantasy or lie. So is there, somewhere in the playwright’s mind or laptop, the “truth” about what happened, or is it the case, as Pinter once said to me in an interview, “I’ve never deliberately held anything back from an audience. If you don’t know what’s going on, then I didn’t either”? She is happy to borrow from another theatrical obscurant to clarify her own position: “I’m totally with Pinter on this one.” Although The Antipodes is Baker’s third play at the National in three years, for a long time, British theatres were scandalously short of women’s voices; Caryl Churchill had a lonely prominence, apart from one-offs such as Shelagh Delaney. Did Baker see a similar imbalance in American theatre? “Things have changed enormously since my first play was produced in 2008,” she says. “It was pretty bad back then.” Baker wrote one episode of the Amazon Prime series I Love Dick, and has acted on screen. Her credits include While We’re Young (2014), a movie in which her actor husband, Nico Baumbach, also appeared, directed by his brother, Noah Baumbach. Her preferred medium, though, is obviously the stage, even if her reason is the sort of provocative surprise often found in her dialogue: “I like theatre because it’s so unprofitable.” She means the type of show that she writes. “The only reason to do it is to make something surprising and strange. I don’t understand commercial theatre, theatre that’s bound to do anything other than surprise and innovation.” Then comes a provocative qualification: “Wait. That’s not true. Hello, Dolly! on Broadway was one of my favourite things I’ve ever seen. And also one of the weirdest. But, with the exception of Hello, Dolly!, I don’t get commercial theatre.” One mark of popular theatre is that a second actor doesn’t start speaking until the first one stops. But, as is increasingly common in non-commercial theatre, Baker’s scripts ask the speakers to interrupt and talk over one another. Is her acting experience useful in getting the dialogue exactly how she wants it to sound? “I do still record myself reading every scene out loud after I write it, and before I make edits. But the handful of times I’ve acted have influenced my work much more as a director than a writer.” Baker is co-directing the National production of The Antipodes with its designer, Chloe Lamford. This pairing reflects the strong visual element of her plays: the precise architecture of an antiquated picturehouse in The Flick, walls covered in strange bric-a-brac in John, and the exotically sterile blue-sky-thinking HQ in The Antipodes. “I almost always think of the environment and stage picture before anything else comes to me,” Baker says. “The specifics are, of course, a collaboration with designers and directors, but for me, excitement about a potential set comes before excitement about character, or dialogue, or story.” The audience is allowed unusual leisure to enjoy the stage images because it is a habit of Baker’s to leave us alone with the set. In both The Flick and John, the characters leave the stage to do something and we wait until they come back. Each scene of an early play, Circle Mirror Transformation, starts in an empty dance studio. I have never seen the stage vacated so regularly, so I wonder if the “everyone out” moments come to her during rehearsal or writing? “Oh – that always emerges at the writing stage. I just really like looking at empty rooms!” Leaping out of Baker’s CV, before her acting and writing credits, is the fact that she was once a “guest wrangler”, supervising the would-be lovers on the US TV dating show The Bachelor. “I had dozens of jobs between 15 and 28 that still provide great fodder for my writing,” she says. “I was a nanny, a camp counsellor, a script reader, a cashier at a bakery and a dorm mother for young ballerinas at the New York City Ballet’s training school.” The Antipodes seems sure to confirm she has now found her ideal career, though. Audiences should not expect it easily to reveal a meaning, but those who balked at the length of her earlier work will be pleased that this one is said by the National Theatre website to last “about two hours”. The Antipodes is at the National Theatre, London, until 23 November.