Police are carrying out DNA tests to establish whether a man arrested at Glasgow airport is a suspect in the murder of five members of his family in France. Xavier Dupont de Ligonnès has been on an international wanted list since the bodies of his wife and four children were found buried under the terrace of their home in Nantes in April 2011. On Friday evening, a man said to resemble the 58-year-old salesman was arrested reportedly after an anonymous tipoff. On Saturday, the prosecutor in Nantes, Pierre Sennès, urged people to “exercise caution” after reports that fingerprints found at the detained man’s home did not match those of Dupont de Ligonnès. Sennès said “verifications” were under way to establish the identity of the arrested man. “Teams of detectives from the national service for the research into fugitives and from the Nantes police will be travelling to Glasgow on Saturday,” he said. The story of what became known as the “de Ligonnès affair” has puzzled and fascinated professional and amateur detectives, leading to genuine theories and conspiracy theories, many of them supported by members of the family. Investigators have followed leads suggesting the family emigrated secretly to the US or Australia, but they insist Dupont de Ligonnès remains the prime suspect and the most likely scenario is that he killed himself after killing his family. His wife, Agnès, 47, her eldest son, Arthur, 20, from her first marriage, Thomas, 18, and Anne, 16, were shot twice in the head. The youngest child, Benoît, 13, was shot three times in the head and twice in the thorax. Detectives belief Dupont de Ligonnès killed Agnès and three of the children on the night of 3-4 April and Thomas the following evening. The bodies were placed in jute sacks and covered in lime to speed up decomposition and disguise their smell. Postmortem examinations found the five victims had been given sleeping tablets and were shot with a .22 long rifle. Dupont de Ligonnès had inherited a gun of the same make and calibre from his father three weeks earlier. Since 2011, there have been more than 900 purported sightings of Dupont de Ligonnès reported to police, all of which have yielded nothing.