Barack Obama has urged Canadians to re-elect Justin Trudeau, an apparently unprecedented endorsement of a candidate in a Canadian election by a former American president. Obama tweeted on Wednesday that he was proud to work with Trudeau and described him as a hard-working, effective leader who takes on big issues like climate change. “The world needs his progressive leadership now, and I hope our neighbors to the north support him for another term,” Obama wrote. I was proud to work with Justin Trudeau as President. He's a hard-working, effective leader who takes on big issues like climate change. The world needs his progressive leadership now, and I hope our neighbors to the north support him for another term. Trudeau later responded with his own tweet: “Thanks my friend, we’re working hard to keep our progress going.” Thanks my friend, we’re working hard to keep our progress going. https://t.co/l4V42PZbef Trudeau is in a tough re-election fight before Monday’s parliamentary elections. Robert Bothwell, a professor of Canadian history and international relations at the University of Toronto, said that might have something to do with Obama’s intervention. “Trudeau is in real danger,” Bothwell said. “If I were a Liberal (party) campaigner I would quietly point with pride to Obama’s endorsement. I don’t know if I’d run around toting it as a major political issue.” Bothwell said you would have to go back more than 100 years to find an American president intervening in a Canadian federal election. He said Theodore Roosevelt, who was president from 1901 to 1909, visited Toronto in 1917 when Canada was having an election about conscription and spoke in favor of it. Nelson Wiseman, a political science professor at the University of Toronto, called Obama’s endorsement rare and said it possibly has not happened before but he doesn’t think it will move the polls. “In fact, some people may feel this is an unwarranted foreign intrusion in Canada’s election,” Wiseman said. Obama also endorsed Emmanuel Macron for president in France’s 2017 election, and he warned British voters against backing leaving the European Union. Trudeau formed a close relationship with Obama when he was president and the two were pictured having dinner in Ottawa earlier this year.