The owners of six flats have been left reeling after being hit with a bill for £31,000 from their landlord – for repairing two small wooden balconies which the residents claim had been left to rot through lack of maintenance. They also say the demand is almost seven times the £4,500 figure for tackling the problem quoted in a report commissioned by the landlord. The £31,376 bill – which includes various fees and works out at between £5,000 and £6,000 per flat – was described by one resident as “an insane amount of money – my carpenter friend burst out laughing when I told him”. The residents allege their freeholder breached the terms of the lease by failing to look after the balconies, so should have to pick up the bill now that the problems have become costlier to put right. The landlord and freeholder is Freehold Managers plc, whose ultimate parent company is based in the British Virgin Islands in the Caribbean and controlled by the family trust of the multimillionaire property tycoon Vincent Tchenguiz. Responding to the allegations, Freehold Managers told Guardian Money that it takes residents’ complaints seriously, but said the balconies needed to be replaced as they were more than 15 years old, were out of use, and could pose a health and safety risk. Kate Farmer Mestre and Nina Feldman (pictured) are among those living in the small apartment block in Stockwell, south London, which was built in 2002. Two of the flats have balconies with wooden balustrades that have rotted over time, says Mestre, who has lived in her flat for just over two years and pays a service charge of more than £1,400 a year. Her and her husband’s share of the bill is £5,883. In a nutshell they left the two wooden balconies to rot, and are trying to get us to replace them with metal balconies for £31,000. “Why are we picking up the tab for them not doing their work?” says Farmer Mestre. She says the cost of dealing with this would be “nowhere near as bad” if the balconies had been properly maintained. A firm of building surveyors commissioned by the property managers to inspect the block in October 2018 reported that “the timber balustrades … are showing signs of timber decay”. Their report recommended replacing these “as soon as possible given the health and safety issue this presents”. The lease places an obligation on the landlord “in every fourth year … [to] paint with two coats at least of good quality paint all parts of the exterior of the building”. However, Feldman, who took ownership of one of the balcony flats in January 2015 and lives there with her husband and daughter, says that to her knowledge, no painting or maintenance has been done to her flat’s balcony since then. Farmer Mestre says she has spoken to the previous property managers and to other residents, and that as far as she is aware, there has only been one occasion – in 2013 – when external repair and redecoration work was carried out. Last week, in a “letter before action” to Freehold Managers, the residents of five of the six flats said that, based on legal advice they had received, “the balcony balustrades form part of the exterior of the building, and therefore the responsibility to maintain them lies with the landlord”. The letter added that despite the obligation in the lease, the reporting of damage and the 2018 report recommendation, no maintenance had taken place for some time. “We therefore claim you breached the positive covenant, causing the state of the balcony balustrade to deteriorate over time. As a result this has become costlier to remedy, and you the freeholder must bear the resulting costs,” it said. The report quotes £4,500 to “remove/replace existing balustrades”. However in July, the property managers, Hurford Salvi Carr (HSC), sent out letters putting the total estimated cost of the work including fees and VAT at £31,376. In September the individual invoices arrived. Farmer Mestre says: “In a nutshell they left the two wooden balconies to rot, and are trying to get us to replace them with metal balconies for £31,000.” While there are clearly problems with some of the wood, is a costly upgrade essential? In an August 2019 email to Feldman, an HSC employee said that, based on the surveyor’s report, “it appears that the balconies, bar the balustrades, were in good overall condition”. Farmer Mestre says conversations are taking place about whether the leaseholders could attempt to exercise their right to manage the block or buy the freehold. Freehold Managers is ultimately owned by a company called Euro Investments Inc, controlled by the Tchenguiz Family Trust. In a statement, Freehold Managers said: “HSC were appointed as property managers in May 2018, with responsibility for maintenance. We take complaints very seriously and are in touch with the residents at [the flats] to address their concerns. However, the balconies do need to be replaced as they are over 15 years old and currently out of use, and could in future pose a risk.” In a letter replying to the residents, Freehold Managers said the £4,500 figure related to the materials alone, and was revised to £6,000 in May this year, and then to £9,505, which “included using steel material in place of timber, which should increase the life of the balconies and reduce future maintenance needs”. The letter said: “We understand that maintenance works have taken place on the balconies in recent years.” It added: “HSC need to proceed with the works which are necessary.” During the last few years there has been a huge outcry about the way some leaseholders have been exploited by unfair contracts and excessive fees, which have left some homes virtually unsaleable. There are about 4.2m residential leasehold properties in England, of which about 2.9m are flats. Following a series of articles in the Guardian and elsewhere, the government has, since mid-2017, announced a series of clampdowns on the sector to tackle a range of issues. However, there are things flat dwellers can do now. • Buying the freehold Leaseholders have a legal right to act together to buy their building’s freehold, provided they meet the qualifying criteria. This is known as collective enfranchisement. However, there are a lot of hurdles to jump – for example, the building has to qualify, plus there need to be enough “qualifying tenants”. The minimum number of participating tenants must equal half the total number of flats in the building. For more information go to the Leasehold Advisory Service’s website. • Ask a tribunal to appoint a new manager You must prove bad management if you want to do this - for example, you have to pay unreasonable service charges, or the landlord hasn’t complied with an approved code of management practice. There are different systems depending on where you live in the UK – to find out more, go to gov.uk/leasehold-property • Exercise your “right to manage” This lets you and the other leaseholders take control of the management of the building without having to prove bad management. You will need to find out if you qualify – for example, at least two-thirds of the flats must be let to qualifying tenants, and if there is a shop/restaurant etc in the building, it can’t take up more than 25% of the total floor area. Contact the the Leasehold Advisory Service for advice. You and the other leaseholders can manage the building yourselves or pay a managing agent to do it.