Leeds, who marked their centenary on Thursday, climbed into second after a 1-0 victory over Birmingham at Elland Road. Kalvin Phillips’ 65th minute goal, set up by Jack Harrison, proved to be the winner. Marcelo Bielsa’s team sit behind only West Brom, who won 1-0 at Middlesbrough. With a 1-1 draw against Barnsley at Oakwell, Swansea dropped two points and the chance to finish the day above Leeds and fourth-placed Nottingham Forest, who play at Wigan on Sunday. Jordan Ayew’s 67th minute header put Swans ahead, only for Alex Mowatt to equalise three minutes later. QPR are up to fifth after coming out on top in a five-goal thriller at Hull that saw ten minutes of injury time. Eberechi Eze’s two penalties, the second coming in the 88th minute after he had been the attacking player fouled, proved decisive. Preston dropped to sixth after losing 1-0 to Reading. Royals manager Mark Bowen got a win in first game in charge with the American Matt Miazga scoring the winner from close range in the eighth minute of time added on. Charlton are now seventh, level on points with Preston, after a convincingly beating Derby 3-0. The Rams drop to 15th with pressure growing on manager Phillip Cocu. Bristol City’s push for promotion - and their ten-match unbeaten run – came to an end as they were beaten 3-0 at Luton, for whom Pelly-Ruddock Mpanzu opened the scoring before Harry Cornick scored the second and Ashley Williams put through his own net for the third. In the division’s lower reaches, Stoke climbed from the foot of the table with a 1-0 win over Fulham, a second victory in succession easing some of the doubts around manager Nathan Jones’ future at the Bet365 Stadium. Teenager Tyrese Campbell’s first league goal proved the difference. Barnsley now occupy the bottom rung. The comeback of the day came at Brentford, who revived themselves from two goals down to beat Millwall 3-2 with three goals in the last ten minutes. Josh Dasilva scored in the 84th minute, then Bryan Mbeumo equalised four minutes later and then had a hand in Ollie Watkins’ winner four minutes into injury time. Blackburn 2-2 Huddersfield, Barnsley 1-1 Swansea, Brentford 3-2 Millwall, Charlton 3-0 Derby, Hull 2-3 QPR, Leeds 1-0 Birmingham, Luton 3-0 Bristol City, Middlesbrough 0-1 West Brom, Reading 1-0 Preston, Stoke 2-0 Fulham With leaders Ipswich at Accrington on Sunday, their chasers had chance to make up ground. Wycombe remain second after Darius Charles’s winner was enough to ruin Phil Parkinson’s first match in charge of Sunderland, who dropped to tenth in the table. Peterborough’s 2-1 win at Gillingham, which came after a goal from Joe Ward and a Mohamed Eisa penalty kept them in third. Fleetwood moved into fourth with a 4-1 defeat of Burton in which striker Paddy Madden completed his hat-trick in the 90th minute after Ched Evans had opened the scoring. Oxford’s 2-1 win at Rotherham and Coventry’s 0-0 draw with MK Dons moved them into fifth and sixth respectively. At the bottom, AFC Wimbledon continued their recent revival by climbing out of the bottom three. Terell Thomas headed home the only goal of game and winner against Portsmouth in the third minute of time added on at Kingsmeadow. An 85th-minute penalty from substitute Paul Mullin earned Tranmere a point at second-bottom Southend while Bolton remain rock-bottom and still on -8 points after a 3-1 Lancashire derby defeat to Rochdale. Bolton 1-3 Rochdale, Doncaster 2-0 Bristol Rovers, Fleetwood 4-1 Burton, Gillingham 1-2 Peterborough, MK Dons 0-0 Coventry, Rotherham 1-2 Oxford Utd, Wimbledon 1-0 Portsmouth, Wycombe 1-0 Sunderland Crewe stayed top after a 3-1 defeat of Swindon, in which Chris Porter scored twice. They are joined in the automatic promotion slots by Bradford, who beat Crawley 2-1, and Newport, who celebrated a 2-1 home win over Scunthorpe. Swindon’s defeat dropped them to seventh in the table, the final automatic promotion slot for which there a few contenders. Plymouth’s 2-0 defeat of Carlisle has them just a point behind the Robins, with Macclesfield sitting ninth only on goal difference after Jak McCourt’s 86th minuter winner at Oldham kept up the Silkmen’s recent revival. Cambridge are just a further point back after crushing Exeter 4-0. At the bottom, Morecambe’s 1-0 win at Carlisle vaulted them above Stevenage, who occupy the sole relegation spot after they could only draw 1-1 at Port Vale. Alongside Cambridge, Leyton Orient were the big winners of the day, enjoying a 4-0 seaside stroll at Grimsby. Bradford 2-1 Crawley, Cambridge 4-0 Exeter, Colchester 0-1 Morecambe, Crewe 3-1 Swindon, Forest Green 2-2 Mansfield, Grimsby 0-4 Leyton Orient, Newport 2-1 Scunthorpe, Northampton 2-0 Salford, Oldham 0-1 Macclesfield, Plymouth 2-0 Carlisle, Port Vale 1-1 Stevenage, Walsall 1-2 Cheltenham