What were you hoping for?To meet someone interesting for a pleasant evening. First impressions?She had very long, silver-blond hair, and a cashmere shawl that was effortlessly wrapped around her. What did you talk about?Not Brexit – though we agree! University lecturing, children, siblings, dead parents, potential grandchildren, wedding rings, languages, Iran, China, Dignitas, bad dates, exes. Any awkward moments?We both mistook the fruit-topped cheesecake as being the tiramisu we had ordered. Good table manners?Of course. Best thing about Alex?Simpatico. Would you introduce her to your friends? Oh yes. She would be a great asset to a party. Describe her in three wordsSophisticated, Italian, charming. What do you think she made of you?A pleasant evening’s conversation. Did you go on somewhere?Only to the station. And... did you kiss?Subtly. More cheek to cheek. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?To have had more time to talk on our respective journeys home. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?I’d invite her to a party. What were you hoping for?A fun evening out, good food and good conversation. First impressions?A friendly gentleman. What did you talk about?The state of UK higher education (I used to be a university lecturer), the pleasure of becoming a grandparent (I am going to), the pitfalls of online dating and, finally, death. Geoffrey is a great conversationalist. We laughed a lot. Any awkward moments?I did not pay attention to the menu and ended up choosing the wrong starter. I could not eat it and had to alert the waitress to take it away. Geoffrey was too polite to say anything but there was this awkward wait. There was also a mix-up with a tiramisu that was not a tiramisu at all. Good table manners?Yes, definitely. Best thing about Geoffrey?His easy-going manner and friendliness. Would you introduce him to your friends? Sure. Actually, he knew an old flame of mine very well. It is a small world. Describe him in three wordsAffable, well-mannered, personable. What do you think he made of you?He seemed to enjoy the evening. Did you go on somewhere?The station. And… did you kiss?Just some air kissing. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I made a fool of myself over the starter. The food was altogether very good; it was an oversight on my part. Marks out of 10?A good 8. Would you meet again?As friends. He gave me his card. • Alex and Geoffrey ate at Chucs Cafe Kensington, London SW7. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com