Extinction Rebellion activists have glued themselves to the Department for Transport and the lobby of the Home Office in another day of protests, with more action planned at other government department buildings as hundreds face arrest. About 200 protesters camped on the streets of central London on Tuesday on the second day of the campaign group’s planned two-week shutdown of the heart of the capital in protest against the lack of action to tackle the climate crisis. Westminster Bridge, Lambeth Bridge, Trafalgar Square and Smithfield market as well as several roads in Westminster were blockaded by activists on Monday, with a focus on the areas around parliament in an attempt to force politicians to heed their warning. On Tuesday, protesters who remained faced arrest after being issued with warnings by police. Under the section 14 notices, which were handed out to tents at around 7.30am, the activists will be allowed to demonstrate in a specified location – Trafalgar Square. Those who do not comply with the order and move their belongings will be arrested, though many camping on the corner of Horseferry Road and Marsham Street, near to the Home Office, still intend to stay. Many activists had no plans to move their tents to Trafalgar Square. One activist in his 20s said: “They came round and told us that we should be moving on. I don’t think we are going to move on. It’s not a risk if you know you’re going to be arrested. It’s something I’ll do if I need to. “We’ve got extremely good legal support and it’s a very well set-up organisation so I feel like I’ll be supported all through the way. An arrest doesn’t mean a conviction.” Another young activist added that there was no pressure from the movement to protest in a particular way. “Just because you’re being arrested doesn’t mean you do or don’t support Extinction Rebellion any more than the next person,” she said. “There are people within this group that support this group very much and they won’t be getting arrested, but they support everybody.” The group had glued themselves to the Department for Transport with other plans for activity at other government departments planned for throughout the day. The prime minister, Boris Johnson, attacked the Extinction Rebellion activists, dismissing them as “uncooperative crusties” who should stop blocking the streets of the capital with their “heaving hemp-smelling bivouacs”. Johnson made the remarks at the launch of the final volume of a biography of Margaret Thatcher written by his former boss at the Daily Telegraph, Charles Moore.