When I meet the director Tinuke Craig she’s just finished the final run in the rehearsal room for Mike Bartlett’s version of Vassa by Maxim Gorky. Now it’s time to take it to the Almeida in London, a bit later than planned, with a couple of previews cancelled. Lead actor Samantha Bond has had to withdraw due to injury and her replacement is Siobhan Redmond. Craig is upbeat despite these difficulties. “She’s played a blinder, learned lines at the speed of light, been extraordinary!” This isn’t the first time the director has dealt with cast changes. This year, her production of The Color Purple at Leicester Curve hit the news when actor Seyi Omooba was sacked for homophobic comments made several years earlier on social media. Omooba had been cast in the role of Celie, a famously queer character. The role was recast and Craig’s production received good reviews (as did new lead, T’Shan Williams). Omooba recently announced her intention to sue Curve theatre and her old agency for breach of contract and “religious discrimination”. “I wasn’t really involved in any of that decision-making either way, so it was really hard at the time,” says Craig. “People were being absolutely vile to me on Twitter. I think [they] assumed I’d somehow known her position and cast her anyway, which obviously wasn’t the case. But do you know what? It’s fine. I feel very attached to the show. It was one of the creative joys of my life.” Craig is a lifelong fan of musicals. “I was scared that I would do a musical and then realise I didn’t like them, and actually the opposite happened. I’m like, ‘I want to do at least one musical a year until the day that I die!’” Vassa, Craig tells me, is “a play about a mother and her grownup children. The family own a business. The patriarch is dying, and when he dies they will be able to get their inheritance and take their shares out of the business. The mother does not want them to do this because that way the business collapses, and the business is the most important thing in the world to her.” Is Vassa a political play, then? For Craig, it is more about family and how politics can muddy the waters. “One thing Mike and I talked about a lot is that families are mostly based on a kind of socialist structure when they work. Which is to say that everyone is considered to be equal; if people are worse off for whatever reason we help them out; there’s a leader but the leader is there to make sure everyone is elevated; we share. In a nice, good family all those things are in place, right? We don’t have favourites, there’s equity, there’s equality, and we like that in families.” In Vassa, however, the central family “have drifted into a capitalist structure, essentially. So there are winners and there are losers, and gains and losses, and they are like ‘Are you useful to me or not?’ Which is a question in the capitalist world, [and] how capitalism fucks over loads of people. So you’re looking at a family who have rejected the socialist structure. What does that do? And can you sustain it? The answer, I think, is no.” Vassa is the first time she has tackled work that wasn’t originally written in English. It was important for her and Bartlett to modernise the language and balance Gorky’s intentions with their own. Craig has cast non-white actors in some roles. “When Gorky wrote it they were white. Aside from me not being particularly interested in putting an all-white cast on stage, it felt quite important that these people didn’t look or sound like each other. That they’re meant to be a family and yet have no connection, and they’re stuck in the house. The house has become sort of a prison. They’re waiting for someone to die, they can’t leave until this person dies, they don’t like each other, they don’t want to be there.” Raised in Brixton, south London, Craig entered the theatre world via playwriting; she was on the Royal Court’s Young Writers programme at 17 years old. “That happened if you grew up in London in the 90s; I was one of those very extracurricular kids. I think there’s something very particular about people who are about my age, 32, in the arts, which is that we were the real beneficiaries of peak scheme time.” She began directing “via the practice of having to read plays. I got into imagining what they would look like and how they would sound.” Craig says she has always been quite shy and awkward but what she found in directing “is an opportunity to properly sit down with how people work. It’s probably not very healthy in real life but if you’re in the rehearsal room you can spend a whole day being like, ‘But why did she do that?’ You get this amazing four-week stint where you’re allowed to dig into brains and work out what the hell is going on with people, which I love.” The day Vassa opens, Craig begins her next job: Cinderella, the pantomine at the Lyric Hammersmith. Why panto? “I have done a lot of plays recently that have dealt in one way or another with trauma. I did Dirty Butterfly about domestic violence, and I Call My Brothers, which is about terrorism and the effects of terrorism on South Asian and Muslim people. I went back to debbie tucker green, the Aids crisis and then knife crime [in random/generations], then The Color Purple, about a girl who’s repeatedly raped by her father in the first act. And now I’m doing a big old Russian play about succession and bad mothers.” She pauses. “When the Lyric said ‘You’re on our list’ I was sort of like, actually a lot of people who ‘don’t go to the theatre’, in inverted commas, they go to panto. They go to Lyric, they go to musicals, they go to Stratford East, especially if we talk about class. It suddenly occurred to me: there are people who I grew up with, that I can make work for. Work for everyone.” Vassa is at the Almeida theatre, London, until 23 November.