An influential committee of MPs has condemned as unacceptable the number of IT failures in the financial services sector, which it said have left customers “cashless and cut off”. With bank branches and cash machines disappearing, customers are increasingly reliant on online banking services, but these have been severely disrupted by IT failures at firms including TSB, Visa, Barclays and Royal Bank of Scotland, the Treasury committee said. Its report called for faster action in resolving complaints and awarding compensation, along with more decisive regulatory action, including higher levies on the sector that will enable regulators to hire experienced staff. The report said prolonged IT failures must not be tolerated, adding: “The current level and frequency of disruption and consumer harm is unacceptable.” In 2018, the Financial Conduct Authority, the City regulator, said the number of incidents reported to it had increased by 187% in the past year, 65% of which were from retail banks. MPs said they were “shocked to hear of the time taken for some customers to have complaints answered”, which could lead to greater financial loss or other harm caused by an IT failure. The committee called on regulators – the FCA, the Prudential Regulation Authority and the Bank of England – to intervene to improve the operational resilience of the sector, in the same way action has been taken to improve financial resilience. Levies on the financial sector may need to be increased to ensure that regulators can hire enough staff with the appropriate skills and experience. The report highlighted TSB’s IT meltdown, which began in April 2018. Up to 1.9 million customers were locked out of their accounts for weeks, and the problems took months to fully resolve. The bank’s chief executive Paul Pester stepped down five months after the debacle, which cost the bank £330m and was caused by a botched migration of customer accounts to a new system. MPs said no individuals had yet been punished after IT failures, adding that if future incidents occur without sanction, parliament should consider whether the regulators’ enforcement powers are fit for purpose. The report said time and cost pressures may result in corners being cut when firms upgrade their IT systems. It urged regulators to adopt a “proactive approach” to ensure customers are protected. MPs also highlighted the need to do proper testing of a new system before it goes live to all customers. Firms must also have adequate recovery plans in place in case an IT failure occurs, and tell customers about the incident in a clear and timely manner and explain what they should do, the report said. Pay for senior staff should be linked to how much attention they give to preventing IT failures and that regulators should step in if necessary. Steve Baker, the Tory MP leading thecommittee’s inquiry, said: “The number of IT failures that have occurred in the financial services sector, including TSB, Visa and Barclays, and the harm caused to consumers is unacceptable. “For too long, financial institutions issue hollow words after their systems have failed, which is of no help to customers left cashless and cutoff.” Baker said it was taking too long to get a comprehensive account of what happened during the TSB IT failure, and added that the committee’s inquiry remained open. Neither the report commissioned by TSB from the law firm Slaughter & May nor the regulatory investigation have been concluded. At Visa, 5.2m transactions failed in June 2018 because a backup data centre designed to handle all transactions across Europe would not switch on when the problems emerged. Three month later millions of Barclays customers were unable to access their accounts online for much of 20 September owing to a technical glitch. The following day RBS, NatWest and Ulster Bank customers faced problems for several hours after an upgrade to firewall software at RBS backfired. The worst-ever service failure by a British bank was RBS in 2012 when a software update resulted in more than 6.5 million customers being locked out of their accounts. Jenny Ross, the editor of consumer organisation Which? Money, said: “Daily IT glitches are leaving too many people struggling to pay bills or buy everyday essentials ... Regulators must swiftly address the committee’s concerns, and the government must introduce legislation that guarantees consumers can access and pay with cash for as long as it is needed.”