‘That was mercifully short,” one actor jokingly sneers, after the audience are awkwardly and inexplicably cajoled into singing. After slogging through almost three hours of meandering plot and muted laughter, it is a shame the same can’t be said of this new adaptation of Edmond Rostand’s French dramedy. Tom Morris’s uneven production pulls from the Bristol Old Vic bag of tricks: the makeshift aesthetic, the self-aware on-stage band, the foul-mouthed cast in period dress apologising as they clamber over the audience. But the playfulness here is scrappy rather than thoughtful, clutching at ways to try and make us laugh during the too-long, too-tangential script. Translator Peter Oswald keeps the play in verse, with some exquisitely romantic lines about theatre, love and self-reliance, but the script leans heavily on incongruence. (Giving a 17th character a swear word is not a substitute for giving them a personality.) Our protagonist, Cyrano, is the only character who feels full-blooded, played with verve by Tristan Sturrock. He is a witty wordsmith, though women are repulsed by his larger-than-average nose. With a classic theatrical blind eye towards casual incest, Cyrano is hopelessly in love with his (distant) cousin Roxane (Sara Powell), who is distracted by the cocky Christian (Patrycja Kujawska). While Christian has the looks, he lacks the wit to woo Roxane. As they head off to war, Cyrano agrees to write letters as if sent from Christian, his only reward being the satisfaction of witnessing the effect of his words on the woman he loves. As misunderstanding and mourning ensue, the production falls short of the heights of heroic comedy and the depths of romantic tragedy, plodding along flatly somewhere in between. Though the ensemble are strong – Miltos Yerolemou is effortlessly hilarious – the physical comedy is flaccid and the chemistry flat, undermining the play’s emotional impact. Rostand’s original introduced the word panache, suggesting flamboyance and reckless courage, into English in 1897. Despite a strong poetic lead and a hard-working cast, this production is sorely lacking in it. • At Bristol Old Vic until 16 November.