“With Leon Clarke making his Premier League debut at the age of 34 for Sheffield United against Liverpool, who is the oldest debutant in a top division?” tweets Joe Turner. We’ve unearthed a golden oldie who can beat the ageing Blade by two years. Now-retired Brighton defender Bruno captained the Seagulls to promotion and then made his first appearance in the English top flight at 36 and only two months shy of his 37th birthday. But Tom Aldous points us in the direction of Graham Alexander who, at the ripe age of 37, made his Premier League debut for Burnley in 2009. Italy has always been an accommodating place for footballers who have got a fair few miles on the clock, so it is little surprise that a 39-year-old made his bow in Serie A in 2016. Goalkeeper Maurizio Pugliesi turned out for Empoli against Torino in the last game of the season and ended up on the winning team too, the home side victorious 2-1. Sticking with goalkeepers, the one and only John Burridge was 43 years, four months and 26 days old when he came on as a half-time substitute for Manchester City against Newcastle United on 29 April 1995. That makes him not only the oldest Premier League player in history but also the oldest Premier League debutant. He did, however, play in the English top flight for Aston Villa way back in the 1970s. We may have a winner in Mexico, though. “In the 1993-94 Primera División, there was a rare occurrence with Humberto Filizola,” reports Milton. “He had never played football professionally, but, being president of the club Correcaminos (he was in charge because he was rector of the university to which the club belongs), he ordered Correcaminos to register him to play just one game in the top flight. On the last matchday of the season against Club América, he began the game and was replaced in the 28th minute. Filizola was 44 years old!” #WikiEfemérides hoy 3 de abril se cumplen 25 años del debut de Humberto Filizola con el @CFCorrecaminos, que debuto a sus 44 años. pic.twitter.com/9hvcLSbYrq Better still, we’ve managed to unearth a clip from the match in question in which the game Filisola – who looks for all the world like a bus driver thrust into the starting XI – misses an absolute sitter from six yards out. Fair play to him for busting a gut to get into the box, mind – and for lasting almost half an hour. 1994El Rector de la U.A.T Humberto Filizola, a los 44 años, decide que quiere cumplir su sueño de jugar en un partido de futbol profesional y lo hace vs el América. #MemoriaFutbolera pic.twitter.com/1Q9U929X5K We’ve got a few more recollections of former pros trudging around amateur battlefields after their retirement … Louis Connell writes: “Former FK Viktoria Zizkov midfielder and Zimbabwe international Kennedy Chihuri plays for St Georges of Leeds in the Yorkshire Christian Football League. Not much of a step down from playing in the Champions League, then.” Chris Adams joins in: “Not strictly Sunday league, but former Bury/Wigan/Oldham/everyone striker Jason Jarrett was still playing in the Lancashire Amateur League Division One for Radcliffe St Mary’s a couple of years ago. He scored twice in one game, only to be thwarted by a great tackle from yours truly,” boasts Chris. Jarrett did in fact turn out on a Sunday … but as a referee. He gave it up in 2017 having become disillusioned with the FA pathway towards the upper echelons of officiating. “Around five or 10 years or ago, Paul Merson played a handful of games for Whitton Athletic in the Chiswick & District Sunday League,” writes Tim Street. “Two of his sons were already playing for the same team. One of them, Sam, was very useful and has gone on to play a decent standard of non-league for Boreham Wood, Biggleswade and St Albans.” “After Beth England’s goal against Brazil on Saturday, I couldn’t help but wonder: who’s the most successful goalscorer in international football to share a name with the country they represent?” wonders Joe Reaney. “The eponymous Stephen Ireland had an impressive scoring record during his brief Republic of Ireland senior international career,” mails Sean DeLoughry. “Despite winning just six caps he scored four goals in Ireland’s challenging Euro 2008 qualifying campaign, including the only goal against Wales in Ireland’s historic first match at Croke Park. A sixth cap and fourth goal later in the campaign in Slovakia proved to be the end of a promising international career, as he went and killed off both his grandmothers before retiring from international football, aged 21.” “Did celebrity medium and former Most Haunted star Derek Acorah really play for Liverpool?” asked Steven Langfort in April 2006. Let’s leave it to the man himself, Steven. “I always wanted to be a professional footballer and at 15 I realised my dream and became an apprentice footballer with Liverpool Football Club,” he revealed in an interview for It’s Fate magazine. “I played many times with Liverpool’s reserve team but sadly never made it to the first team. Years later a medium brought through the spirit of Bill Shankly (my ‘boss’ at Liverpool FC), and she told me, ‘the boss says you’re going to score more goals in your work now than you did at Liverpool!’ (referring to my work as a medium). After Liverpool I played for Glentoran in Ireland and then moved to Australia to play professional football there [for USC Lion]. Sadly a knee injury finished off my footballing career.” For more from the font of nerdvana, click this thing here. “On 16 August, Bohemians beat Dublin neighbours UCD 10-1 in their record league win. On 19 August, they suffered a 6-1 reversal away to champions Dundalk in the league-cup semi-final. Is this the biggest swing in the margin of victory/defeat for a team in consecutive games?” asks John Shortall. “I was just reading an article on Claudio Ranieri being appointed Sampdoria manager. The manager he replaced was the manager he replaced at Roma last season. Have there been other times when one manager has replaced the same manager at two or more clubs with successive appointments?” wonders Paul Symes. has an international football manager ever failed to select a player simply because they forgot to? “Celtic are playing in a Europa League group with CFR Cluj, the team that knocked them out in Champions League qualifiers earlier this season,” begins Kieran Murray. “This made me wonder has any team ever been knocked out of two European competitions in a single season by the same club? Also, hypothetically, if both proceed, they could draw each other later in the knockout rounds of the Europa League, meaning they would have played against one another six times in one season. What’s the most amount of times that two teams have played against each other in one European campaign?” Just found out that TuS Dassendorf had won the Oberliga Hamburg five times in a row (2013-14 to 2017-18), having apparently declined the promotion playoffs each time.Is this the most times in a row the same club had won the same league? (At least, among leagues with promotion.) “I wonder if my friend Alexander might be the only player to score two goals in succession without anyone else touching the ball? He scored with the last kick of the first half, the ref blowing his whistle without letting the other team kick off, and then straight from kick-off in the second half. He did this for Hajduk Spul in Danish Serie 5 this year” – Henrik Hjulgaard. Email your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.