Catherine Cooper With more than 186 miles of slopes, and six ski areas offering varied terrain for all levels, there is plenty to keep you busy on the slopes in the Ötztal valley. But there’s much more to the area than just skiing and snowboarding. The valley is also known for its thermal bath and spas – ideal for easing aching limbs, those who fancy a relaxing day away from the slopes, or for non-skiers who simply want to enjoy the mountains in a different way. Taking relaxation to a new levelThe Aqua Dome at Längenfeld is home to no less than 12 indoor and outdoor pools spread over 22,000 sq metres, as well as seven saunas, plus four restaurants and bars. The warm relaxation pools – some of which appear to float in the air – are surrounded by mountain peaks, and you can watch the falling snowflakes as it snows. The saunas range in style from rustic to modern, and in temperature from the gentle heat of steam baths to the intense, dry heat of the Schluchtensauna, which features a glass wall and panoramic view. The hotel also offers a huge range of spa treatments, ranging from packages designed to help relieve aching muscles to those aimed purely at relaxation, as well as romantic couples’ treatments. And even the little ones won’t be left out – Aqua Dome also has a children’s area with waterslides, spray games and even a cuddle zone for when they’ve tired themselves out. Spas for allThere is a huge range of accommodation to suit all budgets in Ötztal and many have their own wellness facilities. New this year, the All-Suite Resort Ötztal comes with a 500 sq metre spa, a steam bath, indoor and outdoor pools and even a natural swimming pond for summer. Or you could opt for the five-star Das Central and its award-winning spa with 10 saunas and steam baths, and a three-storey water world. While many hotels and apartment buildings include wellness areas, Ötztal is so committed to relaxation that many of those staying in accommodation without its own spa will find that free entry to the Freizeit Arena in Sölden is included as standard. Here, the family-friendly adventure bath is designed like a cave and includes massage jets, waterfalls, a slide, playground and a relaxation winter garden. There’s also a calmer wellness area with several saunas and steam rooms, as well as relaxation areas. Slow down to enjoy the mountainsAnd while skiing and snowboarding are high-adrenaline sports enjoyed by many in the Ötztal valley, there are also calmer ways to make the most of the area. Snowshoeing and winter hiking are perhaps more mindful ways to explore the area and enjoy the mountain scenery. There are 155 miles of signposted and cleared tracks – you can either trek at your own pace or join a guided group. Routes range from a leisurely stroll to full-day excursions. For an entirely different viewpoint, guided night-time snowshoe excursions are an option. There are also several options for yoga lovers in Ötztal, whether you are looking for a one-off course or for a week-long exercise programme. At Umhausen Niederthai, there are 50-minute yoga for winter sports courses twice a week. These courses offer a programme of simple stretching and relaxation exercises specifically aimed at skiers and snowboarders. Wellness weeksFor those who might be looking for something more intensive, the Ski Fit week at the beginning of the winter season (from 14 November) in Gurgl offers a wide range of classes including yoga, stabilisation and ski coordination training, pilates, relaxation sessions and much more – you can take part in as many or as few as you like. Several mountain restaurants throughout the Hochgurgl and Obergurgl ski areas offer special healthy dishes during the week to help people achieve a feeling of wellbeing. The Skifinish Week at the end of the season has a more yoga-based programme with the addition of fun activities such as a ride on a snow-grooming machine, a brunch and a hut rally with live music. Yvonne Stolz-Longaker from Apura Yoga, which runs yoga sessions during the two dedicated wellness weeks, believes yoga is the ideal start to a day on the slopes: “If you practise yoga before hitting the pistes, the body is warmed up and less prone to injury. Yoga trains balance, concentration, strength and flexibility. All of these things really help with skiing, snowboarding or hiking. We also offer a yoga class in the evening to cool down and stretch out. “All of our participants tell us how their performance is enhanced and their experience is a much better one when they incorporate yoga into their winter holiday,” says Stolz-Longaker. “It’s really good for the human body and mind to be in the mountains to quiet the mind and get back into contact with oneself. The mountains can be a reminder of what is really important in life. Our day-to-day problems are often put into perspective here.” Skiing and snowboarding are intensive workouts that involve every major muscle group. It makes sense, then, to sandwich your slope time between some proper R&R – your thighs will thank you. And with wellness at the heart of the action in Ötztal, your muscles are in safe hands. Find out more