Heavy overnight rain has caused the abandonment of Saturday’s race-meetings at both Doncaster and Newbury, leaving a jump-racing card at Cheltenham as the sport’s most significant fixture for the afternoon. The result is arguably good news for dedicated fans of chasing and hurdling, as ITV4 will now screen four races from Kelso as well as the planned four from Cheltenham. The loss of Doncaster’s card brings a sorry end to the Vertem Futurity Stakes, which has usually been an important two-year-old race but which this year attracted just one entry from a stable other than Aidan O’Brien’s. There was no immediate word on whether the Group One contest would be restaged but officials said they were working with all parties to “ensure the best outcome for the sport”. It appears that other Group-level races from the Doncaster and Newbury cards could also be saved, provided a home can be found for them in the next seven days. Newmarket’s racedays on Friday and Saturday appear the most obvious option. There were humorous suggestions on social media that the Futurity should be restaged at Ballydoyle, O’Brien’s training base in County Tipperary. Some questioned whether it would be a good use of racing’s funds to restage a race that had attracted such a disappointing entry, but there seems little doubt that the British Horseracing Authority will wish to save it, as an important race with a strong record of identifying Classic contenders. Saturday morning’s course inspection at Doncaster became a forgone conclusion after 32mm of rain in the previous 24 hours. “It’s as wet as I’ve known it,” said Roderick Duncan, the clerk of the course. “The forecast has been absolutely correct and they are predicting the rain will continue until 3pm. It’s very disappointing for all of us at Doncaster.” Newbury was reportedly waterlogged in places, with no chance of improvement in the face of more rain to come. Monday’s card at Leicester is under threat, as that course is also waterlogged in places. An inspection will be held at noon on Sunday.