The Dark Materials author Philip Pullman has attacked politicians for claiming “the will of the people” as a basis for power. “Any political power that rules in the name of something that cannot be questioned is extremely dangerous,” he told fans in London on Wednesday, at the launch of volume two of his Book of Dust trilogy, The Secret Commonwealth. Pullman also spoke at the Alexandra Palace event about the dangers of being blinkered. Quoting William Blake – “May God us keep / From Single vision & Newtons sleep” – he said that “single vision” was “the kind of vision that only sees the things that can be measured”. “If you become a little obsessed with this you forget there are other ways of being true than just being measurable, and this is what’s happened with [his character] Lyra,” he said. In The Secret Commonwealth, one of the autumn’s most anticipated novels, Lyra, now 20, is a student at Oxford and grappling with rationalism. “‘You used to be optimistic. You used to think that whatever we did would turn out well. Even after we came back from the north, you used to think that,’” her dæmon, Pantalaimon, tells her. “‘I used to be young,’ was all she could find to say,” she replies. For the novelist, “Rationality is a good servant but a bad master”. “If you live according to nothing but reason you will never fall in love, you will come to believe that old people who are not economically productive any more serve no purpose. “Reason on its own is a kind of devilish thing, so William Blake’s term single vision is the enemy. And of course single vision can have a religious dimension as well, which is what I am criticising,” said Pullman, referring to the dangerously powerful Magisterium in his novels. Pullman told the mixed audience of children and adults, some of whom had queued to buy a signed copy, that he had never expected to continue Lyra’s story after leaving her and her young love, Will Parry, on a park bench in Oxford’s Botanic Garden at the end of The Amber Spyglass. But “as the years passed – [it’s] nearly 20 years ago now – I kept on thinking about Lyra and her growing up,” he said. “This is not one of those stories when characters stay the same age – after all the central event in His Dark Materials is Lyra and Will growing up, leaving innocence behind. [So] I wondered what she’d been doing. It must have been frustrating for her to have had the greatest adventure of her life and then it’s all over. I don’t think she’s the sort of person to just accept that. So the next story began to take shape.” Asked whether Will would make an appearance in The Book of Dust, Pullman said: “I like Will. I’m very very fond of him. I know what happens to him, what his career is going to be: he’s going to be a doctor. But whether we have a sight of that, I can’t tell you yet.”