Whether retirement is in your distant or not so distant future, it’s worth carving out some time to manage your superannuation. Xavier O’Halloran, acting director of the Superannuation Consumers’ Centre at Choice, explains how you can make the biggest impact in a single afternoon. Many Australians have to log into MyGov, the government’s online services portal, to manage things like their taxes. The service also has a record of all of your superannuation accounts – and there might be several. You can see all of your superannuation accounts by clicking on the ATO section of the site. “Every time you start a new job, unless you’re paying attention, you basically get set up with a new account,” O’Halloran says. “That means you’re paying two sets of fees, two sets of insurance policies. And they estimate that that will cost you across a lifetime about $50,000 in retirement savings if you don’t consolidate them.” In the super tab of MyGov, you’ll see the details of every super account you’ve ever had, including inactive ones. Once you know where your super is, you need to pick the right fund to consolidate into. “This is where it gets a little bit tougher, because at the moment, there’s not really any good information out there,” O’Halloran explains. When researching your super accounts – or deciding whether or not to switch to a new one altogether – there are two factors to keep in mind: fees and returns. With fees, O’Halloran has a simple rule of thumb: “Anything over 1% in fees per year [is] on the expensive side.” Because super compounds over time, tiny variations in fees can have a significant impact. “If you’re talking about a half per cent difference in fees, across the entire lifetime, that’s about $100,000.” It’s easy to find out what sort of fees a super fund charges using something called a product dashboard. If you Google a super fund’s name and “product dashboard” you’ll be able to find a “one pager” that’s “basically a little cheat sheet that you can use to figure out what the fees are”. When it comes to assessing your fund’s returns, O’Halloran suggests looking at the “medium to long term” – how the fund has performed over the past five to 10 years. “Don’t be looking at what happened last year, because funds and markets change really rapidly. You want to look at consistent performance.” Choice has recently released a tool that allows you to search superannuation funds based on their five-year net returns. If your super fund is in the bottom 25% it might be a supervillain of super. “There’s a few in there that probably you don’t want to be in. Unless you’re looking for something really particular with those funds.” One particular reason to go with a low-return fund is risk level. People on the verge of retirement “shouldn’t be in a really high-risk option because if the market suddenly crashes, they’ll be really badly off”. Not all low-return funds are low risk, so if you’re close to retirement, risk is worth researching too. If you’re younger “you can go high risk. You can ride the bumps of the market, because you’re still 20 or 30 years away from retirement date.” If none of the super funds you’re already with offer favourable fees or competitive returns, switching is not complicated. “You can do it online, most of the time. It’s just a matter of providing your tax file number. And you can even as part of that process, ask them to auto consolidate all your existing accounts into the new one. So instead of going through MyGov, you can just do it that way.” If you are happy with one of your existing super accounts, through MyGov “you can basically auto-consolidate in one click”. “A quarter of people don’t know that they’ve got insurance through their superannuation,” O’Halloran says. Because you’re “automatically signed up”, the insurance policy you’re on may not suit your needs. If you have no dependents, you might be paying for death insurance you don’t need. Low-income earners might be covered for income protection and total and permanent disability insurance (a payout you’ll get if something bad happens that means you can never work again) that “other safety nets … like government support pensions” might cover, which “you wouldn’t be paying any extra for … Because they’re provided to everyone.” If you set up an online account with your superannuation provider, it is relatively easy to check what you’re insured for, and how much it’s costing you. “Then there’s usually just an option to cancel in the website, which is not too difficult in the ones that we’ve seen.” However, O’Halloran cautions against completely cancelling the insurance that comes with your superannuation – even if you don’t need it right now – because if you apply for insurance separately, or reapply through your super fund later on, you may have to complete medical tests which will look for pre-existing conditions. “It’s not apples and apples, but for the most part [insurance] will be a little bit cheaper within super.” If you do have a pre-existing condition and cancel your superannuation fund’s insurance “there’s a bit of a risk … it could knock you out from having cover altogether”. So, rather than cancelling your insurance, it’s better to think about your stage of life, look at what your super covers you for, and make tweaks to lower (or raise) your coverage depending on your individual needs. The kind of insurance you require will also depend on how risky your job is. Those that work in construction, mining and forestry will have different insurance needs, and costs, to those engaged in lower-risk desk jobs. Once you’ve consolidated your super in the right kind of account, and checked that your insurance is tailored to your needs, the final thing to consider is your contributions. “The way the system is designed at the moment, if you’ve been making the compulsory contributions your whole life, you’ll probably get to retirement with a pretty similar level of income to … what you had during your working life. So you’ll probably have a pretty similar standard of living.” But, O’Halloran cautions, that level of super is predicated upon the assumption that you own your own home: “So if you are not getting into the housing market, or you had breaks in your working life, throughout your retirement balance is probably going to be a bit lower than what you have been living on up until retirement.” If you do have additional income to spare, asking your employer to increase your pre-tax super contribution is “pretty much the best tax dodge that exists out there. You’re only paying 15% on your contributions, whereas otherwise you paying whatever your marginal tax rate is.” If you’re on the average wage in Australia, or more, your tax “is going to be higher than that”. You can make up concessional, salary sacrificed contributions to your super of up to $25,000 a year, and if you’re on a salary of less than $52,697 per year, the government may make a matching contribution to after-tax superannuation deposits. Contributing more to your superannuation won’t always make sense, “if you’re struggling to get by, making extra super contributions is really not the right thing to be doing”. But “if you’ve got a bit of extra money kicking around it’s a great way to save for the future”.