A few hours before kick-off, World Cup organisers had to send out a reminder to fans to double-check they were going to the right stadium in Yokohama. It has been a problem all tournament. The baseball ground is called Yokohama Stadium, is around 10 miles away and supporters have been turning up in their droves to the wrong one. Those in attendance for this grim, gruelling World Cup semi-final could be forgiven for thinking they had made the same mistake. The contrast between South Africa’s victory over Wales and the events here 24 hours previously could not have been more stark, the lack of ambition on show on Sunday remarkable in comparison. In total there were 81 kicks from hand and anyone fortunate enough to have been in attendance for both semi-finals will have signed off Saturday night with the image of Beauden Barrett setting off from his own line. Sunday’s fare was another sport entirely. It is often said that there are myriad ways to win a game of rugby and as much as South Africa’s performance was ugly – perhaps even cynical – it was ultimately efficient. In the end they had just a little too much muscle for Wales but few casual observers will have been converted. “There wasn’t a lot of flowing rugby played,” conceded Warren Gatland. “Once we were in that arm wrestle it was attrition.” • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales It must also be said kicking has been an effective weapon at this tournament. But if you are going to kick the leather off the ball, at least make sure you are proficient at chasing properly and catching it. The first eight occasions South Africa got the ball, they kicked it. On the ninth, when Faf de Klerk passed to Handré Pollard, the Springbok fly-half dropped it, no doubt stunned the ball had not been kicked away. De Klerk finished the first half having passed the ball 14 times and kicked it 12. There was a swirling wind inside the stadium, which offers some mitigation, but a lot of kicks were inaccurate. Wales made inroads once when Dan Biggar gathered Gareth Davies’s box-kick but the first half was tryless and, as World Cup semi-finals go, not one that will live long in the memory. Wales lost Tomas Francis to a shoulder injury when Duane Vermeulen ran over the top of him but Warren Gatland will wonder why it was his tighthead prop leading the chase. If England versus New Zealand was explosive from the opening whistle, the best that can be said about Wales against South Africa is that it was a slow burner. The second half was an improvement on the first, if only marginally, and certainly it was tense when Wales levelled at 16-16 and extra time – what Eddie Jones was hoping for – loomed. Alun Wyn Jones deserves credit too, for his bold call for a scrum from a penalty that led to Josh Adams’s try. It must be said it was a sad end for the Wales captain on the day he won his 142nd cap. All the more so because it was he who conceded the penalty that gave South Africa the field position from which they went on to score the decisive points, though it may be fairer to say Francois Louw won it with a trademark intervention at the breakdown. “There’s no real consolation in anything,” said a despondent Jones. Gatland will surely be left with a few regrets too. He had exuded confidence in the buildup but Welsh supporters will no doubt be wondering if their side could have shown more in attack. It feels like half a lifetime ago now, but we can but guess whether Wales would have produced the little bit extra they needed had Rob Howley not been sent home on the eve of the tournament under the cloud of betting allegations. This was Gatland’s 125th match in charge of Wales and if there is any succour it is in the fact that he has one more, against his compatriots New Zealand on Friday. “It will be a hugely monumental,” said Gatland. “[New Zealand] are a team I haven’t beaten with Wales and I’d like to achieve that. I’m absolutely proud of [the players], we punch massively above our weight in terms of the playing numbers they have in Wales so I’m really proud of these guys.” But how he would have loved to have pitted his wits against Jones once more 24 hours later. Wales, after all, are the only team to have beaten England this year, and they have done it twice. They have also fallen at the semi-final hurdle twice under Gatland, and that will hurt. He leaves with his legacy intact after almost 12 years at the helm, but not with the fairytale finish he so wanted. “My first game in charge was against England [in 2008] and the dream was for it to be against England, but it was not to be.”