‘It’s funny,” says Robin Williams as Dr Oliver Sacks in Awakenings, as he is faced with recurring batches of symptoms in patients at his new hospital. “You’d think eventually all these atypical somethings would end up as a typical something.” I feel much the same about Channel 5. My first impulse when coming to write about its three-part documentary Doing Drugs for Fun?, which takes four British casual users of cocaine behind the scenes of its manufacture and supply, is to describe it as “surprisingly good”. But Channel 5 has been producing good stuff, if not consistently then frequently and for long enough, that the qualifier seems unfair, even to those of us who remember its early years as a purveyor of “erotic dramas” such as The Red Shoe Diaries (with, bizarrely, David Duchovny). So, Doing Drugs for Fun? is, simply, good. Very good, in fact. It is a deep-dive through the superficial fun of a party drug that 1 million Britons take into the brutality beneath. It manages to be compelling, honest and unpreachy, and treats its subject with robust respect. Central to this is the fact that the four users whose revelatory journeys we follow have clearly been chosen with acute care. They are all perfectly ordinary, save for the gift (a natural one that can’t be taught) of remaining engaging and unaffected in the presence of a camera. They are interested and open-minded, not hostile or rebarbative, and none is a Character-with-a-capital-C. They are here to act as a conduit between the viewers and the subject, rather than to form an antic barrier between the two. This is rare enough to be a striking and admirable choice. The opening episode starts relatively traditionally, with a general look at the quartet’s attitude to their own and others’ drug-taking (PR consultant Amber, airport load operator Louis and supermarket worker Troi cite straightforward pleasure, while mixed-race model and makeup artist Chanel adds with wry satisfaction that it also makes the people who once racially abused her “want to be my best friends now”). This is followed by a chat with their parents – the perspicacity laurels go to Chanel’s mum, who responds to her daughter’s lament about the judgment attached to taking cocaine with a dry: “Think the law’s got summat to do with that” – and the mandatory science bit. Samples of the weekend’s plans are brought in by the four and found to be cut with, among other things, the skin-rotting anti-worming agent levamisole. The first scales fall, tinkling to the ground. They fall harder and faster from this point on. By the end of episode one, the quartet are in Colombia. Amber and Louis have interviewed a contract killer for the vicious Gulf Klan gang and are beginning to sense the oppressive fear and misery that comes with living in a country that produces, smuggles and fights for the profits born of the 140 tonnes of cocaine it produces every year. In the second episode, the reality becomes inescapable. Troi and Chanel trek for two hours through the rainforest with a coca farmer to his secret plantation. They watch him mix leaves (50 plants are required to make one gram of cocaine) with chalk, fertiliser, petrol, water and battery acid, helped by his barefoot eight-year-old son, before cooking it down on the stove at home. He will be paid 50p for a gram that will eventually be bought by the likes of Chanel and Troi for anything up to £100. The cartels take the rest. “It’s the only way to survive now,” he says. “I don’t have a choice.” Meanwhile, Louis and Amber get a taste of the size and scale of the gangs’ operation. They visit the slums and the tenants they control, meet the children who have an 80% chance of being recruited into the industry, and go out on patrol with the navy to understand the virtual impossibility of breaking the stranglehold of the cartels. But all of these horrors pale into comparison with those exposed by Chanel’s interview with a 39-year-old female assassin called the Devil, who is the closest thing to a person scoured of humanity most of us are likely to encounter. Her first kill was at the age of 15, her most recent eight days ago. She has killed pregnant women, her cousin and countless others in between. “I like the madness,” she says. “Not when I was a little girl, but since 15 I’ve loved seeing things fall around me.” Party on.