In the 1940s and 50s the Cadbury family’s social experiments at Bournville (Letters, 23 and 28 September) contributed significantly to the later national development of further education for school leavers. The building of Bournville day continuation college was part of the basic plan for Bournville village green, alongside the church and the Carillon bell tower. Young workers, 14- to 18-year-olds, at the Cadbury family’s factory worked for only four days of their five-day week. The fifth day was spent at the college. College education was not wholeheartedly popular among these youngsters, who had spent their war years with a skeletal teaching force and an education system that had had no significant improvement since 1918. A quarter of the college intake in 1946 were wholly or nearly illiterate. Teaching, therefore, was not easy; talk and chalk were not good enough. But teachers adapted and innovated. Day release college attendance was required by the work contract. Truants would find their work managers were right behind the college. The Cadbury family members were fully supportive, in collaboration with the local authority and in cooperation with several smaller employers. Cadbury ould chip in with fees and extras – music, theatre, crafts, trips, university entrance exams – any sensible support asked for. The central aim was the personal development of all members of their young factory workforce. The Bournville experience was a model for the Ministry of Education when further education colleges were developed during the 1950s and 60s; now, 50 years on, we are still catching up with their aim. In 2008 legislation was passed requiring full-time education for all up to age 18. But we aren’t there yet.Mary GeffenMalvern, Worcestershire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition