Some Rugby World Cup semi-finals stay longer in the memory than others. For every stunning sporting spectacle – Sydney 1987, Dublin 1991, Cape Town 1995 and Twickenham 1999 – a good number have been unable to match the hype. Often they are not even close: in no fewer than nine of the 16 semi-final contests to date there has been a double-figure margin of victory. Major surprises, historically, have also been relatively sparse. Of those 16 games, a mere three were won against the head, so to speak. France, both in 1987 and 1999, totally confounded expectations but, otherwise, probably the biggest shock was New Zealand’s decisive 22-10 loss at the hands of Australia in 2003. That latter fixture, as it happens, is as relevant as any previous last-four game before the weekend’s double bill of England v New Zealand and Wales v South Africa. Tempting as it is to dwell on Jonah Lomu’s four-try trampling of England at Newlands or even the Scotland v England showdown of 1991 – the only previous time that two British sides have made the last four – there are two good reasons why England, in particular, may be keen to dwell on the last occasion the All Blacks lost a World Cup semi-final. Because both the coaches that day are now to be found in England tracksuits. Eddie Jones was in Australia’s corner in 2003, responsible for devising the plan that stopped a rampant All Blacks side dead in their tracks, reducing their counterattacking opportunities and heaping pressure on their brilliant but mercurial fly-half Carlos Spencer. And the coach outwitted on that occasion? None other than Jones’s assistant, John Mitchell, who went on to lose his job as the New Zealand coach as a direct result. Between them Jones and Mitchell know how important it is to have the right tactical plan for the right occasion. Only last weekend there was a perfect example of how not to do it: Australia’s profligate game management and “what will be will be” mentality playing directly into red-rose hands. England will be smarter, not least because Jones and Mitchell have been down this particular dark alleyway before and know precisely where to look for Kiwi insecurities. Perhaps the best way to imagine them is as two old-school detectives, Twickenham’s answer to the Sweeny’s Regan and Carter, sat in a car across the street staking out a dimly-lit target. Jones will have been looking less at the shellacking New Zealand gave Ireland last Saturday and more at precisely how they engineered their victory. As South Africa found on the tournament’s opening weekend, simply putting pressure on their half-backs via line speed is not enough. Unless all their key supply lines – lineout, aerial dominance, breakdown – are shut down, the All Blacks will always find a way to hurt you. To that end the England v Australia game was an extremely useful reconnaissance exercise: southern-hemisphere opposition, dangerous on the counter, a proper defensive test. Assuming Jonny May is fit, England also possess the kind of flying pace they will need to try to turn the tables. Above all, though, they will need to win plenty of collisions and extend their reputation as the World Cup’s tightest defensive unit. The collective confidence of Tom Curry, Sam Underhill and Billy Vunipola is growing by the game and, should it all come down to goal-kicking, Owen Farrell is right back in the groove. A similar muscular chess match awaits when South Africa face Wales, who can surely not play as flatly again as they did against France. When Warren Gatland talked about the better team having lost he was simply speaking the unvarnished truth. Gatland, though, has not arrived at his lofty coaching perch simply by assuming that last week’s form will endlessly repeat itself. If ever there was a game that underlined the steadying influence of Jonathan Davies it was Sunday’s quarter-final and should the centre be back fit to face the Springboks it will make a significant difference. There is also the crucial matter of preparation: Wales’s heavy recent schedule appeared to leave them heavier-legged than France, who, following the cancellation of the previous weekend’s England game, looked far sharper. Given Wales have also beaten South Africa in five of their past six meetings, Gatland can give it to his players straight this week: if they hang tough, keep calm, make inroads with their aerial game and avoid the Boks’ more obvious strengths, it is not totally inconceivable two Six Nations sides could contest the final. In that event, though, southern-hemisphere coaches would still very much retain the balance of power. Jones has won 38 of 48 Tests as the England coach; Hansen and Gatland have been picking off less wily coaches for more than two decades and Rassie Erasmus has done a remarkable job of resurrecting a South Africa team who, as recently as 2017, could barely win a game. The Springboks and the All Blacks remain narrow favourites to contest the final in Yokohama on 2 November but if anyone can wrongfoot them it is Gatland and Jones.