Youri Tielemans claimed the winning goal as Leicester City commemorated the approaching anniversary of Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha’s death but Brendan Rodgers also owes a debt of gratitude to VAR. The Belgium midfielder scored the decisive goal, after Jamie Vardy had cancelled out Chris Wood’s opener for Burnley, but the visitors were unfortunate in the extreme not to equalise 10 minutes from time. Wood took two bites at Matt Lowton’s excellent cross before the ball hit Jonny Evans’s chest to go over the line but only after Wood had inadvertently tangled legs with the defender. After an emotional day for Leicester, Rodgers reacted to Sean Dyche’s measured despair over the decision to point out that VAR tends to go both ways. Leicester lost at Anfield to a tight stoppage-time penalty call two weeks ago. “My feeling with VAR is you’ll get some go for you, some go against you,” the Leicester manager said. “We had it two weeks ago at Liverpool. We had a penalty against us that really wasn’t a penalty and it ended up costing us two points. Today I can see where Sean’s coming from but there’s enough people looking at it [at Premier League HQ] to say there was contact and obviously we’ll take it. When it’s so late in game, it’s hard to take, especially when they’ve played so well. But listen, it was a really good three points for us today; we had to battle and fight and earn the right and we did that.” This fourth successive home victory means Leicester have 17 points after nine games, one more than they did in their title-winning season four years ago. Burnley have yet to win away but, despite the relative thinness of their squad showing, and looking leg-weary after the break when Leicester played with greater tempo, they could argue they deserved a point here. Dyche’s argument that Wood’s effort should have been allowed centred on the striker’s lack of intent. “For the record, I am a big fan of VAR and I think it is needed in the game,” the Burnley manager said. “There is someone sitting watching on a screen, like I have just done, through 15 different views, slow motion, fast motion and with no emotion to the game. I find it incredible that after that you manage to find that is not a goal.” There had been an emotional build-up to the game as around 5,000 Leicester fans joined in the Walk for Vichai from the city centre almost a year after the helicopter crash that claimed five lives including that of the former chairman. Before a powerful minute’s silence, with the cameras on Top Srivaddhanaprabha in the directors’ box, scarves were held aloft all around the King Power Stadium. Burnley have still to win away though this was their first defeat in five matches, yet they had gone ahead in the 26th minute. Dwight McNeil, starting on the right wing, cut back on to his left foot and crossed for Wood to head in. The 1,267 Burnley fans told Jamie Vardy his wife was a grass, proclaiming their support of “Rooney, Rooney” in a nod to the recent online spat between the former England strikers’ wives. They should have known better. Vardy had the last laugh of the half as he claimed his 11th goal in as many Premier League home games, climbing powerfully to head in Harvey Barnes’s superb cross. Whether Burnley tired or Leicester simply played with greater urgency after the restart, the home team deserved to go ahead when the substitute Demarai Gray’s cross was dummied – or missed – by Barnes for Tielemans to take a couple of touches to steady himself and blast home his third goal of the season.