In the course of my work and play this year, I have spent time in, or passed through, the following small towns and villages around the UK: Abergavenny, Ayr, Ballycastle, Bewdley, Bridgnorth, Chorley, Droitwich, Dumfries, Ebbw Vale, Fareham, Formby, Goole, Hagley, Holyhead, Inkberrow, Kidderminster, Langley Park, Malvern, Monmouth, Neath, Oldbury, Portishead, Portpatrick, Redcar, Stourbridge, Stranraer, Teignmouth, Tewkesbury, Upton-upon-Severn, Wantage, Wem, West Bromwich and Weymouth. In all these places, and many like them, I am struck by the same thoughts. First, they all have good things going for them; they would be really pleasant places to live if you could find a way to earn a living. Second, attractive as they are, I fear they were in better shape a couple of generations ago. And third, I wonder what the future holds for them. What I have really wanted to do is knock on the doors of sixth-form colleges, get the 17- and 18-year-olds together, and ask which of them is planning to make their lives in their home towns. Then I would ask those who wanted to be somewhere else why this was, and what it would take to get them to change their minds. These are really important questions, at the heart of inclusion, identity and opportunity. If answers aren’t found, our smaller places will risk withering on the vine, and our bigger places will get bigger and bigger, with all the ghastly consequences – air pollution, soaring house prices and so on. Look no further than the absurdly skyscraping skyline of Manchester now under construction. What are we thinking? For heaven’s sake, let’s just spread life around a bit more. The above list finishes with Weymouth, and not just because it is in alphabetical order. It was Weymouth that got me thinking this way. Last year, I was having my picture taken by an impressive woman working for this newspaper who had grown up there. She was in her 20s and living in north London. I asked her if she had ever considered making her life back home. “What would I do in Weymouth?” she shrugged. I get that – I left the West Midlands when I was 19, after all – but why does it have to be like this? What needs to happen for there to be jobs near these places, or ones that are easier to get to if they are not so near? I have pitched the idea to every media organisation that will take my call. Working title, WTF Would I Do in Weymouth? But none of this is new, of course, and plenty of research has been done looking at how to reverse the endless march towards the metropolis. The solutions are obvious, starting with much better transport, especially public transport, and better broadband. Both of these require massive public spending, with electoral reward starting to pop its head up only in three parliaments’ time at the earliest, I would have thought. So we can probably dream on. NB: Regarding the places I have mentioned, I expect I will get furious communications along the lines of: “How dare you? This town is thriving!” All I can say is: bring it on. Honestly, I’d love to be wrong. • Adrian Chiles is a writer, broadcaster and Guardian columnist