ScrunchUnicorn theatre, London, 27 November-22 December A show that celebrates the true meaning of Christmas for babies: wrapping paper. Performed by Kevin Lewis, and co-created with Sarah Argent, this is a gentle half-hour of clowning for children aged 6-18 months, based around the opening of ever more exciting presents on stage. It ends with a paper-scrunching session for toddlers that leaves the room looking like Christmas morning. The Lost ThingRoyal Opera House, London, 7 December-4 January Shaun Tan’s dystopian picturebook – about a boy collecting bottletops who befriends a huge, many-tentacled creature – became an Oscar-winning short film narrated by Tim Minchin. Now, it’s been turned into a 90-minute stage production by Candoco Dance Company and the Royal Opera. Suitable for over-sixes. The Astonishing Times of Timothy CratchitHope Mill theatre, Manchester, 22 November-29 December Here’s a refreshing alternative to yet another helping of A Christmas Carol. This musical sequel by Allan Knee and Andre Catrini plots a big adventure for Tiny Tim and features other characters from Dickens’s novel as well as a role for the 18th-century entertainer Giuseppe Grimaldi. PenguinsLyric theatre, Belfast, 18-22 December In 2004, two male chinstrap penguins at a New York zoo hit headlines around the world when it was reported that, after trying to hatch a rock together, Roy and Silo had raised a chick. Their story subsequently became a children’s book and is now also a theatre-cum-dance show for over-threes, directed by Paul Bosco McEneaney. Rapunzel The Egg, Bath, 6 December-12 January The snug Egg theatre has a tradition of cracking Christmas shows, aided by the proximity of the audience to the actors. They’re following up last year’s hair-raising Scarlet Pimpernel with a Rapunzel for over-sevens, adapted by Annie Siddons and directed by Nik Partridge, that promises comedy, songs and a magic pig. Five Little Christmas MonkeysPark theatre, London, 16-21 December It’s the night before Christmas and Sue Keeper, the zoo keeper, is trying to get a little monkey to sleep. Cue number-counting, zany wordplay, plenty of puppets and a puzzling present that keeps the audience guessing. Baby Panda’s production is aimed at children aged two to six. Keep your eyes peeled – the set design is full of secrets. Strange TalesTraverse, Edinburgh, 30 November–21 December There’s a fine tradition of Christmas shows that chill the bones as well as warm your heart. This is a hi-tech, immersive adaptation of some of the enigmatic and supernatural tales collected by Pu Songling (1640-1715) and published after his death as Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio. Co-produced with Grid Iron, it’s recommended for over-14s. Watch out for the fox-spirits. The Prince and the PauperNew Vic, Newcastle-under-Lyme, 16 November-25 January Director Theresa Heskins and actor Danielle Bird worked wonders with an adaptation of The Worst Witch and now reunite – joined by Bird’s twin, Nichole – for an in-the-round staging of Mark Twain’s novel. The Bird sisters are an inspired bit of casting for this 16th-century-set tale of two children, identical in appearance but whose circumstances couldn’t look more different. The show is for over-sixes but the New Vic also has a 45-minute version for three- to five-year-olds. The Wizard of OzLeeds Playhouse, 20 November-25 January Renamed and now open after its £16m redevelopment, Leeds Playhouse has plenty to celebrate. Its festive shindig for over-sevens is the RSC adaptation by John Kane of the MGM classic, which was first released in cinemas 80 years ago. Meanwhile, Leeds Playhouse’s 2017 box-office hit The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe will be revived at the Bridge theatre, London, this winter. Black BeautySouthbank Centre, London, 14 December-5 January Awarded a five-star rosette by the Guardian’s Mark Fisher in 2016, this is “not so much an adaptation of the Anna Sewell novel as a free-associating theatrical gymkhana”. Aimed at over-fives, it’s a playful reinvention by Shona Reppe, Andy Manley and Andy Cannon that features puppetry, music and a treat for My Little Pony fans. How the Grinch Stole ChristmasMotorpoint Arena, Cardiff, 20-24 November. Lowry, Salford, 10 December-5 January This supersize staging of Dr Seuss’s book about a furry green Scrooge is going on a five-city UK tour. Audiences in Cardiff and Salford will see the starriest cast, as Griff Rhys Jones plays the canine storyteller Old Max. X Factor winner Matt Terry stars as Young Max and Edward Baker-Duly savours the roar of the green paint in the lead role. For children aged three and above. The Ocean at the End of the LaneNational Theatre, London, 3 December-25 January The National’s Christmas blockbuster is in the more intimate Dorfman theatre this year. All the omens are good. It’s based on Neil Gaiman’s bestselling fable (which started as a story written for his wife, Amanda Palmer) and directed by rising star Katy Rudd. The movement direction from Steven Hoggett should be spellbinding as ever. Recommended for over-12s.