French toast is evocative of long brunches in America. However, imagine yourself on a French mountainside and it is that thoroughly irresistible pain perdu that probably gave the US its inspiration. For our British issue, I’ve made a version with new-season squashes, which are all over farmers’ markets right now. The squash gives the caramel a wonderful flavour and tames its sweetness. The sweet-savoury flavour of pumpkin softens the dark, salted caramel and gives it a gorgeous deep shade of tangerine. Prep 30 minCook 45 minServes 4-6 ½ small pumpkin or squash200g caster sugar50g butter100ml double cream3-4 tbsp dark rum or aged tequila½ lemonSalt For the french toast4 eggs175ml whole milk6 slices white bread75g butterVanilla ice-cream, cream or yoghurt, to serve Peel and cut the squash into equal 3-5cm chunks. Put in a steamer and cook for about 25 minutes, until tender to the point of a sharp knife. Remove the pan from heat and leave the squash uncovered to steam-dry. To make the caramel, put the sugar in a heavy-based pan and pour over four tablespoons of water. Set over a medium heat and keep an eye on it as the sugar melts and turns a deep, dark caramel colour, and the water evaporates. Just before it starts smoking, quickly add the butter, cream and rum, and stir vigorously until you have a smooth, silky caramel. Put 350g squash flesh into a bowl, pour over the caramel and . Use a stick blender to whizz until you have a smooth sauce. Taste, season with a little lemon juice and a few pinches of salt, and keep warm. To make the french toast, whisk together the eggs and milk, submerge the bread in the mix and leave for 10-15 minutes. Heat a large frying pan over a medium heat. Add one to two tablespoons of the butter and, once hot, fry one to two slices of the bread at a time, turning once the bottom is golden – three to four minutes. Set aside on a warm plate and repeat until all the toast is done. Dollop over scoops of the pumpkin caramel, season with a scrunch of sea salt, then serve with vanilla ice-cream, thick cream or Greek yoghurt. There is usually some leftover puree, so stir it through Greek yoghurt for breakfast with a touch of granola. Leftover pumpkin is delicious in a fiery Thai curry, and would make a lovely autumnal soup.