England have been forced to review their travel plans for Saturday’s World Cup semi-final against New Zealand after their final training session at Yokohama Stadium was delayed due to traffic congestion. Eddie Jones has based his squad to the east of Tokyo at the Disneyland resort, 30 miles away from the stadium with an average journey time of more than an hour. England were due to start their final training session before facing the All Blacks at 10am local time but, amid torrential rain, they did not run out on to the pitch until around 10:45am. The All Blacks opted against conducting their captain’s run at the stadium, instead training in Tokyo. Both sides are supposed to carry out their final press conference at the venue but World Rugby has allowed teams to do so at the governing body’s Tokyo hotel instead, which New Zealand opted to do. While the All Blacks are familiar with the 72,000-seater stadium, having beaten South Africa there on the opening weekend of the tournament, England are yet to play there after their pool-stage match against France was cancelled. England’s assistant coach, Neal Hatley, played down the impact it would have on their travel plans but conceded their arrangements would be looked at. “The rain was a bit of a factor,” he said. “It was about 10 minutes longer than expected so we’ll have a look. The logistics have been brilliant through the whole tournament and it’s not due to rain tomorrow.” Jones has prepared for travel delays – before their record-breaking win in their World Cup warm-up match against Ireland he ensured England arrived late at Twickenham on purpose but did not inform his players he was doing so. “We arrived at the ground late on purpose, to see how the players adapted,” he said at the time. Meanwhile, Courtney Lawes has insisted New Zealand will know exactly who England are on Saturday. Five years ago Brodie Retallick was asked whether he knew any of the members of England’s touring party to New Zealand. He replied by saying “a couple”, before singling out Michael Laws, seemingly confusing the Northampton lock with the former mayor of Whanganui. Retallick was furious when reminded about the incident earlier this week but Lawes said: “If they don’t [know our names], then they will tomorrow, it’s just one of those things mate! We will just get on with it.”