When a newborn baby dies because the mother has been left alone with no medical care in a privatised prison, the time has come for political change (Inquiries launched into death of baby in prison cell, 9 October). Handwringing apologies which ignore the fact that four women have also died at HMP Bronzefield since 2016 are indicative of the increasing collapse of penal provision. A country is judged by its prisons and this latest disaster would have Elizabeth Fry turning in her grave.Shirley HarringtonBury, Greater Manchester • Our heritage orchard at Woodlands Farm in Greenwich boasts one court pendu plat (How do you like these apples?, G2, 10 October). We’ve often called it by its old English nickname, “the wise apple”. So called because it blossoms late, so flowers miss spring frosts. After almost 20 years we’re still waiting for a fruit to try. Perhaps that’s another reason why it’s so rare.Maggie JonesBlackheath, London • Saturday stag parties leaving on the 6pm boat and a few teenagers smoking a bit of weed hardly make the place downtown 1980s Beirut (Sark’s dark side: island is awash with criminals, says police chief, 8 October). It’s actually the second most boring place in Britain!Ian GarnerVale, Guernsey • I spent a frantic half hour seeking my black Audi TT in a huge car park (Digested week, 5 October). I was on the point of reporting it stolen when I noticed the keys in my hand. They were for my wife’s white VW Golf. David ShannonIreland’s Cross, Shropshire • Whatever happened to “high tea” (Letters, 8 October)?Judith MilnesFarnsfield, Nottinghamshire • I’m looking forward to the “10 perfect dessert recipes” supplement on Saturday. But I can do without the letters from those who end their tea with a sweet, rather than a pudding.Brian BaxterBournemouth, Dorset • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition