‘This was incredible – to quote you.” Kate Berlant is reflecting on her performance, and sees no cause to question its brilliance. We have been blessed to bask in her light, as far as she’s concerned – and you may well concur by the end of this comedy-impro happening, in which the Californian narrates her experience, moment by moment, of existing on stage in front of us. And makes it hilarious. The show confirms the impression given by Berlant’s 2018 Edinburgh debut that she is one of comedy’s most electrifying performers. As much of it is off-the-cuff as scripted, and she’s blazingly in-the-moment throughout. The audience’s responses, her own words and unplanned gestures, a misbehaving microphone cable – she’s so alert to all of them, and capable of alchemising them into instant, unexpected comedy. Berlant’s persona is that of an aloof egomaniacal narcissist. She offers us her every statement, every thought and momentary observation as if it were a precious gift. She’s hungry for our attention, and commentates on her control of it (“the immediacy is searing; you can feel it!”) – even as she requires us to keep our distance (“I can feel you contextualising me”). It’s a meticulous portrait of millennial entitlement, but it’s also plain ridiculous – as Berlant telegraphs with a wide range of dorky face-pulls. It’s beefed up too by some high-end prepared material, like her riff on the possibility of a female president, or the one about sibling sexual tension. There’s rich comedy to be found in Berlant’s matter-of-fact treatment of extremely absurd propositions, or in the out-of-nowhere philosophising that leads, say, to her “I don’t like that life is constant” routine. The show is 10 minutes shy of an hour – it’s padded with a fine support set from Phoebe Walsh – and lacks structure. Its final third finds Berlant playing psychic to audience members, advertising her own (debatable) virtuosity as she divines who ate caramel today, or who broke a lightbulb. It’s a winning set piece, its failures as entertaining as its successes, which finds Berlant, as ever, in exquisite – and exquisitely funny – command of the live moment. At Soho theatre, London, until Saturday 12 October.