Restaurant names are important; they lure or repel. My Neighbours The Dumplings sounds like a post-post-punk group featuring Jah Wobble and ex-members of Gang of Four. It also sounds like a disrespectful jibe about the people over the fence post-Christmas. But My Neighbours The Dumplings, which opened in Clapton, east London, some years back, and which has recently opened a second, roomier restaurant in Victoria Park, Hackney, is in fact named after the 1998 cult Japanese anime film My Neighbour Toroto. That has to be the most impudently east-London thing I’ll write in 2019, but there are 11 weeks left. Three years ago, with that brilliant name acting as catnip, I fought my way into Kristian Leontiou and Becky Wharton’s first dumpling and sake bar to find the place in absolute bedlam. Delicious, homespun, sort-of-Chinese, sort-of-Korean, a-little-Vietnamese bedlam. But also the sort of bedlam that sets in when your pop-up events and baskets of crisp, chewy, courgette and wood-ear mushroom potstickers are a sell-out success and Nigella’s been in for a plate of your prawn har gow. It was the sort of bedlam that brings all the cool kids to the melee, like wasps to jam, and turns your waiting area into a 50-minute queue for smacked cucumber and turnip cake. I remember leaving feeling that it was wonderful, and that drinking sake cocktails in its pot-plant jungle was a real coup, but still, I’d eaten dinner with one bum cheek on a stranger’s thigh and my elbow in their peanut salad. I was impressed, but would never go back. We hear lots these days about restaurants withering due to lack of interest, but what do you do when you’re loved to the point that your walls can barely contain you? “So this is what stupid people look like,” Becky Wharton wrote on My Neighbours The Dumplings’ Instagram last April, revealing these new premises. “Two kids and two restaurants in three years!” Cut to a drab, very early Tuesday evening in early October, and we are eating alone in the all-new, bigger and, I think, better My Neighbours The Dumplings. We go at 5pm, managing to miss not only the hip things, but also the parents with toddlers who began to fill up the benches later. This suits me fine: the new residence is a gorgeous expanse of elegant calm. More beautiful, more, dare I say, grown-up than the first. It’s twinkly, inviting and date-nightish. Or, in our case, date-late-afternoonish. On one side, banqueting benches sit under explosions of greenery and a cacophony of lanterns and knick-knacks; on the other, a small dumpling kitchen. Trung Nguyen and master dumpling chef Carol Lee supervise the making of around 14,000 dumplings a week over the two sites. I think they may have nailed the perfect crisp, moist potsticker. You may know them as gyoza. I once heard potstickers called “Peking ravioli” in America. It’s no surprise they’re also nicknamed “the gateway dumpling” by some, because, even if you’re not in the mood for Asian food, they’ll change your mind. Here, the vegetable potstickers are a punchy blend of shiitake, cabbage, chive and sesame. Next up, a thrilling basket of Cantonese crystal shrimp dumplings, or har gow, are the best I’ve had in London. They are firm, satisfying bullets of joy, with stretchy, nigh-translucent skins, masking a buoyant whack of pink prawn, sesame and oyster sauce. We are supposed to be pacing ourselves, but quickly order another basket from the chipper staff. We steer ourselves away from dumplings to the other small plates: a bowl of delightful pickled wood-ear mushrooms with goji berries and matchsticks of apple is fabulous and a great foil for a soothing, unusual cold plate of marinated silken tofu littered with preserved vegetables and pine nuts in a puddle of tamari. Yakitori skewers of line-caught mackerel, grilled with lime and sake, are a delight. Possibly my least favourite dish is the fanciest and most expensive: a tartare of hamachi yellowtail on avocado mush looks charming on the menu photo, but makes little impact on my tastebuds. If you go, which I think you should, order the chocolate dumplings. Yes, it’s only a basket of unglamorous spring rolls filled with dark chocolate goo and served with a salted caramel dipping sauce and a scoop of ice-cream, but winter is coming and we all need extra fat to keep warm. Go early, beat the rush, order the har gow. That’s how good neighbours become good friends. • My Neighbours The Dumplings 178-180 Victoria Park Road, London, E9, 020-3327 0447. Open all week, 5-10pm (11pm Fri & Sat). About £20 a head plus drinks and service.Food 8/10Atmosphere 8/10Service 8/10