Polish novelist Olga Tokarczuk and Austrian author Peter Handke have both won the Nobel prize in literature. To a packed room at the Swedish Academy in Stockholm on Thursday, the permanent secretary of the Swedish Academy Mats Malm announced Tokarczuk as 2018’s Nobel literature laureate, and Handke as 2019’s winner. Tokarczuk was cited by the committee for “a narrative imagination that with encyclopedic passion represents the crossing of boundaries as a form of life”, and Handke for “an influential work that with linguistic ingenuity has explored the periphery and the specificity of human experience”. The selections come days after the Swedish Academy promised to move away from the “male-oriented” and “Eurocentric” past of the Nobel prize in literature, and follow an unprecedented two years of scandal at the august body, which hopes to restore its reputation with this year’s choices. Last year’s prize was postponed because of the “reduced public confidence” that followed rape accusations made against Jean-Claude Arnault, the French husband of academy member Katarina Frostenson. Frostenson and six other members ended up leaving the Swedish Academy amid bitter rows over how the accusations were handled, and Arnault, who was also accused of leaking the names of laureates, is now in prison for rape. Anders Olsson, chair of the Nobel prize in literature committee, admitted earlier this month that: “we had a more Eurocentric perspective on literature, and now we are looking all over the world.” Olsson also admitted to a “much more male-oriented” perspective in the past, which he said was changing. The Swedish Academy has long tended to veil the process for choosing its candidates in mystery, with its 18 members elected for life, and nominations of candidates not made public until 50 years have passed. Told to show “greater openness towards the outside world” by the Nobel Foundation, and charged with restoring its credibility, it now allows members to voluntarily resign, and has appointed seven new members, with Malm taking over from former permanent secretary Sara Danius, who was forced out during the Arnault scandal.