Downing Street has indicated it will back a plan by the Liberal Democrats to change the law in order to hold a December election if Labour refuses to back Boris Johnson’s motion on Monday for an early poll. A No 10 source attempted to put pressure on Labour to back its motion under the Fixed-term Parliaments Act for an election on 12 December, saying the government would turn to the Lib Dem plan as an alternative. The law requires there be at least 25 working days (five weeks) between calling an election and polling day. That realistically leaves only three Thursdays when the UK could have an election this year. The key dates are: 12 December has emerged as Boris Johnson's favoured date. Any later seems unlikely as it will be seen as an unwelcome intrusion into the festive season - and difficult to organise, as many of the venues needed for polling stations will be busy with Christmas and holiday events. Despite repeated assurances, Boris Johnson seems set to miss his 31 October deadline for Brexit. The Benn act specified 31 January 2020 as the UK's preferred length of extension and new Brexit date, but it is possible the EU might opt for a shorter period of time to focus minds. Any EU extension is likely to be a 'flextension' - with a set end date, but the opportunity for the UK to leave earlier if parliament can ratify a withdrawal agreement. An alternative scenario is for Johnson to prefer to use an EU extension period to force his withdrawal agreement bill through parliament before Christmas, exit the EU with his deal at the end of January, and then press for an election in February/March 2020 having 'got Brexit done'. Martin Belam Johnson needs Labour support to get a two-thirds majority for an election under current legislation, but Jeremy Corbyn is refusing to back one while the possibility of a no-deal Brexit is still alive. Over the weekend, the Lib Dems offered to help Johnson change the law to allow an election on 9 December, which would need only a simple majority in parliament. A No 10 source said: “Tonight is Labour’s last chance to have an election with Brexit delivered – they can vote for the 12th and get Brexit done before. If not, we will introduce a bill almost identical to the Lib Dem/SNP one tomorrow. “This parliament has repeatedly failed to deliver on its promise to respect the referendum. Millions of families and businesses can’t plan because of constant delays. We need a new parliament by Christmas so we can get Brexit done in January and the country can move on.” It is not clear how the government’s proposal for a bill would differ and it is possible No 10 could be using the idea to put pressure on Labour before tabling legislation that the Lib Dems could not back. However, Lib Dem sources indicated they would be willing to support any legislation that was fundamentally similar to their own and confirmed they would not pursue amendments in order to ensure the bill had the best chance possible of getting through. It is understood the bill would need to be tabled on Tuesday and passed by Thursday in order for a 9 December election to take place. The move creates a dilemma for Labour over whether to support Monday afternoon’s motion calling an election for 12 December, if it wants to avoid the situation of the Tories, Lib Dems and SNP all ganging up to call a poll this year. John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, framed the situation as “the Lib Dem and Tory pact of 2010 being re-established”. “They are back together, selling out the People’s Vote campaign and the cross-party campaign to prevent a no deal. The Lib Dems will stop at nothing to get their ministerial cars back,” he said. The shadow cabinet was meeting on Monday afternoon to determine whipping arrangements for the election vote, which is due at around 7pm in parliament. Jo Swinson, the Lib Dem leader, hit back at McDonnell, tweeting: “In the last 10 days I’ve addressed a #PeoplesVote March and tabled an amendment to the Queen’s speech that would have given us a people’s vote. Your leader did neither. Don’t lecture me about fighting for a people’s vote.”