Tom and Lisa Aldiss* had just bought their first home when the demand arrived. A housing association they had never heard of claimed the developer had breached a restrictive covenant by building their house and demanded they pay £45,000 or face legal action. Restrictive covenants appear on the majority of title deeds for properties in the UK and can prohibit certain uses, alterations or developments. Although solicitors are supposed to flag them up, most homeowners remain unaware of them. And those who inadvertently breach a covenant – or buy from a seller who has already breached it – can find themselves liable for life-changing sums. For the Aldisses, it has turned into a legal nightmare. A covenant on the land on which their new house stood forbade any building work without permission from the council. The developer who initially bought the plot failed to seek permission and later ignored a request to pay for release from the covenant. The property was sold on to another builder, who claimed to be unaware of the breach. This builder then sold the completed house to the Aldisses, who are now being pursued by a housing association, the current beneficiary of the covenant. Their solicitor had made them aware of the covenant, but was satisfied that the seller had taken out indemnity insurance to cover any liability. However, that insurance was invalidated because the original developer had been notified of the covenant breach before the policy was purchased. The Aldisses’ starter home is also potentially liable for another astronomical charge – “chancel repair liability”. This ancient burden can require landowners to foot the bill for repairs to the local church, a sum that could reach hundreds of thousands of pounds. The couple have had to buy indemnity insurance to protect against future demands. Thousands of homeowners could, like the Aldisses, be hit by unexpected costs because of antique laws buried in their title deeds. Worse, they can be held liable for arrears accrued by previous owners. Eva Hamilton opened a letter addressed to the previous owner of her home demanding payment of a £100 “rentcharge”. Confusingly, that has nothing to do with ground rent or tenancies. It is an annual sum due to a third party who has no other interest in the property. This is usually a former landowner or developer, or a private company that bought the “rentcharge” as an investment. Although the sums may be small – in Hamilton’s case just £1.50 a year payable to a private company – if a homeowner fails to pay the “rent-charge”, they may end up forfeiting the freehold. Hamilton bought her home six years ago and had never been billed for the charge, which dates from 1887. “I was told that unless I bought it outright for £100 I would be pursued for decades’ worth of charges,” she says. In fact, under the Limitation Act 1980 she is only liable for the past six years. But if she fails to pay, her flat could be seized by the freeholder. The Rentcharges Act 1977 prohibited the creation of new charges, with some exceptions, and most historic ones will be extinguished by 2037. But the act failed to protect homeowners from an even more onerous liability: “estate rentcharge”. This is often levied on owners of freehold properties on an estate with communal amenities, and has the same purpose as a service charge to pay for the upkeep of shared facilities. Paul Hanna received a demand for nearly £700 in “estate rentcharges” from Saxon Weald, the housing association that sold him the freehold to his house in Southwater, West Sussex, in 2016. He already pays a service charge to the management company of the estate but has now discovered that under the transfer deeds of his home, he is liable for both. Frighteningly, freeholders who are pursued for “estate rentcharges” can be charged unspecified sums for unspecified works indefinitely, and face forfeiting their freehold if they don’t pay, unlike leaseholders who are protected by law from unfair service charges. Saxon Weald failed to respond to requests for a comment. The law is inching forward to protect homeowners from archaic liabilities. Until 2013, the owner of a property subject to “chancel repair liability” was liable whether or not they had notice of it when they purchased the property. In 2013, churches were required to enter a notice on the Register of Title to protect their rights, and more than 250 have done so, affecting 12,000 properties. The rule was intended to give a buyer advance warning that payment might have to be made, and means that anyone buying a property without a notice on the title after October 2013 should be safe. As new protections are brought in, new rules can exert a similar stranglehold. Rachel Stevenson and David Hill received a demand for £8,000 from the London Borough of Newham three years after moving into their newbuild home. It was for a Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL), which is payable on new developments to local authorities since 2010. The council has since acknowledged that its attempt to chase the debt was 'untimely' The developer is supposed to issue an “assumption of liability” notice when applying for planning permission and pay the CIL once they’ve notified the council that works have commenced. In Stevenson and Hill’s case the builder issued the first notice but not the second. It took Newham council two years to get round to issuing him with a demand and, when he failed to respond, it waited a further three years before sending a second bill. By then Stevenson and Hill had bought the house and, since the council had not registered the unpaid CIL with the local land charges register, it was not picked up during conveyancing. Worse, the couple were hit with an additional £2,000 surcharge for the builder’s failure to serve the commencement notice, and £1,000 of late payment charges. If they don’t pay up they may be unable to sell. The council has since acknowledged that its attempt to chase the debt was “untimely” and has waived the £2,000 surcharge, but the couple is still liable for the £5,000 levy plus the escalating late-payment fees and interest. They say they are footing the bill for the council’s inertia. Following contact from the Observer, Newham council says it is reviewing the case. Alison Spark of Thomson Snell & Passmore says a vigilant solicitor should identify any expensive burdens that could affect the value or sale of a property. “Searches during the conveyancing process should guard against the hidden costs,” she says. * Names have been changed