Russell Wilson threw a five-yard touchdown pass to Chris Carson on fourth-and-goal with 2:28 remaining to give Seattle the lead, Greg Zuerlein missed a 44-yard field goal with 11 seconds left and the Seahawks held on for a wild 30-29 victory over the Los Angeles Rams on Thursday night. Jared Goff and the Rams (3-2) appeared on the verge of a victory after driving into field-goal range in the final 90 seconds. Zuerlein hit three field goals earlier, but his final attempt slipped wide right and gave Seattle (4-1) a win they needed against their NFC West foe after losing six of the past eight to the Rams. FINAL: The @Seahawks hang on for a thrilling #TNF win! #LARvsSEA #Seahawks(by @Lexus) pic.twitter.com/xJDQqQfVLz Wilson was 17 of 23 for 268 and four touchdowns. He was at his best, whether it was his throws from the pocket or when he was forced to improvise. It was one stunning play after another from Seattle’s star, continuing the best start to a season in his career. “I thought Russell played one of the best games I’ve ever seen him play,” Seattle coach Pete Carroll said. Even his opponents were left in awe. “Russell Wilson is playing out of his mind right now,” Rams safety Eric Weddle said. Seattle appeared to wrap up the victory when Tedric Thompson made a juggling interception of Goff’s deflected pass while lying on the turf with 2:08 left. But the Rams forced Seattle to punt and took possession at their own seven with 1:38 left. In just seven plays, Goff had the Rams to the Seattle 30 after a 28-yard strike to Gerald Everett. The Rams stalled and a nine-yard pass to Everett on third-down set up Zuerlein’s attempt. The snap was good, but the kick stayed just to the right. “It’s one kick. He’s made a lot of big kicks for us. He’s going to continue to make a lot of big kicks for us,” Rams coach Sean McVay said. Goff finished 29 of 49 for 395 yards and one touchdown just days after throwing for a career-high 517 yards and tying an NFL record with 45 completions in a loss to Tampa Bay. Everett had seven catches for 136 yards, and Cooper Kupp had nine grabs for 118 yards and a TD. Wilson, though, was the star.