Before the Democratic debate on Tuesday night, Cardi B expressed doubt that any of the Democratic presidential candidates have what it takes to beat Donald Trump next year. In an appearance alongside Chance the Rapper on TI’s podcast expediTIously With Tip, she worried that no 2020 candidate had risen above the pack and suggested Trump’s base was too entrenched to be beaten. Chance said: “I think Trump is going to win again at the next election because he’s got the biggest base.” Cardi agreed: “I really hate to say it, but sometimes I do believe that Trump will be winning. Just because every single time I don’t see nobody saying they love a Democratic candidate. There’s no candidate that people are saying like we love, we want them to win.” Cardi has been an enthusiastic supporter of Bernie Sanders, and praised him on the podcast as “really a person that cares” – but her comments come as something of a surprise. This summer she sat down for an interview with Sanders as part of an effort to encourage young people to vote. On the podcast, Cardi said she believed many of Trump’s supporters had fallen for his hateful rhetoric and voted for him despite it not being in their best interests. She said: “Every single time he always talk about how he wants to take away Medicare and shit like that. A poor white man that’s getting Medicare is not even caring that he’s saying that – he just cares that he hates Mexicans and he want to get rid of them. “I don’t care if Donald Trump take away the thing that I need, I just hate Mexicans and I want them gone. So I’m going to keep on voting for them A lot of people vote with feelings in America and a lot of their feelings is racism and religion.” She also said she was pessimistic about the impeachment inquiry, saying Republican legislators themselves are too beholden to Trump to let it amount to anything meaningful. Republicans in the Senate, Cardi said, “are the people that are letting Trump still not getting impeached. They don’t want to lose their job. They don’t want to lose their position.” On the podcast, she again praised Sanders, and added that she would like to be able to sit down with more of the candidates. “I really want to do it with every candidate but I just didn’t have time. I really wanted some of my fans to ask questions that they would like a candidate to answer. And I’ve really been a fan of Bernie’s for a long time,” she said. “I always felt like he was really passionate, and I had to ask him, ‘A lot of people think that the things that you’re going to do is not possible, you’re too progressive, it’s not possible.’” Sanders won her over after their talk, she said, adding that he’s “really like a person that cares and I really want that. I want somebody that cares for, not just America, but everybody in America. Every person white. Every person of color, black, Hispanic, Muslim, everybody.”