A wit once stated, after surveying the wreckage of another forlorn Five Nations campaign, that Ireland were in a critical state but it was not serious. Nothing a few shots could not make appear better. As the swaying lines of supporters made their way to the train station more than two hours after the end of one of the most sobering defeats in the six-year reign of Joe Schmidt, their optimism had not been doused by the raging fire that burned deep within New Zealand. They scorched the hopes of a team who had never made it beyond the last eight but hope sprung infernal. Few teams would have got near New Zealand such was the way they married ambition with precision, a potent cocktail that took the legs from Ireland before it messed with their heads. “It is hard enough playing New Zealand with your A game, never mind the D version,” said the Ireland wing Keith Earls, one of the 30-something players whose international careers may have ended along with that of the captain, Rory Best, who at a time of high emotions gave a measured response to a defeat Ireland had not expected, never mind the size of it. “We just seem to shoot ourselves in the foot in the quarter-finals of a World Cup,” said Earls, one of Ireland’s few players who made an impact, if only in defence where, often confronted with the twin threats of the wings George Bridge and Sevu Reece bearing down on him together, scrambled brilliantly at times to make recovery tackles and prevent a rout from turning into a landslide. The priority for Ireland is to ensure all the gains they made under Schmidt – Six Nations titles, a series victory in Australia and their first two victories over the All Blacks – are not undone by a defeat to a team who have, down the decades, been the masters of invention and single-minded resolution. They have opted for continuity with Andy Farrell, the defence coach who oversaw the only two shutouts against New Zealand in the last four years, taking charge. It will be new territory for Stuart Lancaster’s former right-hand man with England. What marks out the very best coaches, such as Steve Hansen, Warren Gatland, Eddie Jones and Schmidt, is their ability to make the right selection calls far more often than not, a vital quality that Australia’s Michael Cheika ultimately lacked. Farrell will have to make decisions over players such as Johnny Sexton, Earls, Rob Kearney, Peter O’Mahony and Cian Healy before the Six Nations. Does he blood a new generation or make changes gradually? What he does have is a nucleus of players aged 24 or younger who have international experience and should be in the leadership group come 2023: Garry Ringrose, Jordan Larmour, Joey Carbery, Jacob Stockdale, James Ryan and Andrew Porter. Hansen remarked before Saturday’s match that under Schmidt Ireland were a well-organised, structured team who rarely depart from the prepared script. It was when they needed to, not so much on Saturday because the brutal manner in which they were torn apart gave them little scope for improvisation, but certainly in the pool defeat against Japan, that the difference between succeeding in Europe and winning a World Cup was laid bare. Ireland under Schmidt did not play like a New Zealand team. He applied a tight rein from the start, instructing his players not to offload unless the act carried a minimum of risk, and unlike Hansen, Gatland and Jones, he was reluctant to expose young players early, preferring to wait until they were embedded in his system. What players such as Carbery, Ringrose and Larmour provide is the means for a more expansive, bolder approach, while retaining the abrasion they developed at forward. “New Zealand were without doubt better than us but we also created opportunities,” said Ryan, who at 23 has developed into one of the leading second rows in Test rugby. “What we have to remember is that some of the wins we have had under Joe Schmidt set standards that were higher [than] before he took over. We have to learn from this and come back stronger.” Schmidt reflected that he carried his scars more than his successes and the latest wound would run deepest. It was not the finale he or Best had dreamed of but, as he appreciates as well as anyone, there are very few happy endings when New Zealand are the opposition. Ireland supporters heading back to Shinjuku had only praise for a man who had touched their dreams with belief, the romantics turned realists. That may be Tokyo Joe’s greatest legacy.