If Wales reach the final they will look back on this match as England did after beating Australia in the 2003 climax having overcome Samoa in the group stage after being overrun initially and 10 points down in as many minutes. The same happened to Warren Gatland’s side here as Fiji, out of the tournament all but mathematically before the kick-off, played as only they can, offloading outrageously to thwart a rush defence, handling with aplomb and running so hard that tacklers were splattered. Sixteen years ago Samoa led England with 18 minutes to go and here Fiji were 17-14 ahead 18 minutes into the second half. Wales had lost their outside-half Dan Biggar, who suffered a second head injury in as many games and will now miss the final pool game against Uruguay after colliding with his teammate Liam Williams. They were down to 14 men with the flanker James Davies in the sin-bin for his team’s persistent infringing. Their captain, Alun Wyn Jones, of all players, had not long before dropped a pass in his own half and it was the point in the game where the Six Nations champions needed someone to step up. Salvation appeared in the form of Jonathan Davies after Rhys Patchell had kicked a penalty to level the scores at 17 apiece. Fiji, who had dominated Australia for long periods before inexplicably losing to Uruguay, had not lost their early fire and enthusiasm, the likes of Semi Radradra – how the tournament will miss the powerful yet balletic wing who was named man of the match – Frank Lomani, Leone Nakarawa and Josua Tuisova bristling with intent and menace. Like Ireland against Japan, Wales were struggling to contain an attacking threat they were not used to. Then Davies, who had not enjoyed his best match, throwing a pass intended for Josh Adams into touch in the first half, made the decisive intervention, running on to the ball at pace and an angle, fending off Jake Vatubua and accelerating into the 22. There was a time when distribution was not among his attributes, but he kept running hard, drawing the defence before flicking a pass out of the back of his left hand to Adams on the wing. Fiji’s two tries in the opening 10 minutes had come down Adams’s flank. He rushed out of the line prematurely before the first, giving himself no chance to tackle Tuisova after a five-metre scrum, and he bounced off the full-back Kini Murimurivalu, who scored the second after Radradra had come into midfield from his wing and taken the ball from a deep position to thwart a rush defence which stalled to leave space out wide. He then scored two tries as Wales took a 14‑10 lead and was denied two more by superb tackles from Lomani, a player who emerged from World Rugby’s fast-track system. When Adams received Davies’s pass he was close to the touchline 10 metres out with two defenders sweeping across. He somehow stayed in field before acrobatically touching down to claim his hat-trick and give Wales a lead they were to supplement with a bonus-point try through Liam Williams. It was a breathless contest – seven tries, five more which were disallowed and four yellow cards, two of which, for Ken Owens and Tevita Cavubati for dangerous challenges, may attract the interest of the citing commissioner. Davies suffered a knee injury after being clattered as he passed and was immediately taken off. Adams followed after having his right leg strapped when victory was secured. Gatland said both had suffered dead legs and that they were expected to be fit for the quarter-final, which will be against France if their game against England on Saturday is called off because of Typhoon Hagibis, but Biggar’s return will be determined by an independent specialist. Wales could be without specialist cover at fly-half. Fiji outplayed Wales for long periods, but their lack of exposure against the leading nations eventually told, again. They scored three tries, their last a penalty try after a driving maul that was about to reach Wales’s line was taken down, had two more ruled out for forward passes and a potential penalty try after George North’s saving tackle off the ball was not reviewed because of a forward pass in the build-up. With Biggar missing, Patchell will step up in a much-changed team against Uruguay, although who would provide fly-half back-up remains to be seen. “Some players are going to have to back up, particularly backs. We may go for a 6-2 split on the bench with six forwards,” said Gatland. “We will weigh those options up in terms of who we think can do the job for us. We’ve got players who may be a little unfamiliar, but we have been running players there at training.” Wales were not at their best, but showed the powers of recovery that helped deliver the grand slam this year as they recorded a record 14-match winning run. Coming from behind for the first time showed how mentally strong they now are, a characteristic England boasted in 2003. They rallied to beat Samoa by 13 points, fired by the self-belief Wales now possess. Fiji are going home, but the world game needs to embrace and support a team who provide so much of its colour. They will be missed.