More than 50 years after it was first invented by a bloke named Thomas Angove in South Australia, boxed wine is back in fashion. It’s come a long way. Once the domain of cheap drops and drinking games, there are now specialty “bag-in-box” wines selling out in bottle shops across the country, produced by a coterie of Australia’s trendiest winemakers. Technology has advanced, yes, but it’s popular for the same reasons it was a smash hit in the first place: boxed wine is cheap, portable and convenient. You can buy three litres, take it home, and it’ll keep in the fridge for four weeks once it’s opened. The only difference is now, according to Dr Mardi Longbottom, a senior researcher and viticulturist at the Australian Wine Research Institute, the “quality of wine can be exceptional”. Last year, top Sydney restaurant Icebergs kicked things off when it collaborated with Giorgio de Maria Fun Wines to launch its biodynamic house red in a two-litre box. It was poured in-house for $9 a glass, while the cask itself sold at sister venue the Dolphin Hotel’s bottle shop for $55. When it sold out, quickly, the team followed up with a 10-litre box of skin-contact orange. There are now several plans for white and rose varieties. Elsewhere, 1.5-litre “bagnums” of natural wine from Australian producers Jilly and Le Grappin sell so quickly they’re almost impossible to track down and Italian producer Carussin’s three-litre boxes of natural Barbera red have become big sellers in bottle shops across the country. Such is the demand, specialty Australian booze shops P&V Merchants and DRNKS are now developing bag-in-box varieties of their own (Joel Amos, owner of the latter, said his customers were “smashing through it”). Sustainability has become a real selling point. Many new-age cask winemakers have said they started producing bag-in-box in a move to make their work more environmentally friendly. Most market their bags with a line about a low carbon footprint. It’s true: in the production stage, boxed wine is better for the earth. A 2016 study by the Australian Wine Research Institute showed that making and packaging wine in glass bottles produces almost triple the amount of greenhouse gas per litre than wine made in cask. Though larger in volume, cask wine is “lighter and easier” to produce. According to Longbottom, who worked on the study, it’s “pretty obvious that in terms of greenhouse gas emissions, it’s much more sustainable to be making boxed wine”. But it’s not as black and white as it seems. In order to keep its contents fresh, most cask wine packaging is made from a type of lined, single-use plastic that currently cannot be recycled. Ever wondered where all your empty goon sacks ended up? Well, landfill is the short answer. Longbottom says “the discussion has come up” in the industry but, as yet, it seems that no further research on biodegradable packaging or the long-term effects of cask packaging has been done. Ultimately, it’s complicated. Glass has almost triple the carbon footprint, but unlike plastic, it’s recyclable. Take environmental claims like this with a grain of salt. If you’re interested in making your drinking habits more sustainable, there are other things you can look out for. At P&V Merchants in Sydney, a wine refill station was installed as a reaction to a strong shift in consumer culture towards “green thinking”. You buy a reusable, recycled wine bottle for $25, fill it with natural wine from the in-store tap (again, the technology has advanced, this is good stuff), then you can bring the bottle back in for a $20 refill. According to owner Mike Bennie, the program has “exceeded expectations”. Specialty bottle shops around the country employ the same tactics: ReWine in Melbourne’s Fitzroy and Plonk in Canberra. It’s fair to say that no country has more preconceptions about boxed wine than Australia but, as a nation, we seem to be getting over them. As Longbottom says, “generally the better wines are only packaged in glass because there’s an expectation from consumers”. It’s 2019 and the goon sack is back. If we can get over the stigma, anyone can. 2017 Carussin Asinoi Box Barbera, 3L, $68 2019 Jilly Miami Bagnum, 1.5L, $59 2018 Owen’s Big Orange, Field Blend, Pyrenees Victoria, 10L, $200 2019 Good Juice Party Bagnum, 1.5L, $65