Jeremy Corbyn has announced that Labour is ready to back a general election now that the EU has granted a three-month Brexit delay, making a pre-Christmas poll all but certain. With the Liberal Democrats and the Scottish National party preparing to support a one-line bill tabled by Boris Johnson’s government later on Tuesday, triggering an early poll, Corbyn said his party would also vote for it. The Labour leader told the shadow cabinet: “I have consistently said that we are ready for an election and our support is subject to a no-deal Brexit being off the table. “We have now heard from the EU that the extension of article 50 to 31 January has been confirmed, so for the next three months, our condition of taking no deal off the table has now been met. “We will now launch the most ambitious and radical campaign for real change our country has ever seen.” Corbyn’s party abstained on Monday when Johnson tabled a motion under the Fixed-term Parliaments Act (FTPA) to call for an election, with the shadow cabinet split over the wisdom of an early poll. The Labour leader and his close allies have been keen to hit the campaign trail, despite the reticence of his chief whip, Nick Brown, and other key figures. The Labour campaign group Momentum tweeted: “Labour are officially backing an election. This is the opportunity of a lifetime to put an end to the shambolic mess the Tories have made and return hope to millions. Let’s do this.” Corbyn gave a televised statement at Labour HQ, with his shadow cabinet applauding behind him. “I’m absolutely looking forward to going to every part of the country with my wonderful shadow cabinet team here and all the fantastic Labour activists to give a message of hope where there isn’t one with this government,” he said. The exact date for a general election remains unclear. The government’s bill names 12 December, but the Lib Dems and SNP have objected to that date, and Downing Street said on Tuesday it would be willing to accept 11 as a compromise. A Downing Street spokesman said the only unacceptable date for the government would be the original Lib Dem-SNP proposal of 9 December. This would mean parliament being dissolved on Friday to allow 25 working days between dissolution and polling, he said, making it “very difficult” for both the election bill and a bill on budgets for the suspended Northern Ireland assembly to be passed and get royal assent. Also, 9 December is a Monday, meaning election preparations would take place during the preceding weekend, which would be logistically difficult and costly, he added. The spokesman said the government could not accept amendments extending the vote to 16- and 17-year-olds or EU nationals, saying longstanding convention dictates that changes to the franchise only happen after extensive consultation. Adding younger voters would be “administratively impossible to deliver in the time available”, he said, warning also that adding EU nationals would bring “administrative chaos”. Labour is expected to support efforts to amend the bill to bring forward the date, and also to lower the voting age and allow EU citizens to vote. But Corbyn’s statement suggests the party will still support an election, even if those amendments fall. A Lib Dem source said the party would be willing to consider the 11 December date. The SNP said no decision had yet been taken. The prime minister has been seeking to trigger an early poll since last week, when MPs refused to accept the government’s fast-track timetable for scrutinising his Brexit deal. Over the weekend, the Lib Dems and the SNP had said they would table a one-line bill seeking to trigger a 9 December election, which would only require a simple majority of MPs to pass. They said that date was calculated to prevent Johnson bringing his Brexit deal back to parliament, and to avoid students being disenfranchised, as the Christmas break will not yet have begun at most universities. After his motion fell on Monday, Johnson said he would table a similar bill himself. “Across the country, there is a widespread view that this parliament has run its course, and that is because I simply do not believe that this house is capable of delivering on the priorities of the people, whether that means Brexit or anything else,” he told MPs. The leader of the House of Commons, Jacob Rees-Mogg, then made a verbal commitment in the house not to bring back the withdrawal agreement bill.