For one sweet moment Everton were on course for their first away league win of the season. Then everything turned strange and bitter. Neal Maupay scored from a controversial penalty before a flustered Lucas Digne gave Brighton all three points by sliding a Leandro Trossard cross into his own net in stoppage time. And so, yet again, Everton lost on their travels. Fifteen minutes earlier, they had been celebrating, as Dominic Calvert-Lewin made the score 2-1 two minutes after being cast on from the bench. Pascal Gross had fired Brighton in front in the first half before Adam Webster scored the game’s first own goal, put under pressure by Richarlison into heading into his own net. The turning point was undoubtedly the penalty awarded in the 80th minute. If the foul by Michael Keane on Aaron Connolly was clear and obvious to the video official, it was not detected by most people in the stadium, so there was widespread astonishment when the referee pointed to the spot after VAR concluded that Keane had stepped on the striker’s toe as the pair ran for the ball. That must have been why Connolly clutched his shin as he went down. “The decision and why that happened is very difficult to understand,” said Silva. “We were in control at that moment and it completely changed the game.” Graham Potter was sympathetic. “Maybe we got a bit lucky,” he said. “Apparently on VAR there’s a contact but I haven’t seen it. Unfortunately, you’re going to get harsh decisions because ultimately that’s what it is, still somebody’s decision.” The result means that Everton have taken a single point on their league travels this season and find themselves embarrassingly close to the bottom three. They made a tentative start here but so did Brighton. Gross went very much against the grain when, after André Gomes brought down Connolly at the edge of the visitors’ area, he arrowed a wonderful free-kick through a gap in the wall and into the net from 20 yards. It was a beautifully struck shot but Jordan Pickford’s attempt to stop it was not impressive. It would be an exaggeration to claim that Gross’s goal shocked Everton into life, but the visitors drew level within five minutes all the same. The equaliser came from a corner won by Bernard after Dale Stephens allowed a long clearance by Jordan Pickford to bounce in the box. Digne sent over a typically fine outswinging delivery and Richarlison nodded it against the head of Webster and in. Everton briefly fizzed with Richarlison tormenting the home defence. In the 23rd minute he banged a low pass from the left across the face of goal. Mat Ryan rushed off his line to smother the shot by Theo Walcott. In the 37th minute Richarlison did even better, showing skill and speed down the right before teeing up Walcott again. Lewis Dunk hurled himself in front of the winger’s shot. Brighton had bouts of good possession but struggled to get at Everton’s rearguard, leaving Connolly and Neal Maupay bereft of service. However, just before the break Maupay got behind the visitors’ defence down the left and sent over a low cross. Steven Alzate ran on to it only for Digne to thwart him with a strong block. At half-time both managers had reason to believe victory was there for the taking. Brighton were the first to grasp for it, Alzate going close with a curled shot from the corner of the box just after the resumption. By now, though, the hosts had to be content with counterattacking as Everton had begun overpowering them in midfield and reversing the possession statistics. Ryan did well to hold a ferocious drive by Iwobi after a corner was only half-cleared by the hosts in the 54th minute. The keeper had to foil the same player again moments later as Everton cranked up the pressure. When Everton’s dominance receded, Silva made changes. The introduction of Calvert-Lewin soon paid off, as the striker accepted an elegantly crafted invitation from Mason Holgate, who strode forward and slid a pass into the path of the striker. Calvert-Lewin fired emphatically past the onrushing Ryan. Everton celebrated like a curse had been lifted but VAR soon burst their bubble and their frustration was compounded when Digne turned Trossard’s cross into the net.