Gary Younge’s brilliant article (In its deference to the powerful, our media are failing us, 25 October) highlights the vital role of curiosity, scepticism and challenging the powerful on behalf of readers. Most newspapers are uncritical cheerleaders for Brexit, so the Guardian must do even more to expose those who will benefit (including press owners) and their lobbyists. It also needs to expose flaws in the EU (The EU is no defender of workers’ rights, 25 October) and global institutions. Seeking the truth and bigger picture behind events is more important than ever, and why I get the Guardian every day.Titus AlexanderAuthor of Practical Politics: Lessons in Power and Democracy, Kings Langley, Hertfordshire • What is forgotten in current debates about journalism is that journalists are in competition to be the first to break “news”. The reports, and especially journalists’ tweets, are infused with palpable excitement as one or other seeks to be first at reporting news emanating from No 10. In this scramble for the new, judgment and forensic scrutiny go out of the window. Our political culture is being debased by this government and our journalists have colluded in portraying this as a new normal, and not something that should be completely unacceptable. Thank heavens for writers like John Crace and Marina Hyde for showing up the inadequacies of our political leadership.Roger WhitmoreBath • The press is so cosy with the establishment and so anti-Corbyn because, as Upton Sinclair noted, “it is difficult to get a man to understand something, when his salary depends on his not understanding it”. Gary Younge accurately profiles the privileged, highly remunerated denizens of Fleet Street to whom Sinclair’s observation applies in spades as they knowingly and unashamedly follow wherever the dictates of their masters lead. If ever I happen to see their one-eyed “journalism” I always add: “It’s even more difficult when the man’s kids’ school fees demand his not understanding it.” John SmithBeighton, Sheffield • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition