The New Zealand coach, Steve Hansen, conceded that his team had been well beaten by England in Yokohama but his All Blacks will have to take the 19-7 defeat by the better side “on the chin”. “Firstly I’d just like to congratulate England, they played a brilliant game of footy and deserved to win,” said Hansen, who will stand down after the bronze-medal match. “You can’t give them half a step because they will take it. At the end of the day, you have to say well done to them. “I’m really proud of our team, they’ve done a tremendous job for their country and tonight they weren’t good enough. We have to take that on the chin and so do the people back home. You saw the boys at the end, they were still trying their guts out and that’s all you can ask. Really proud of them.” Maro Itoje said despite England’s victory to reach the World Cup final they are still building as they look to finish the job next weekend. The 24-year-old lock forward was named man of the match after playing a leading role in England’s magnificent defensive and setpiece effort to build the platform for the 19-7 victory over defending champions New Zealand. “Fair play to the All Blacks, they were the best team in the world for a reason, we really had to play for 80 minutes. It was a good day at the office for us,” Itoje said. “I think we’re just building, game by game, week by week, we’re just building. We haven’t done the job yet but we’re one step closer.” England’s coach Eddie Jones paid credit to the All Blacks, who had won the last two World Cups, before concurring with Itoje on the need to improve again before next week’s final against Wales or South Africa back at Yokohama International Stadium. “We’re playing against a great team today, Steve Hansen is a great coach, Kieran Read is a great captain,” Jones said. “I’m really excited for the boys. We’ve got another week in the comp, pleased about that so we can see how we can get better. We played our game and our discipline was outstanding. Our forwards are well-drilled and tactically aware, but we can get better by taking more opportunities.” England’s hero of their 2003 World Cup success, Jonny Wilkinson, said the modern-day players were “superheroes”. “You look at the back-row guys, Curry and Underhill, their impact, it’s immense,” he said. “It’s easy to look at New Zealand and call them superheroes, but you have to do the same thing for our boys and give them credit. “That’s a result of immense talent and training, Eddie Jones has created an incredible environment in which these guys can do what they have done. They are on a par with these New Zealand superheroes.” Winning captain Owen Farrell told ITV: “It’s a World Cup semi-final against New Zealand, as big as it gets. We feel like we prepared well and we started well. In all these big games, teams get physical and we were ready to go at it from the off.” On the final, he added: “It’s brilliant to get there, brilliant to be a part of. We will enjoy this and then make sure we prepare.” England’s World Cup-winning coach from 2003, Sir Clive Woodward, said: “That was totally complete. They strangled the All Blacks to death, not just the first two minutes, but the whole game. The physicality, 1-15, was fantastic. It was huge and totally deserved. They absolutely smashed them.”