The McDonald’s kitchen is designed by geniuses to be mastered by children. It’s meant to be idiot proof. Comprised of bright and imperishable parts, you assemble burgers like simple Lego sets. But two months into the job, I disproved its invulnerability to fools. The day’s lunch rush complete, two of the four grills were turned off just before I clocked on. Unsupervised, I threw two frozen meat-cakes on a decommissioned press, shut the lid, and prepared the buns. Only recently hibernated, the press had sufficient latent heat to give the patties the impression of being cooked. Well, they had barely thawed — a fact gruesomely obvious to me when the indignant counter girl, acting on behalf of the indignant customer, threw the bloody, half-frozen flesh-pulp on my work bench. That the burger was half-eaten was attributable, I think, not to the customer’s hunger but the imperiously concealing tang of the condiments. Anyway, I was mortified. Ashamed. But in a heroic display of honour, I offered to apologise to my victim, whose life expectancy I assumed was now shortened, and then I offered my resignation. Now compare my teenage magnanimity with British leader Boris Johnson, who in just two months has lost every vote he’s initiated in the House of Commons, unlawfully suspended parliament and mislead his Queen. He has suffered party defections, been censured by his own family and the supreme court, and provoked righteous criticism for glibly invoking the memory of murdered MP Jo Cox. Now he’s been referred to a police watchdog for allegations arising from his time as London mayor. But Boris is not mortified or ashamed. He’s not even chastened. In fact, he remains convinced of his own wisdom – or, perhaps more accurately, convinced of the benefits of appearing so. Darkening the farce is the irony of a man committed to honouring the will of the people by achieving Brexit, while unlawfully suspending his democracy’s chief organ. If a politician’s skill is usually agreed upon retrospectively, for now we might say that Johnson does not possess a heroic temperament, but an aggressively cynical faith in his own bluster and chaos-making. But as someone capable of experiencing embarrassment – which is to say, as a member of humanity’s majority – this doesn’t look like noble defiance. It looks like narcissism upheld by political theatre. For the Uber driver sacked for being five minutes late, the craven endurance of an unelected PM must grate just a little. In Australia, we’re yet to suffer the same thrillingly improvised amorality of Boris or Trump – not so explicitly, at least. But we still experience politics as a zero-sum game, and as such nothing can ever be simply conceded by its participants. Last week ABC radio asked the minister for water resources, David Littleproud, why a regional shire which  was not experiencing drought had received a million of the Queen’s dollars in drought assistance. That a mayor wanted to return a million bucks might’ve given the minister pause, but instead he spoke of his policy like a car dealer might describe a new Mazda, or David Attenborough a peregrine falcon: the policy, dear reader, was “agile”. He then said that the “decisions were predicated on data”, even if the local mayor’s decision was predicated on having eyes. What a conversation that would’ve been: “Minister, we’re not in drought.” “But Mayor Brown, you received drought assistance.” “Yes, but—” “So you must be in drought.” “I’m rowing down Main Street.” “Rowing?” “My daughter jet-skied to school this morning.” “You must be mistaken. See, I have the data in front of me and I can see that your shire received drought assistance.” “Yes, we did. But—” “What was that noise?” “A barramundi just capsized my dinghy.” Someone less magnanimous than me might also detect a curious inconsistency about when the government declares faith in data and bureaucracy. When administering drought assistance, data is unimpeachable and bureaucracy an enlightened arm of the government’s generosity. But when data is produced by climate scientists, say, it’s dubious; and when the bureaucracy is ruled by Labor, it’s incurably inept and profligate. It’s almost like governance is a game played by callow tacticians. Unlike the McDonald’s kitchen, democracy is not – happily – idiot-proof. But great comedy, and fatigue, follows from the refusal to admit it. Martin McKenzie-Murray is a Melbourne writer and the author of A Murder Without Motive.