Ear seeds? Is this a beat poetry thing? A nonsensical yet evocative pairing of random words, like asparagus rebel or potted moon? Inevitably, no: ear seeding is the hot new technique in wellness circles. A self-administered variant of traditional acupuncture, it takes place entirely in one’s lugs, a microcosm for the whole body. I’m trying out these 24-carat-gold ear seeds (Vie Healing, £29 for 20) to see if they live up to their name. And I’m struggling. The studs are extremely tiny, like the pips on the outside of a strawberry. Imagine trying to manipulate one of those with any precision. An accompanying auricular therapy diagram only adds to the confusion. Fifty spots are highlighted, as if I could place a seed with a specificity that targets my spleen and avoids my lung. (I’m happy to get it in at all, but please don’t quote me out of context.) The seeds are fixed to clear, sticky discs that require a frustrating amount of care to remove from the packaging. Six seeds disappear in quick succession, lost to the carpet or the furthest reaches of my ear canal. That’s £8.60 down the old ear toilet. Unthinkably, the seeds are meant to be changed “every two to three days, but can be kept on for a week”. I’m not convinced these seeds would stay in place for three minutes if I was dead. The instructions recommend cleaning one’s ear with alcohol before application: a faff, as I’m guessing they don’t mean a rum and coke. Eventually I find a suitable alcohol cleaner, which dries my skin of oils and means the discs stay put. Unfortunately, my head now smells of a KFC wipe. Should anyone interested in golden ear seeds manage to couple up – one would assume it was with an equal idiot, but let’s pretend not – how would they explain the purchase? “I’ve bought a handful of expensive, microscopic marbles”? At least when Jack traded the family cow for magic beans, he had a beanstalk the next day. There was actual produce involved. These aren’t even real seeds. So what is the point of these gaudy little pips, these golden nuggets of futility? Ear seeds are an ancient element of Chinese medicine, sourced from an actual plant, the vaccaria herb. Yet there is nothing bling about medicine made from the seeds of a weed. Vie Healing are based in West Hollywood, a clue as to the real aim here. (Ironically, weed is popular there, too.) “Enjoy the golden look, the nourishing feeling and this unique approach to easing your symptoms,” the box reads. Vanity, novelty and nonsense, together at last. I get the feeling this is mostly about looking special. My worry, though, is that I look too special. The seeds are nestled in a part of my body I can’t see, so enjoying “the golden look” is frankly a bust. A nourishing feeling? I am mostly experiencing profound anxiety that the missing seeds might find their way into my brain and tunnel through it. As for the unique approach to easing my symptoms, I could train a pigeon to answer my emails but nothing would get done. Press or stimulate the pellets throughout the day, the box says. I walk around, stimulating my pellet and feeling – this may shock you – nothing. Well, that’s not strictly true: it turns out it’s quite painful to push tiny ballbearings into one’s sensitive bits. The 24-carat-plated “ion seeds” apparently stimulate reflex centres of the brain “to help you achieve your Calm”, a claim so foggy I can see mist coming off it. Of course, many believe ear seeds placed on meridian lines clear up qi blockages, which may be true. Even if not, the placebo effect is powerful. But I would rather have a trained practitioner apply them, rather than this keyhole surgery with oven mitts. In fairness, the seeds remain in place for days, even after sleep and showers. They are non-invasive and harmless but also ineffective. I resemble a poundshop Lady Gaga who has lost his tiny marbles. You would be better off sticking 24 golden carrots up your arse. Vie Healing? Not v healing at all. Earful. I mean awful. 1/5 This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.