The imprisoned British-Iranian woman Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe is sending her daughter back from Tehran to be schooled in England, saying the separation will leave her a “desolate mother ready to burn like a desert dune”. In a letter smuggled out of Tehran prison and published by the Centre for Human Rights in Iran, Zaghari-Ratcliffe writes: “In the near future my baby will leave me to go with her father and start school in the UK. It will be daunting trip for her travelling and for me left behind, And the authorities who hold me will watch on unmoved at the injustice of separation. That first day of school not for me”. Zaghari-Ratcliffe, who was arrested in Tehran on espionage charges in 2016, had kept her daughter, Gabriella, now five, in the city with her grandmother in an effort to minimise the trauma of separation while her husband Richard has campaigned to secure her release in the UK – often offending both the Iranian authorities and the UK Foreign Office. The Iranians do not recognise dual citizenship, and so officially reject all requests by the British government for consular access. The former UK foreign secretary Jeremy Hunt described her letter as agonising to read and added: “If there was ever a moment for Iran to show some humanity it is now. Let this innocent woman who has suffered so much come home”. Part of the hurt revealed in Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s letter stems from the release of other political prisoners while she remains, and repeatedly reflects on her loss as a mother. The letter also reveals a deep anger with both the British and Iranian governments for failing to come to a deal over the terms of the release of as much as £400m the government admits it owes to the Iranians due to the incomplete sale of Chieftain tanks to Iran in 1979. Both Iran and Britain insist the 40-year-long dispute between the two governments is not linked to her imprisonment, but London has accused Tehran of keeping her hostage to extract other concessions from the UK. The Iranian foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, at the UN general assembly accused British ministers of backing out of a deal to hand over the money, adding the handover might have eased her likely release from prison. The UK has held back paying the money for a mixture of political and legal reasons, including a court dispute over the amount of interest payable and the entity to which the cash could be sent without breaching EU sanctions law. In her letter, Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe says: “Last week my country put me on sale, in return for a huge amount of money using me for its own political benefits. Was it a surprise ? My hope for freedom from my own country died in my heart years back. “My country did not defend me or my baby’s rights but marketed me for its negotiations. Even now I remains a pawn in the hands of politicians – abroad and in Iran – to reach their goals in their game of chess. Some have used every opportunity these past years to use a mother and baby as a political leverage. In remarks directed at Iran, she says: “It is such a bitter feeling. My country talks constantly about the the separation of the Yemeni, Syrian and Palestinian mothers from their children Yet it remains blind to the separation of a mother and baby in her homeland. It even adds to the pain”. In a sign of how resistant Iran is to pleas to release foreign nationals, Iran on Thursday told France to cease trying to intervene in the case of the French-Iranian dual national Fariba Adelkhah. Iranian foreign ministry spokesman Seyyed Abba Mousavi said French meddling had no legal basis. Russia was also at loggerheads with Iran on Friday, summoning the Iranian ambassador to Moscow after a Russian reporter, Yulia Yusik, was detained in Tehran by the Iranian Revolutionary Guards. The impasse over the payment of the Chieftain tank cash is striking since this week the UK Treasury completed an out-of-court settlement to pay £1.3bn to Bank Mellat, an privately owned Iranian bank. The means of payment has not been disclosed, but it is not subject to sanctions. The bank was banned in 2009 from operating in Europe due to links with the Iranian nuclear programme, but the ban was quashed in 2013. Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe is an Iranian-British dual national who has been jailed in Iran since April 2016. She has been accused of attempting to orchestrate a “soft overthrow” of the Islamic Republic. She and her three-year-old daughter, Gabriella, were about to return to the UK from Iran after a family visit when she was arrested. Since then, she has spent most of her time in Evin prison in Tehran, separated from her daughter. In January 2019 she went on hunger strike for three days in protest against being denied medical care in Tehran’s Evin prison. In March, the UK Foreign Office granted her diplomatic protection, a step that raised her case from a consular matter to the level of a dispute between the two states. Zaghari-Ratcliffe worked for BBC Media Action between February 2009 and October 2010 before moving to Thomson Reuters Foundation, the news agency’s charitable arm, as a project manager. Her family has always said that she was in Iran on holiday. Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe is arrested at Imam Khomeini airport as she is trying to return to Britain after a holiday visiting family with her daughter, Gabriella. Her husband, Richard Radcliffe, delivers a letter to David Cameron in 10 Downing Street, demanding the government do more for her release. She is sentenced to five years in jail. Her husband says the exact charges are still being kept a secret. Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe's health deteriorates after she spends several days on hunger strike in protest at her imprisonment. Iran’s supreme court upholds her conviction. Boris Johnson, then Foreign Secretary, tells a parliamentary select committee "When we look at what [she] was doing, she was simply teaching people journalism". Four days after his comments, Zaghari-Ratcliffe is returned to court, where his statement is cited in evidence against her. Her employers, the Thomson Reuters Foundation, deny that she has ever trained journalists, and her family maintain she was in Iran on holiday. Johnson is eventually forced to apologise for the "distress and anguish" his comments cause the family. Her husband reveals that Zaghari-Ratcliffe has fears for her health after lumps had been found in her breasts that required an ultrasound scan, and that she was now “on the verge of a nervous breakdown”. New Foreign Secretary Jeremy Hunt meets with Richard Ratcliffe, and pledges "We will do everything we can to bring her home." She is granted a temporary three-day release from prison. Zaghari-Ratcliffe is on hunger strike again, in protest at the withdrawal of her medical care. The foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, takes the unusual step of granting her diplomatic protection – a move that raises her case from a consular matter to the level of a dispute between the two states. The UK upgrades its travel advice to British-Iranian dual nationals, for the first time advising against all travel to Iran. The advice also urges Iranian nationals living in the UK to exercise caution if they decide to travel to Iran. Richard Ratcliffe joins his wife in a new hunger strike campaign. He fasts outside the Iranian embassy in London as she begins a third hunger strike protest in prison. Zaghari-Ratcliffe ends her hunger strike by eating some breakfast. Her husband also ends his strike outside the embassy. According to her husband, Zaghari-Ratcliffe was moved from Evin prison to the mental ward of Imam Khomeini hospital, where Iran’s Revolutionary Guards have prevented relatives from contacting her. It is announced that Zaghari-Ratcliffe's daughter Gabriella, who has lived with her grnadparents in Tehran and regularly visited her mother in jail, will be back in London before Christmas in order to start school.