When parliament returns on Monday, John Bercow will be three weeks from retirement. These weeks are likely to be stormy. MPs could be wrestling with divisive Brexit decisions right up to the Speaker’s departure on 31 October, which is also the date of the Brexit deadline. So there will be no gentle cadence about this final farewell. It may all end instead with crashing discord. That would be a fitting send-off to a Speaker who is unprecedentedly polarising but who has been Britain’s most important parliamentarian of modern times. Throughout his decade in office, Mr Bercow has been a controversial Speaker. Originally, he was a rightwing Conservative, but his views have moved to the left. His main support has come from Labour, to the dismay of his own tribe. Many Tories have never forgiven him. Some have come to detest him – a farewell snub from them remains likely. Some of the reasons are understandable. Mr Bercow is often patronising from the chair, and has been far too fond of verbose lectures to MPs. He has been accused of worse behaviour by staff, with charges (which he denies) of bullying and harassment in the Commons. Calls for new leadership have grown louder. On all these counts, there is now the overdue chance of a new start, a better working atmosphere and a tougher approach towards unacceptable behaviour. Brexit has, however, been Mr Bercow’s finest hour. Since the leave vote in 2016, he has presided over an increasingly explosive convergence of challenges to the ways in which parliament and government work. The all-encompassing nature of Brexit’s effects on Britain is one. The impact of a referendum verdict that slashes a deep gash across the sovereignty of parliament is a second. The destabilising effect of the hung parliament that was elected in 2017 is a third. The recent emergence of an unelected prime minister who is effectively at war with parliament is a fourth. Together, these events have generated divisions and passions that have come close to bringing parliament to its knees. Few Speakers have faced such sustained parliamentary instability for so long. But Mr Bercow has risen to the challenge. Flawed though he is, a kind of greatness was thrust upon him by immensely difficult events. Mr Bercow is a Westminster moderniser. This remains essential work. He has opened parliament up for visitors and expanded its educational and civic presence. In the chamber, he has consistently championed backbench MPs against ministers, allowing prime minister’s questions to extend to almost an hour. He has pioneered the use of urgent questions and emergency debates, thus ensuring that big issues are debated by parliament when MPs want, not when it is convenient for ministers. On Brexit, he has become increasingly ready to allow backbenchers to challenge the claim of modern governments, even in a hung parliament, to sole control of the agenda. Sometimes it has been messy, sometimes disappointing. Occasionally, though, it has been heroic and in the deepest and best traditions of parliament. With Gina Miller, Mr Bercow has done more than anyone in modern times to ensure that the elected parliament rightly retains the authority to be the nation’s sovereign decision-maker. The question in the Speakership election on 4 November, after Mr Bercow leaves the Commons, is what comes next. By leaving now, Mr Bercow is trying to ensure his successor is not a Tory Brexiter. Many candidates are promising MPs a quieter and more comfortable life. This is worrying and wrong. Parliament is neither a club nor a conventional workplace. It is the engine house of democracy. The Brexit process has strengthened parliament, but in many eyes it has weakened its moral authority. Britain may soon face a “people v parliament” election. The country needs a dynamic parliament that embodies the people of all corners of Britain in all their multiple identities and concerns. It does not need a cowed parliament that bends the knee to a lawless government that claims other sources of authority. Mr Bercow stood up for representative democracy when it really mattered. It will still matter after he goes. Parliament needs a worthy champion, ideally without his faults, to continue his work.