Q My long-term partner and I are thinking about getting married, mainly as we are worried that if one of us dies suddenly, the other will face an inheritance tax bill as what we would leave to the other would exceed the inheritance tax threshold of £325,000. This seems a no-brainer as I own a property worth £400,000 with no mortgage as does my partner. We live separately and each property is in our own name. She stays at my property in Glasgow at weekends only, and lives and works in London during the week. She is a higher-rate tax payer and I am self-employed and earn about £12,000 a year. However, a friend mentioned that we will have two issues if we get married: stamp duty land tax (SDLT) and capital gains tax (CGT). So if I were to sell my property once married and buy a new main residence, would I have to pay the extra 3% land tax even if we are still living separately? As regards the CGT, when I sell my flat is there a downside to us being married in financial terms, and in the above scenario if she then sold her flat, and moved into my new property, is she worse off? We will make approximately £30,000 profit minus costs on each property. We are guessing that the ideal financial scenario would be to stay unmarried for now, sell both of our properties at some point in the future, buy a single property between us, and then get married. And not die in the meantime!MJ A Avoiding inheritance tax may not be the most romantic reason for getting married but it’s as good a reason – if not a better one - than many others. That’s because gifts between spouses and between civil partners – whether in life or in a will after death – are not liable to inheritance tax. Gifts to anyone else are tax free up to £325,000 (but £150,000 more than that if the family home is involved and it’s going to direct descendants). So as far as inheritance tax goes, getting married is indeed a “no-brainer” but only if you make a new will after the wedding (or before the wedding provided the will is made “in consideration” of your marriage) because if you already have a will, marriage will invalidate it. The other bonus of being married is that if the £325,000 exempt amount of the first person to die is unused, the estate of the surviving spouse or civil partner can inherit it meaning a potential exempt total of £625,000. When it comes to CGT, gifts of assets which typically attract CGT – such as of property, shares or costly antiques – are also free of tax if the gift is to a spouse or civil partner. However, if, for example, you were to give your current partner a half share in your property without being married, the gain on that half share at disposal (ie at the time of the gift) would be liable for CGT if it came to more than the £12,000 exempt amount (in the 2019-20 tax year). I suspect that what your friend sees as a downside to being married where CGT is concerned is the fact that a married couple can nominate only one property between them as their “main residence” for CGT purposes. While you’re not married, you each get to nominate a main residence each. Nominating a property as your main residence means that that there’s no CGT to pay when you sell provided you sell within 18 months (nine months from April 2020) of moving out. But being married won’t make any difference to your financial situation if you get the timing right so it would be worth talking to an accountant with specialist CGT experience who can advise you on how to time your transactions. Your “main residence” when it comes to SDLT is a whole new can of worms. But married or not, the guidance published by the government seems to suggest that if you sell what is your home and replace it by buying another one to live in – even if one or both of you owns another property – you won’t have to pay the higher rates of SDLT. 