As Scottish rugby fans contemplate the prospect of “losing by default to a typhoon”, initial anger and frustration at the threat of cancellation and lack of contingency planning is giving way to pragmatism. Tom Moore, who arrived in Tokyo on Thursday from the Scottish Lowlands village of Lochwinnoch, told the Guardian that he would be “immensely disappointed” if Scotland’s match were cancelled, as has happened with the England v France game at the same venue in Yokohama on Saturday. But Moore, who has packed his uniform of a Loch Ness monster hat and kilt for watching the game, added: “If you follow Scottish sport, you’re used to saying the best thing is to get there early so you can have a good time before you lose. We’ve written the book on how to lose sportingly, but there’s not been a chapter yet on losing by default to a typhoon.” Moore, who is hoping still to get to the match with his son, questioned the fairness of drawing certain fixtures that can’t be played and what effect that will have on the overall integrity of the competition, saying: “It is a long tournament, and you would have thought there would be enough flexibility to delay until the weather improved.” Scottish Rugby has said that it fully expects contingency plans to be put in place to enable Scotland to contest for a place in the quarter-finals on the pitch, but online fans have vented their frustration at what they see as a lack of planning. Those watching from Scotland are also debating the different outcomes of cancellation versus playing. Craig Shearer, a Murrayfield season ticket holder from Dundee, explained: “We’re all being pragmatic here. I think the organisers have good procedures in place. Decisions are being taken in good time so fans are in no doubt as to what’s happening. When it comes down to it, this is about public safety and these guys are the experts.” But Shearer went on to raise a point that is being made by many: “The decision of World Rugby to give the World Cup to Japan in typhoon season is one to consider. The development of the Japanese (and tier two in general) is a big thing and this decision was taken as a very positive move. The risks of this happening must have been assessed.” Other fans also queried why World Rugby agreed to the rule that cancellation would be marked as a draw when it was likely to cause controversy. Meanwhile, the Scottish Rugby Union is advising supporters who are already in Japan to heed the advice of the Foreign Office, which is “to follow all official advice, stay indoors and do not attempt to travel on Saturday”. There is an official warning for a continuous risk of earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and tsunamis across the country, which may well also affect the qualifying for the F1 Japanese Grand Prix at Suzuka, which is also due to take place on Saturday. Cammy Black, the deputy editor of the Scottish Rugby Blog, said that the fans he is in touch with are keeping the drama in perspective. “Most fans have huge sympathy for Japan, it’s a massive tournament for them and they have really embraced the Scottish team. If it is cancelled it will be hugely disappointing for the players having worked up to this for four years, and the fans who have paid money to go out there. But we need to be level-headed when there’s a huge storm coming that’s going to affect lots of people’s lives and this is a game of rugby.”