After a slow start in which they picked up just three points from their first five league games, Wolves have now gone six unbeaten in all competitions. That run of results includes an impressive 2-0 victory against Manchester City – only the fourth time Pep Guardiola has been on the losing side at the Etihad in the Premier League – but Wolves fans still have reasons for concern. After finishing seventh in the league last season – and securing a place in Europe for the first time since 1981 – their performances this season have been underwhelming. Their 1-1 draw at home to Southampton on Saturday means Wolves have now picked up just seven points from a possible 18 against teams that finished below them last season. It was also the sixth league game this season in which they have conceded the first goal – a joint Premier League high so far. Sluggish starts have not been uncommon since their return to the top flight but their reliance on late goals could prove more problematic this time around. Last season Wolves scored as many goals in the final 15 minutes of matches as they managed in the first half (17). Only four teams scored fewer first-half goals. This season their reliance on late heroics has been even more evident. Just two of their 12 goals so far have come in the first half. No side has scored fewer first-half goals and no side has scored more goals in the final 30 minutes (nine). Their ability to rally late in games shows impressive fight and fitness, but it may not be sustainable. The additional responsibility of playing in the Europa League may take its toll. They have already played eight games in the competition and we have not yet reached the halfway point in the group stage. Wolves’ ability to come on strong in games may be a result of a tactical approach that helps them save energy in the early stages of matches, but their stamina will be tested more as the season progresses. They have only taken 80 shots in the league so far this season – the worst return for all 20 teams in the league. Last season, they averaged 12.6 shots per game; that figure is down to 8.9 this season – and they are averaging just 3.6 shots in the first half of games, which is the lowest in the league. There is a worrying drop in creativity in the team. A number of key players are underperforming. The team deserved to qualify for the Europa League last season, however they were also fortunate to avoid serious injuries. Only 13 Wolves players reached double figures for league starts last season; this season 14 players have started a third or more of the club’s league matches. The need to rotate due to European commitments is costing the team the consistency and fluency they enjoyed last season. The players have struggled to maintain those standards. Conor Coady – who committed a costly error at the weekend – Matt Doherty, Jonny, Leander Dendoncker and Diogo Jota have all been below par so far this season. Although Rúben Neves’ form, or lack thereof, is perhaps the most alarming. The 2017-18 Championship player of the year has completed the full 90 minutes just four times in his nine league appearances this season. The Portuguese midfielder, who is pivotal in setting the tempo for the team, has been abject. His passing figures have nosedived. He attempts riskier passes than most players but his overall accuracy of 71.8% is inexcusable. That’s down almost 10% per cent from an already modest 81.2% last season. He is known for his range of passing but more than half of his long passes have been wayward this season and, to make matters worse, he’s not regaining possession as regularly either. João Moutinho, now 33, is carrying the burden in midfield and striker Raúl Jiménez is being relied upon too often to conjure something out of nothing. The Mexican is not only the side’s biggest goal threat by a distance but, when excluding set pieces, he is also their most creative player. Jiménez has forged 10 chances for teammates from open play, with centre-back Willy Boly his closest rival on five. The victory at Manchester City and their current unbeaten streak are papering over the cracks. Their weaknesses were again on show at the weekend as Wolves managed just four shots at home against Southampton. Performances need to improve, and fast, with Thursday’s trip to Slovan Bratislava the first of six games in the next 17 days. At the end of that run it will be far more clear whether Wolves can hope to match last season’s achievements. Right now that seems unlikely. • Visit WhoScored for more statistics and ratings• Follow WhoScored and Martin Laurence on Twitter