Who knows why those 39 victims were heading our way last week, only to die before reaching their destination? Were they driven by fear, hope or both? Were they refugees or naive victims of criminal opportunists who were trafficking them? At what point did it dawn on them that their cries for help in that grim container were going unheard? Essex police reported that eight of the victims were women and 31 were men. The National Crime Agency says it is trying to identify any “organised crime groups who may have played a part”. Most of our questions will have to wait a long time for an answer. In the meantime, when a young Essex woman heard the dreadful news, she brought some flowers to lay in the dockyard where the container had been. It was all she could do: a deeply moving expression of fellow feeling, which spoke for us all. Treat others as you want to be treated. It’s a universal template for right behaviour towards one another Last century, the US president Woodrow Wilson wrote: “Benevolence does not consist in those who are prosperous pitying and helping those who are not. It consists in fellow feeling that puts you upon actually the same level with the fellow who suffers.” Many of the world’s religions share what we call the golden rule: treat others as you want to be treated. It’s a universal template for right behaviour towards one another. Ben Ryan, in his new book How the West Was Lost, compares various nations’ treatment of asylum seekers, reminding us that in 2017 Germany, Austria and Sweden settled more than 3,000 refugees per million of their own population, compared with Britain and Bulgaria with 240 per million. His thesis is that we need to recover our moral purpose of freedom, equality and solidarity – enshrined in article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: “All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.” Yes! Equal in the eyes of God. This means interdependency, interconnectedness as members of one race – the human race. We find our joy and human flourishing in company with others. And the rule of law should help us to put all our actions in check. Each statistic conceals a human being. The United Nations Refugee Agency tells the story of Farouk, who, in early 2018, aged 15, fled war in his home country of Afghanistan. He walked 10 days through a forest, crossed Iran in the boot of a car, braved the sea in a dinghy at night and endured months in detention. He crossed 10 countries overland, slept under bridges and finally wound up in Italy, where he asked UNHCR how he could be reunited with his brother and sister who were living in the UK. Now he’s in London, training to be a plumber. On the way, he picked up four languages. Farouk could have been murdered, drowned or died of hypothermia in his search for a worthwhile life. In 2000, 58 migrants suffocated in a lorry in Dover, having set off from China weeks before. Each had paid £20,000 to a Chinese gang. In 2015, the bodies of 71 people were found in an abandoned lorry on an Austrian motorway. Police suspected it was part of a human trafficking operation. There have been thousands of such fatalities this century. Human trafficking is a heinous crime of modern-day slavery. We are all implicated in what some criminals are doing because of our common identity as human beings. Be kind, be the voices of the voiceless. Be a human being Ahmad al-Rashid was an asylum seeker from Syria, who has been reliving the nightmare of his journeys in the back of refrigerator lorries driven by people-smugglers in 2015. Last week, he told BBC News he had been at the mercy of the smugglers and that the trucks were locked from the outside. “It was a matter of death or life for me,” he said, thinking of the carnage he had escaped in Syria. “If I go back to that situation at that exact time, the bombing and the shelling and the desperation, I think I would still do it.” Eventually, he was granted asylum and permission for his wife and two daughters to join him in the UK. “I’m extremely lucky because I’m alive and with my family and little angels. My heart goes out to those who lost their lives en route. Be kind, be the voices of the voiceless. Be a human being.” There is a lurking suspicion that if Britain opens the door to more refugees, they will take the jobs of locals and destabilise the country. I think these fears are unfounded. A National Farmers’ Union survey reveals another story. It shows that apple growers have been forced to leave 1,000 tons of fruit unpicked because of a 30% drop in labour. Brussels sprouts, cabbages and cauliflowers are also at risk because of an anticipated labour shortage in the period leading up to Christmas. That’s because foreign workers have left, either through political uncertainty or because better wages are on offer elsewhere. There are unnecessarily bureaucratic obstacles in the path of refugees in the UK, holding them back from working when they are raring to go. Here’s a typical quote from one of them: “I want to work – I don’t want any more hand-me-downs. I want to enjoy the reward of my sweat. I don’t want to rely on the government’s benefits. I want to work so I can prove myself to my children.” I must declare an interest. In Christ’s words: “I was a stranger and you welcomed me.” That was in 1974, when I was fleeing the regime of President Idi Amin in Uganda. So I know at first hand what it’s like to depend on the fellow feeling of British people, to be allowed to work for a Cambridge doctorate and to have the privilege of serving in the church’s ministry here for 40 years. Experience tells me the British are not hard-hearted. We just need to turn today’s sentiments of sadness into a national policy of welcome. Becoming people with cool heads and warm hearts. • The Most Rev John Sentamu is the archbishop of York