I’ve always thought I was quite good at reading faces, but the look people give you when you tell them you’re going to publish your diary is more complex and mysterious than the average expression: a half-smiling blur of alarm, tinged with suspicion and protest, which opens into a shyly guilty curiosity. A writer I like and greatly respect, when I told her about my plan, drew in a sharp breath and said, “Your idea of privacy must be very different from mine.” I was mortified. Did she imagine my diary as a narcissistic spilling of guts, the sort of ghastly self-glorifying mush that women like Anaïs Nin used to spew out? We were sitting in a bar. I started babbling about how it was a stream of fragments, chunks of life. She still had that doubtful look. So I got out my phone and showed her photos of a couple of pages. Her face brightened. “Now I get it,” she said. “These are experiences that anybody might have lived.” Phew! I wiped the sweat from my brow. A few years ago I had a huge bonfire in my backyard and burned all my diaries up to the point where Yellow Notebook begins. I did this because when I went through the cartons of exercise books one day, looking for what I’d written around the time of the dramatic dismissal of the Whitlam government, I found to my astonishment that I hadn’t even mentioned it. That day, crouching over the crates in the laundry, I was soon so bored with my younger self and her droning sentimental concerns that there was nothing for it – this shit had to go. Flames from the barbecue licked the heavens. All I kept were things that my daughter had written and drawn, plus the odd tram ticket or shopping list or dried flower that I found shoved between the pages of manically precise handwriting. I’m happy to report that I have never for a second regretted this conflagration. The point of my personal history at which I stopped tearing and burning was around 1978, when my daughter and I briefly lived in Paris. I’m not sure if it was a matter of a tonal shift in the writing, or the change of scene, or greater brevity, or because I’d stopped going on and on about “love”, but reading what I’d written back then gradually ceased to embarrass me. It seemed that in 1978 I had sat up and taken a proper look around. What I was seeing and hearing around me, in a foreign country whose language I had studied for half my life but still spoke imperfectly, was taking on, in my diary, as much life as were my own inner concerns; and the links between inner and outer had became looser, somehow, less grinding and neurotic. And a lot funnier. Pretty much everybody crashes through the world hurting other people and hurting themselves – cheating, lying, sneaking, betraying When in 2018 I sat down to see if this material might be publishable, I set myself some strict rules. I could trim, I could fillet, yes, but I was not to rewrite. On rare occasions I was allowed to reorder hastily written sentences that no reader would otherwise be able to make sense of – this was simple good manners. But I would not permit myself to correct or improve or polish. And of course I soon found myself, day after day, strapped into the straitjacket that is the very nature of a diary: it’s got a voice, it’s entirely composed of voice, but it has no voiceover. It exists in an eternal present. When you’re typing it up you can’t add a layer of self-exculpating charm or graceful irony, as you can for example in memoir. You can’t wriggle past your ugly, foolish behaviour by saying, “OK, I did and said that then, but I would never do or say such a thing now.” The evidence is there on the page, unredeemable, giving off its static: your spiteful thought, your careless cruelty, your maternal neglect, your treachery and greed and laziness. There you go again, frolicking blindly towards the cliff and prancing straight over the edge. Sometimes, as I typed, I’d watch my own antics and burst out laughing, but I can’t count the number of times I writhed and cursed, and had to cast myself on the mat in the corner of my office and howl with shame. In other words, pulling this book together has been a very challenging experience. At first I stripped out people’s names. I simply called them “he” and “she”, or, when that was too confusing, I made up tags that I thought of as Homeric epithets: “the curly-headed one”, “the married man” and so on. I was a bit pleased with myself for this – I thought of it as keeping the text airborne above the mess of literalness. But of course it didn’t work. No one would have the patience to keep track of all these masks and pronouns over the long haul. So that balloon went down. Then my editor, a woman of subtle intelligence who works with a light touch, suggested I should give each person an initial. I resisted; but she was right. The way it pulled the thing into shape was a revelation. Several people go by their real names, usually public figures I didn’t know, or writers and performers I admire and quote. A handful of those closer to me (“the law student”, “the born-again”, “the biographer”) have kept their epithets because I couldn’t bear to part with them. But almost everyone else who appears is identified by a single letter. Working on this text has taught me a lot. I came to understand that reading an account of a stranger’s daily tasks and troubles doesn’t have to lock you into their life and stifle you there. If the writing is doing its job, it has a double effect: first, to show you the world from the writer’s point of view, but then at the same time to keep turning your attention back to your own experience, thus giving you a deep sense of comradeliness, of not being so alone with your preoccupations and failures and sufferings. I found, as I slogged through the old notebooks, that my shame and embarrassment gradually shed their power. Memories of my crimes lost their punitive force, ceased to be weapons I could use to lacerate myself. Because of what I’d learned over the intervening decades, from the contortions of my friends’ lives and my own, from the hundreds of books I’d read and movies I’d seen, and from the hard lessons that psychoanalytic psychotherapy had taught me, my whole take on the past somehow broadened and relaxed. I became more philosophical, less of a puritan, able to accept that pretty much everybody crashes through the world hurting other people and hurting themselves – cheating, lying, sneaking, betraying, laying about them with the broad sword – and there grew in me a new camaraderie with the rest of the human race. This diary is not the story of my life. It rarely records, for example, untroubled times of happiness. That’s not what it was for. Its purpose was always – and still is – to help me get a grip, to keep me on the rails. It’s a habit which, if I sincerely and rigorously stick to it, helps me understand the things that hurt me, and the hurtful things I can’t believe I did to other people. It helps me to see the patterns in my own behaviour, and to get a handle on them. It’s a moral exercise, a way of keeping my balance, of letting me fall asleep at night, of stopping my ship from going down. I don’t know what people expect to find in a published diary. I just know that my favourite entry in this one is on page 186, about leaning against a fence in the long-term car park at Melbourne airport, waiting for the bus. It’s a moment I would otherwise have lost. Nothing much happens, and yet reading it fills me with a peculiar, inexplicable joy. It’s a tiny jewel. I found it and kept it. It’s mine, but it could have been anybody’s, and I’m offering it now to anybody who cares. • Yellow Notebook – Diaries Volume 1: 1978-1987 by Helen Garner is out 5 November through Text Publishing. The book has been selected for Guardian Australia’s series The Unmissables, highlighting the most notable Australian books of the year