This is a really quick dessert to whip up and store in the freezer for when you want a little treat. Inspired by the LCM bars we ate growing up, this slice has a delicious peanut butter twist. Makes 12 250 g (1 cup) natural peanut butter 5 medjool dates, pitted 1⁄4 teaspoon sea salt 3 tablespoons melted coconut oil, plus extra if needed 60 g (2 cups) puffed rice 40 g (1⁄3 cup) dried cranberries 60 g (1 cup) shredded coconut 265 g (11⁄2 cups) vegan dark chocolate chips 3 tablespoons coconut flakes Line a 26 cm × 18 cm baking dish with baking paper. Place the peanut butter, dates, salt and coconut oil in a blender and blend until smooth. Transfer to a large mixing bowl and fold through the puffed rice, cranberries and shredded coconut. Spread the mixture into the prepared dish and flatten with a spatula. Place the chocolate chips in a heatproof bowl set over a saucepan of simmering water, stirring until melted and smooth (don’t let the bowl touch the water or the chocolate will seize).If the chocolate chips are struggling to melt, stir through 1–2 tablespoons of coconut oil. Spread the melted chocolate over the slice and sprinkle the coconut flakes over the top. Place in the freezer for one or two hours to set, then slice into 12 pieces. The slice will keep in an airtight container in the fridge for up to 2 weeks. Makes 8 1 tablespoon flaxseed meal 140 g (1 cup) self-raising spelt flour 150 g (1 cup) plain flour 1⁄4 teaspoon sea salt 1 teaspoon baking powder 3 tablespoons pure maple syrup 3 tablespoons olive oil 250 ml (1 cup) soy milk 150 g vegan dark chocolate, broken into pieces 60 g (1 cup) shredded coconut Preheat the oven to 180°C fan-forced. Line a 20 cm × 15 cm baking tin with baking paper. Place the flaxseed meal and three tablespoons of water in a bowl and set aside for 10 minutes. Sift the flours, salt and baking powder into a bowl and stir to combine. Pour the maple syrup, oil and soy milk into the flaxseed meal mixture and mix well, then add to the dry ingredients and fold together until just combined to form a smooth batter. Transfer to the prepared tin and bake for 40 minutes or until a skewer inserted into the centre of the cake comes out clean. Remove from the oven and set aside to cool completely. Melt the chocolate in a heatproof bowl, set over a saucepan of simmering water (don’t let the bowl touch the water or the chocolate will seize). Carefully remove from the heat and set aside. Cut the cake into eight even-sized pieces (you can trim the edges to make them square, if you like). Place the coconut in a shallow bowl. To coat, dip each side into the melted chocolate and allow the excess to drip off. Transfer to the bowl of coconut and gently roll until each lamington is completely coated. Store in an airtight container in the fridge for up to one week. Makes 12 120 g (1 cup) spelt flour 1 tablespoon tapioca flour 1⁄4 teaspoon sea salt 100 g (1 cup) rolled oats 60 g (1 cup) shredded coconut80 ml (1⁄3 cup) coconut nectar 80 ml (1⁄3 cup) olive oil 5 drops of liquid stevia (optional) Preheat the oven to 170°C fan-forced. Line a baking tray with baking paper. Sift the flours and salt into a large mixing bowl. Add the oats and coconut and mix well. Heat the coconut nectar and olive oil in a saucepan over medium heat. Bring to a gentle simmer, stirring, then remove from the heat and pour into the dry ingredients. Add the stevia, for sweetness, and two tablespoons of water. Mix to form a dough. Roll the dough into 12 even-sized balls and place on the prepared tray. Gently flatten to about 1.5 cm thick, leaving room for spreading. Bake for 12 minutes or until golden. Allow to cool for 30 minutes, then transfer to an airtight container and store in the pantry for up to three days. Makes 8 slices or 16 squares 320 g (2 cups) raw macadamias 2 tablespoons pure maple syrup Pinch of sea salt55 g (1 cup) coconut flakes180 g medjool dates, pitted 1 tablespoon raw cacao powder 150 g vegan dark chocolate, broken into pieces Preheat the oven to 150°C fan-forced. Line a baking tray and an 18 cm × 13 cm slice tin with baking paper. Place the macadamias in a bowl and add the maple syrup and salt. Toss together, then transfer to the prepared tray and bake for 25 to 30 minutes or until roasted and golden. Meanwhile, blitz the coconut flakes, dates and cacao powder in a blender or food processor to form a rough dough. Transfer to a bowl. Place 120 g (3⁄4 cup) of the roasted macadamias in the blender or food processor and pulse until roughly chopped. Return the dough to the blender and blend again until well combined with the macadamias. Press the mixture into the base of the prepared tin and scatter the remaining macadamias over the top. Melt the chocolate in a heatproof bowl set over a saucepan of simmering water. Carefully remove from the heat and drizzle the chocolate over the prepared slice. Transfer to the fridge and allow to set for one hour. Cut into eight slices or 16 small squares and serve. Store in an airtight container in the fridge for up to 10 days, if they last that long! This is an edited extract from The Global Vegan by Ellie Bullen, Published by Plum, RRP $34.99. Photography by Ellie Bullen.