While we are still, just about, in Europe, I will try to make the most of its delicious ingredients, even if I can’t bring myself to believe the doomsday predictions of frozen imports. Figs seem to crop long into October in Greece and Spain, and I love them roasted in autumnal salads such as this one. As for beyond the end of October, I mean to plant my own fig tree in the back garden as soon as I possibly can, so that I can enjoy this most luscious of fruits, with or without our imminent divorce. Sweet from the figs and sticky onions, salty and creamy from the cheese: salads should never be boring. Prep 30 minCook 25 minServes 4 2 red onions, peeled and cut into eighths through the stemSalt and pepper2 tbsp balsamic vinegar4-5 tbsp olive oil1-2 tsp soft brown sugar6 ripe figs, sliced in half widthways75g walnutsJuice of ½ lemon1 head radicchio, finely shredded100g watercress120g blue cheese, such as Stichelton or Oxford Blue Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Scatter the onions in a large tray, season generously and drizzle with a tablespoon of the vinegar and enough olive oil to coat them all. Toss with your hands, lightly scatter with brown sugar, then roast for 10 minutes. Meanwhile, put the figs cut side down on a different tray, and season with salt, pepper, a little brown sugar and a drizzle of olive oil. Roast with the onions for another 10-12 minutes, until the figs are slightly softened and releasing their juices and the onions are crisp around the edges, but otherwise tender and sweet. Drizzle the figs with the rest of the balsamic vinegar. Put the walnuts in a small baking tray and roast for five minutes in the same oven until slightly darker in colour and smelling nutty. Remove from the oven and run a sharp knife through them once or twice to break them up a little. Pour any juice from the figs’ roasting tray into a small bowl or cup, and whisk in two to three tablespoons of oil and a squeeze of lemon juice. Season to taste. Wash the leaves and pat dry. Arrange them on one large plate (or individual plates) and top with the silky red onion. Sit the figs among the onions and dot around the cheese. Scatter over the walnuts, dress and serve. Toast extra walnuts and put them on the breakfast table – they are irresistible and a great start to the day. If you have leftover watercress, make a rich potato and watercress soup, with a touch of sauteed chorizo, if you like.