“Hale knew, before he had been in Brighton three hours, that they meant to murder him.” I owe so much to Graham Greene’s Brighton Rock. Not only did it inspire me to become a writer, it also revealed a new side of my hometown that to this day both fascinates and inspires me. I was born in the city and spent my youth, as many teenagers do, inside the wooden walls of Brighton Pier’s arcade. My favourite arcade machine was rather macabre – an old automaton of Marie Antoinette on the guillotine that would, on the insertion of a coin, relieve her of her head. It certainly foreshadowed my career as a crime writer. Brighton is much like the sea it borders, an ebbing and flowing place with a constant movement of people in and out, providing an ever-changing study for new characters. The modern incomers are mostly affluent young professionals, students and LGBT+ people attracted to the city for its beauty, vibrant atmosphere and diverse culture. My favourite arcade machine was Marie Antoinette on the guillotine, which on the insertion of a coin would relieve her of her head However, in the 1930s, it was not a place to escape to but rather a place to escape from, known as “The murder capital of Europe” – an unfortunate nickname that came about when three dismembered female bodies were discovered in the train station’s left-luggage lockers. To this day, it is the only place in the UK where a serving chief constable has ever been murdered. Henry Solomon was bludgeoned to death in 1844 while interviewing a man on suspicion of stealing a roll of carpet. The crime was so shocking that it caught the attention of Queen Victoria, who donated to the welfare fund for his widow and nine children. The more you know about the city’s dark history, the more you can see potential for the sinister in the everyday. The bustling, bohemian but claustrophobic Brighton Lanes lend themselves to a chase, the burnt-out skeleton of the West Pier is the ultimate melancholy view for a pensive antagonist, and the enduring outlandishness of the Royal Pavilion is the perfect place to juxtapose with an illicit deal. Surprisingly, Brighton has not been overwritten by other authors. Patrick Hamilton’s The West Pier and Greene’s Brighton Rock are the only novels to have delved in any depth into its criminal underbelly. This has left a lot of space for my own fictional underworld. It has played a massive part in shaping not just my characters but my own character. Many people feel constrained by their hometown and want to spread their wings but I still feel excited by Brighton – despite its sometimes grisly past. • The Secret of Cold Hill by Peter James is published by Macmillan.