Jonathan Freedland’s articulation and understanding of the feelings and emotions of remainers over the last three years are very welcome (For years we’ve held our breath. Today remainer dreams may die, Journal, 19 October); we have felt excluded from “the people whose will must be done” and there is an impending sense of loss at the prospect of being outside the EU, which is barely acknowledged or recognised by Brexiteers. The narrative in the media has all been about their anger and sense of betrayal, with hardly any reference to the feelings of those of us who voted to remain. Andy Beckett (Journal, 19 October) is correct in his analysis that the campaign to stop Brexit has never found the right words – what a pity that no politician has been as eloquent in defence of the ideal of cooperation across borders as Jonathan Freedland. Perhaps, then, we would not be in the situation that we are in today.Katarina TidballRingwood, Hampshire • I entirely agree with Andy Beckett that the stop Brexit campaign has had by far the better of the arguments, but has never had the persuasive slogans to win over the country. I believe a very simple line should have been taken immediately following the referendum to reflect the size of the leave vote as a percentage of the electorate: “37% is not enough” would have been a simple response to all the bluff about the so-called people’s vote and a rejoinder to every claim that leave was the decision of a majority. Sadly, it is now too late.Robert NelsonLondon • With reference to the People’s Vote march in London on Saturday, for every visible person taking part there will have been many who, like my partner and me, could not be present due to various reasons such as health or commitments. As veteran demonstrators in our 70s, it frustrates us deeply that we cannot be counted among those who are trying to pluck this country back from the brink of disaster. All we can do is sign petitions and write to our MP, both of which seem to be ignored. No doubt letters to the media are equally futile, but we cannot keep completely quiet. Please try to give us a voice, however unheard it may remain.Maggie GuillonMoorgreen, Nottinghamshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition