France’s Jefferson Poirot has insisted he is not fazed by the prospect of his side finishing as runners-up in their World Cup pool with the Super Typhoon Hagibis set to hit this weekend’s fixtures and affect the tournament’s quarter-final lineup. World Rugby was overnight set to announce whether France’s Pool C decider with England in Yokohama has been cancelled, with the violent tropical storm headed for Tokyo and the surrounding area this weekend. France were due to name their team to face England at 10am local time on Thursday, two hours before World Rugby’s announcement, but that press conference has now been cancelled due to “exceptional conditions”. It is understood that the possibility of moving the match hundreds of miles south to Oita was explored but safety issues for supporters was proving a stumbling block. England are seemingly eager for the match to go ahead, potentially behind closed doors, and France were similarly keen to play in Yokohama. However, World Rugby was expected to cancel the match and award both teams two points unless there was a dramatic change in Hagibis’s trajectory. On the same day that World Rugby was assessing its options, the Tokyo district where England are based was shaken by two earthquakes in the space of 12 hours. England currently lead Pool C by two points from France but both sides booked their place in the knockout stages last weekend with respective victories over Argentina and Tonga. The winners of the pool are almost certain to face Australia with the runners-up on a collision course with the Six Nations champions Wales. “It would have been a problem if qualification was at stake, as is the case for Ireland,” said Poirot. “We are in the quarter-finals anyway. That’s all I care about. Is it a problem for momentum? Yes and no, we are ready for whatever happens. It’s not a concern.” Privately, however, France would be dismayed at missing out on the chance to exact revenge on England for their 44-8 humbling during this year’s Six Nations. There has been talk of disharmony in the French camp this week and it can be traced back to that match in February. In the aftermath, Morgan Parra was scathing about the coaches’ methods. “I think that we are capable of doing what the English do but are we working on this during training? I think we don’t work on it enough, even not at all.” The captain, Guilhem Guirado, was exposed as lacking in deputies within the squad, leading to Poirot assuming more responsibility while the defeat also prompted changes to the coaching staff and the French federation president, Bernard Laporte, set about appointing Fabian Galthié as one of Brunel’s assistants with a view to taking over after the World Cup. Published on the day of the match, Galthié wrote a column in L’Équipe detailing in no little depth how Eddie Jones’s side would employ a kicking strategy to pull France apart. England proceeded to do precisely that. The suggestion is that Galthié and Guirado were not on the best of terms when at Toulon together and complicating matters is the excellent recent form of another hooker, Camille Chat. Guirado was captain against Argentina but Louis Picamoles and Poirot have assumed the role against the USA and Tonga respectively with Chat preferred in the No 2 jersey. Guirado still seems to have Brunel’s favour and has the final say on selection, though Galthié takes control on the training field, so whoever starts at hooker in France’s quarter-final may be indicative of where the balance of power lies. The players, for their part, seem united behind Guirado, and that includes prop Poirot, who appears to have little interest in usurping his fellow front-rower. “When I was offered the captaincy, it was more to relieve Guilhem as a player and pick up the baton,” he added. “But we came together as players and found an organisation with a player council which is what happens now. The England incident made me react. I am in the French team to defend the jersey. From there we took on more responsibility because we need it.”