I made my way to the Staples Center in Los Angeles with a mix of trepidation and excitement. Excitement brought about by what would be my first live experience of an NBA game and a chance to see one of the best players of all time in LeBron James, trepidation due to the fact I have been diagnosed with high functioning autism which means I see the world in a very different way, and attending live sporting events can prove challenging. Loud noises and crowds are not my favoured environment! As it happens watching sport LA style was a very pleasant surprise ... This game had a huge build up, the Lakers having experienced a major slump since a recent injury to their talisman LeBron James had put their play off hopes at significant risk. A win was essential to keep the season alive. On the other hand, Houston were dominant with the impressive James Harden leading them to the top of the conference, making them favourites to come away from the City of Angels with another win on their impressive record. I soaked in the atmosphere and was amazed by the entertaining build up, nothing like the sports I have attended in the past, all played out against the backdrop of a heavy Hip-Hop bass beat. As the players entered the court to a rousing reception I noticed opposing fans sat alongside each other, very unlike the tribal football fans I encounter every week at home. An extremely different, yet exciting, experience. The Rockets won the tip off and never let up for the majority of the first quarter, the red of Houston swarming all over the court as they eased to a 32-22 lead. It looked like yet another defeat could be on the cards, but to my surprise the party in the crowd never stopped. There was no negativity, instead everyone was enjoying themselves, cheering the Lakers on despite what was a worrying start. A revival in the 2nd quarter saw LA go in 58-52 down at half-time. Driven by the entertaining half time show (a young drumming troop, like a mini army of Roger Taylors in a Queen tribute band) I watched the positivity spread over the crowd. I was finally beginning to feel comfortable in the environment, not angry or scared like I have been at sports before. The 2nd half started to a chant of “Let’s Go Lakers”, LeBron feeding off the crowd and scoring buckets like he couldn’t even miss if he’d been blindfolded. The billing of LeBron Vs Harding was now coming true as the ball went from end to end and the two future hall of famers battled it out. The crowd were on the edge of their seats as the lead went from team to team. A late three-pointer from a now exhausted Harden saw the Rockets take a 90-83 lead into the final quarter. You could see the intensity in the eyes of the Lakers players as they came out for the final quarter. The normally reliable Harden was feeling the pressure, missing the opportunities he did get on the rare occasion when the ball turned over from the Lakers’ consistent possession. The crowd were on the edge of their seats as LeBron took control and led the Lakers to a narrow but deserved 111-106 victory, the legend scoring 29 points and keeping play-off hopes alive. 