The past few months at Säbener Strasse have resembled Coronation Street, with the goings-on at Bayern Munich reminiscent of a half‑baked and barely believable soap-opera storyline. It is, if nothing else, in keeping with the nature of the club’s FC Hollywood moniker. From the sublime – look no further than Philippe Coutinho’s sumptuous assist for Serge Gnabry on Saturday – to the ridiculous, namely the president, Uli Hoeness, recently backtracking over threatening to prevent players joining up with the national side should Manuel Neuer be dropped in favour of Marc-André ter Stegen. Never dull, it has been difficult for Bayern to mute the volume on a series of sagas. There was the very public summer pursuit of Leroy Sané, with Bayern expected to make another play for the Manchester City winger in January, and a failed effort to sign Callum Hudson-Odoi from Chelsea. The man behind the moves is the sporting director, Hasan Salihamidzic, who is out of contract next summer and at pains to convince despite pulling rabbits out of the hat with the last-minute loan signings of Coutinho and Ivan Perisic. In addition there is a changing of the guard at the top. Hoeness and the chief executive, Karl-Heinz Rummenigge, have announced they will depart, though neither will truly surrender power any time soon; Hoeness will step down in November but remain on the club’s supervisory board until at least 2023 while the former Bayern captain Oliver Kahn will assume Rummenigge’s role on the first day of 2022. Caught in the middle of the impasse and infighting is the manager Niko Kovac, walking a tightrope to keep both satisfied; Rummenigge has aired his doubts and ticked off Kovac after the Croat said he was confident Sané would join the club. It seems absurd that the ground is so rocky at Bayern before they face Tottenham on Tuesday, given they are top of the Bundesliga – in which they have not lost since February – after winning a domestic double. But this is Bayern, a team who do not know any different. They are a club obsessed with success, an empire with their eyes fixed on something significantly more substantial than pipping Borussia Dortmund to the next title. Domestic success is a given by Bayern’s standards and an insipid Champions League exit to Liverpool in March – the last time they were defeated in Bavaria – rankled from top to bottom. This season they will again be expected to go deep into the competition. Bayern yearn to restore their status as a European superpower, to be elevated to the heights that Jupp Heynckes lifted them when they won the Champions League, the final of which Bayern will host in 2022, in a treble-winning season six years ago. The one constant since July 2014 has been the prolific Robert Lewandowski, who has scored 12 goals in 11 matches this season. Ten of those came in the Bundesliga, meaning he has personally outscored 10 of the 18 teams in the division. Since joining Bayern from Dortmund the Pole has scored 138 league goals in 165 games. Before the arrivals of Coutinho and Perisic, which earned Salihamidzic much-needed brownie points, the 31-year-old openly questioned the club’s transfer activity. “We need players who can make an immediate difference from the bench,” Lewandowski said after defeat by Dortmund in the German Supercup during August. He signed a new four-year contract 26 days later. “Yes, I stated my opinion,” he said. “I can win games on my own but only teams win titles.” Everything may not be rosy – it hardly ever is at Bayern – but there is plenty for Spurs to fear. Perisic and Lucas Hernández are fit enough to be part of Kovac’s travelling squad while Gnabry and Kingsley Coman continue to flourish where Arjen Robben and Franck Ribéry for so long excelled. The 18-year-old Alphonso Davies, who was born in a refugee camp in Ghana after his parents fled the second Liberian civil war, has provided further verve. But it is another summer recruit who has made supporters sit up and take notice; Der Spiegel described Coutinho as Der Tanzer, the dancer, following his exquisite pass to free Gnabry on Saturday and the Brazilian, as Lewandowski predicted, has added a touch of class. “He will definitely help us even more,” Kovac said. “He’s integrated and happy here. Whether you’re a Paderborn, Bayern or any other fan, you will have enjoyed [his performance].” Coutinho has been starting at the expense of a fans’ favourite, Thomas Müller, who has been relegated to the bench. “He has dealt with the situation really well,” Salihamidzic said. “He is total professional.” Yet the element of struggle in a 3-2 victory over the division’s bottom club last weekend is symptomatic of the uphill task facing Kovac, hampered by unhelpful headlines since taking the job last year. As Kicker pointed out, Bayern were made to worry. “That was not the manner of victory we wanted,” Salihamidzic said of a wasteful display. “In footballing terms we can play much better, clearly. We want to, we will and we must increase the level of performance. If in London we are presented with two big chances, then we must be more effective.” The challenge now, as Der Spiegel highlighted, is for Coutinho to weave his magic in a Bayern shirt against not only a team playing in the Bundesliga 2 last season but also last season’s Champions League finalists. Mats Hummels and Rafinha, players Kovac failed to convince, departed this summer but when Hoeness eventually follows there is an expectation that the manager will be exposed to greater scrutiny by Rummenigge. Hoeness has suggested a little friction fosters success but any fallout could get messy. Kovac knows, as Mauricio Pochettino can vouch, he is never too far from apparent crisis.