A British tourist has had his foot bitten off by a shark during a day cruise in the Whitsunday region of north Queensland. Two men were airlifted to hospital in Mackay, both suffering serious lower leg injuries after being attacked by the shark in Hook Passage, about 30km from the harbour at Airlie Beach. The RACQ rescue helicopter said one man, aged 22, had lost a foot, while the other, 28, suffered “serious lacerations”. An English tourist has had his foot bitten off and another has serious lacerations to his lower leg after a shark attack in the Whitsundays today. Both were transported to Mackay Base Hospital by #RACQ #CQRescue in a serious but stable condition. The helicopter service said the men had been “wrestling and thrashing about in the water” before the attack occurred. The tourist boat brought the men back to the Abell Point marina at Airlie Beach, where they were treated before being flown to Mackay by helicopter. #Update1 - Two patients are being transported by road to a location on Proserpine Shute Harbour Road where they will meet up with the rescue helicopter. Both patients have sustained serious lower limb injuries and are in a serious condition. The tour operator, ZigZag Whitsundays, said in a statement posted on Facebook the injured men were passengers on a cruise it had been operating. “Our thoughts are with them, their families and the other guests on the tour,” the statement said. “We are working with authorities to assist in any way we can. We have suspended our tours for today and will work closely with authorities regarding our upcoming tours.” The attack occurred amid a debate about shark control in Queensland and a landmark court ruling that forced the state to remove its lethal drum lines from the Great Barrier Reef marine park. The attack took place in Hook Passage, between Hook Island and Whitsunday Island, about 10.20am. Guardian Australia understands drum lines were not previously positioned in the vicinity. Conservationists have said there was no scientific evidence lethal baits prevent shark attacks. A Victorian man was killed and several people injured in shark attacks in the Whitsundays last summer. Several of those incidents occurred at Cid Harbour, about 10km from Hook Passage. The Humane Society International launched the legal challenge to the state’s lethal shark program earlier this year, arguing it was in conflict with the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority’s responsibility to protect the reef, citing evidence drum lines killed turtles, rays and sharks. The situation has devolved into a political argument. The Queensland government has sought to discredit so-called smart baits that catch and release sharks. The federal environment minister, Sussan Ley, has described the removal of drum lines as “a political stunt” that puts public safety at risk. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk told reporters she had not yet received details of the attack, but that she was concerned for the welfare of those injured. “I don’t know if they were diving, if it was offshore, I don’t know if it was outside the marine park. “I will not shy away from my stance that the drum lines need to go back in.” Drum lines have not previously been in place at Airlie Beach or the Whitsundays – the nearest baits were at Mackay, more than 100km away. The Humane Society International Australia said in a statement the incident was “completely unrelated” to the recent court ruling. “We are very sorry to hear of the recent shark incident in Airlie Beach and hope for a speedy recovery for the two men. “Culling sharks does not make swimmers safer. Education, shark alerts and personal deterrents are far more effective at protecting swimmers and were part of the court ruling which Queensland is refusing to implement.”