Bradley Walsh, host of The Chase (every day until the end of time, 5pm, ITV) has a curious ability to pull out the very tendrils of someone’s soul with three slithering little questions: what do you do for a living?; what do you do for fun?; and, what would you do with the money if you won today? Bradley Walsh is able to gauge the very essence of man merely by asking what they’d do if they won about four grand. I sometimes wonder how I would fare under the Walsh magnifying glass: “I’m a writer, Brad,” I’d say, as he twinkles at me. “And what do you do for fun?” “I have no discernible hobbies of which to speak,” I’d tell him. Bradley Walsh would look at the camera. A murmur from the audience. “And what would you do if you won the money today?” And I would say: “I have all the trainers and coats I need, Bradley. And no matter how much I earn over the course of a lifetime I will never buy a flat. Those are the only three things I have any ambition to buy. So if you gave me four grand today I would do literally nothing with it. I am, essentially, post-money. This whole endeavour is a waste of time.” And Bradley Walsh would turn and say: “Let’s win you that post-money.” The Chase, now a decade-defining 10 years old, is part of the furniture of daytime. Every day, four contestants – with the inter-team rapport of a group of people on the same stranded rail-replacement bus who all decide to complain to the driver at once – join forces to try and win up to £150,000. They never do. This is because the conditions of The Chase – a futuristic prison of blue and black studio lights, a looming Quiz Champion (the Chaser) atop a ramp, ticking clocks – conspire to make them forget, say, how many world wars there have been, or what oxygen is. Among so many bombastic daytime TV quiz formats – Tipping Point, Tenable – what makes The Chase so special is the gentle build to a massive, adrenaline-pump climax. There is no better thrill available on TV. Once contestants have answered softball questions in the Cash Builder round they then head-off against the Chaser to add money to the collective pot: those who make it back to the team unscathed get to humiliate themselves in the final, where the aforementioned Chaser – usually a man called “The Beast” – out-answers them by exactly one question and wipes out their jackpot entirely. Adding to the tension is Walsh. For much of the programme he’s a friend, a confidant: contestants call him “Brad”, they apologise to him when they get a question wrong. He seems to be the last quizmaster working today who genuinely doesn’t know the answers to the questions he’s asking. That’s until that last round, when he becomes a quick-fire question hound: he spits out historical facts, wordplay, sporting teasers. The teams are suddenly baffled. The game is lost. And then, tomorrow, the cycle begins anew: what do you do for a living? What would you do with the money if you win? And Bradley Walsh turns to me, and says: “And what do you do for fun?” And I whisper: “I watch The Chase, Bradley Walsh. I watch The Chase.”