Armando Iannucci wanted to “rip up the rules” of costume drama when adapting the Dickens classic David Copperfield, which the satirist says shares similarities with Martin Scorsese’s riotous tale of greed and excess, The Wolf of Wall Street. The Personal History Of David Copperfield, which premiered at the Toronto film festival, is Iannucci’s third film and he decided to make it after re-reading the novel a decade ago, finding it “cinematic, funny and experimental”. “It’s really funny,” he said at a press conference at London film festival on Tuesday where the film has its European premiere. “When Copperfield is drunk, he shouts about having ‘drunken hair’ – and Dickens describes all of London swirling around – it’s like that scene in the Wolf of Wall Street where they’re all on drugs.” Iannucci and the film’s producer, Kevin Loader, addressed the diverse casting of the film, including British-Asian actor Dev Patel who plays the lead role. “We only ever had one candidate: Dev Patel. And once he’s your only candidate for David Copperfield, certain things flow,” said Loader. Benedict Wong is also cast as Mr Wickfield, Rosalind Eleazar plays Agnes, with British-Nigerian Nikki Amuka-Bird playing the snobbish Mrs Steerforth. The casting decisions were intended to reflect the diversity of Victorian London. “It was like Manhattan in the 1920s,” said Iannucci. “London then and London now was and is a global city. We wanted to make a city that the audience would recognise and the characters would recognise.” The director said there is a big debate at the moment about “what Britain is and what it is not”, and how it has become excluded on the world stage, and the film’s outlook offers another perspective. “I wanted to celebrate what I think Britain is, which is something more lively and vibrant and cheery,” he said. “Personally, I’m an optimist.” The story was originally published in serial form between 1849-1850, but Iannucci, whose previous films include In the Loop and The Death of Stalin, said the themes Dickens explored were still relevant in contemporary Britain. The satirist said Copperfield’s story was riddled with “status anxiety”, which was something that was still ingrained in modern Britain. “He’s wondering if he fits in and his background, is he making the right friends? It just felt very modern.” Homelessness is another theme of the film and the charity Shelter is thanked in the credits for its help with the research for the film. Iannucci said he was shocked at how much power landlords – like Uriah Heep, who is played by Ben Whishaw in the film – still have. “The shocking thing is that the status of landlords hasn’t changed in the UK, they have many more powers and less oversight than they do on the European mainland,” he said. “Although it’s set in 1840 we wanted it to touch on this thing that is happening now.”