Not even in the halcyon days of British middle-distance running did three men from the UK reach the same world championship 1500m final. But on Sunday a new wave of British talent – Neil Gourley, 24, Josh Kerr, 21, and Jake Wightman, 25 – will be mining for medals. All three men are confident they can make the podium, and they have every right to be optimistic. Apart from the favourite, Timothy Cheruiyot of Kenya who has been almost unbeatable since 2017, it looks as if it will be a wide open race. Gourley said: “I’m setting my target on a medal. That’s what I came here to do.” Kerr, meanwhile, says he has another gear. Wightman, too, cannot be ruled out having got through despite barely sleeping between his heat and Friday’s semi-final. But there is another reason why the 1500m final is so fascinating: it will feature one current member of the Nike Oregon Project in Craig Engels – and another former member, Matt Centrowitz, the reigning Olympic champion. The NOP, as it is known, was run by Alberto Salazar until he was banned for four years for doping offences and is now led by Pete Julian, his long-time assistant. However, Wightman said running against Engels and Centrowitz did not raise any concerns for him. “All the guys that are part of it now, and especially Pete Julian, are completely fine,” he said. “That’s the way I see it. It’s a new generation of athletes. “As for the old generation, I can’t really comment. The important thing is that I see everybody is being a clean athlete and importantly to try and beat anyone regardless. It’s not really anything that I’ve thought about or involves me too much.” Gourley, who looked particularly impressive in easing through in third in his semi-final, agreed with his teammate when asked if he had any cause for concern in facing NOP athletes in the wake of the Salazar ban. “I’m just focusing on myself and competing,” he said. “But honestly, right now, I don’t care.” Such stances are in stark contrast to the American four-time 1500m global medallist, Jenny Simpson, who has been very outspoken about the Oregon Project all week here. After her opening heat she said: “Anybody who knows anything about this sport knows there is a shadow, a black cloud, whatever the analogy you want to make, over that group. Anyone that is shocked isn’t involved in the sport.” Olympic 1500m bronze medalist Jenny Simpson backs IOC calls to investigate all athletes coached by #AlbertoSalazar #Doha2019 #WorldAthleticsChamps pic.twitter.com/8T1aEF11Sv Engels and Centrowitz have never been accused of any wrongdoing and the former has proven an engaging figure in the mixed zone after his races, happily chatting about Salazar, the fact the coach rubbed testosterone on his own sons to observe the effects on sample testing, and Simpson’s comments. After his heat Engels praised Simpson as a runner but insisted her comments had been unfair. “She’s just trashing every single person and it hurts,” he said. He also said he stood by Salazar, who is appealing his ban. “I trust Alberto, for sure.” His comments, along with his Hillbilly haircut, have made Engels go viral on social media. But as he prepared for the final he said that reaction had been mixed. “My teammates are very happy I stuck up for the Oregon Project, but there’s some backlash from Jenny’s fans.”