It must have been something of a culture shock for my great-great-grandad when he left Grosmont, a small village in the North York Moors, for industrial south Leeds. He had worked on North Yorkshire’s railways before moving to Hunslet, known as the “workshop of Leeds” on account of its iron foundries and steelworks. Like neighbouring Holbeck, the centre of Leeds’ textile industry, workers lived in red-brick terraced houses close to their places of employment. By the 1890s Hunslet’s steel works was Britain’s largest producer of railway tracks, sprawling over a 25-acre site. By 1911, one in every five men worked in Leeds’ heavy industries, which were predominantly concentrated south of the River Aire. South Leeds’ reliance on iron, steel and textiles meant it was hit hard by industrial decline. By the 1960s the area’s traditional industries had largely collapsed and workers’ terraces were demolished in slum clearances. Stourton, a working-class suburb bordering Holbeck, was transformed in the space of a few years from residential suburb to post-industrial wasteland. The city council, keen to rebrand Leeds as a thoroughly modern city, welcomed the construction of the M621 motorway through Holbeck and Hunslet, and attempted to style Leeds as the “Motorway City of the Seventies”. Fifty years later, the effects of post-industrial decline and poor urban planning are increasingly difficult to ignore. South Leeds’ grandiose industrial architecture is decaying; far from singing the motorway’s praises, the council now recognises that the M621 “disrupts the community, cutting it off from the rest of Leeds”. In 2018 the council launched an ambitious plan to redevelop Leeds’ “South Bank”, hoping to redevelop industrial wasteland to double the size of the city centre. Architectural plans show the “South Bank” sprinkled with high-rise office buildings, and residents might question whether the benefits will be spread evenly between businesses and the local population. Nonetheless, attention is at last being focused on the future of south Leeds and its unique heritage. A walk through south Leeds reveals a district caught between industrial grandeur, post-industrial wasteland and urban blandness. The starting point is Leeds station, where the 1960s edifice and the 1930s art-deco concourse sit directly above the Dark Arches, a series of vaults spanning the River Aire that serve as the station’s foundation. A metal walkway passes through the Dark Arches and over the Aire, where passers-by can stop andwatch the churning water receding into darkness. Around 18m bricks were used to construct the arches during the 1860s – the largest such project in the world at that time. Through the Dark Arches lies the Leeds-Liverpool canal and the gentrified tip of Holbeck: “Holbeck Urban Village”, a tight knot of former red-brick flax mills and steam engine works. The Round Foundry dates back to 1795 and was once home to steam engine manufacturers; today the complex is home to offices, a brewery and Yorkshire’s official tourist board. The gentrification of this small part of Holbeck has done little to ease poverty in south Leeds as a whole, but it has preserved a part of the district’s history that was previously at risk. The buildings in the Urban Village are significant, but the most impressive relics of south Leeds’ industrial heritage lie just around the corner. Tower Works on Globe Road was constructed in the 1860s by the industrialist Thomas Harding to produce needles for south Leeds’ textile manufacturers. A lover of Italian architecture, Harding took the unusual decision to embellish his factory with red-brick replicas of famous towers in Verona, Florence and San Gimignano. Derelict for several decades, Tower Works is currently being converted into luxury flats. Perhaps the most impressive relic of south Leeds’ industrial past lies a five minute walk from Tower Works. Pass Marshall Mills, an imposing six-storey edifice that dwarfs the smaller industrial buildings around it, and you might be surprised to find an Egyptian temple executed in millstone grit. This is Temple Works, modelled on the Temple of Horus at Edfu on the west bank of the Nile, and a prime example of northern industrialists’ use of architecture to flaunt their cultural capital. Temple Works opened in 1840 and boasted the largest single-span room in the world, as well as a grass-covered roof where sheep could graze, sometimes falling on to the street below. The mill was sold in the 1880s, and by 2008 it was on the verge of collapse. After several stalled attempts at redevelopment, Temple Works has been purchased by a local developer, CEG. Work has started on the restoration, with CEG stating: “We want to reconnect the communities that were cut off by the M621 and feel the city centre is not for them. It needs to be an inclusive use that everyone is proud of.” Beyond Temple Works the gentrification ends abruptly. South of the regenerated buildings lies a patchwork landscape of old railway viaducts, industrial wasteland and decaying historic buildings such as Low Hall Mills, constructed in 1874 and now derelict. The area is peppered with listed buildings; the red terracotta and Burmantofts tiling of Holbeck public library, now offices; the United Methodist Free Chapel constructed in 1880, now home to a carpet warehouse. Yet much of the landscape is a blur of roundabouts and light industrial units. This part of Holbeck has seen its fair share of controversy: in 2014 the area was profiled in the press as the UK’s first “legal” red light district, a reference to Leeds city council’s introduction of a “managed zone” where sex workers and punters could work free of police interference within agreed hours and geographic limits. Although efforts to improve safety for sex workers are commendable, Holbeck’s ginnels and viaducts are far from a sanctuary. In 2016 a young woman named Daria Pionko was murdered by a punter in the managed zone, a reminder of the dangers that women working in Holbeck still face. In neighbouring Hunslet, the remnants of south Leeds’ industrial past are harder to spot. Clues remain, however: among the most impressive examples of Hunslet’s industrial past are Leeds city college’s conversion of a former printworks factory into a campus, resplendent in terracotta, and the former Hunslet Engine Company headquarters on Jack Lane, where an exposed section of rail track still cuts through the road (the Hunslet Engine Company is still manufacturing locomotive engines in south Leeds to this day). Just over the border in Middleton lies the oldest continuously operating railway in the world, Middleton Railway, opened in 1758 to serve south Leeds’ coal mines. There are other reasons to be optimistic: Victoria Mills, derelict since the 1970s and once among the Victorian Society’s top 10 at-risk buildings, is being redeveloped as flats. It is not clear how many will be affordable, but at the very least part of Hunslet’s industrial history has been salvaged. South Leeds was once the heart of industrial Leeds, but suffered a steep decline in the late 20th century. There are reasons to question how far the redevelopment of buildings like Victoria Mills will address stubborn poverty in the area, and there remains a perceived boundary between Holbeck proper and the Urban Village. Nonetheless, after decades of neglect, there are signs that south Leeds and its remarkable history is finally being recognised. Francesca Roe is a writer, printmaker and illustrator from Leeds. Her visual diaries can be found on Instagram, as can her print work; more of her writing is available on her website If you’re an illustrator or graphic artist with an idea for The Illustrated City series, email us at Cities@theguardian.com Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram to join the discussion, catch up on our best stories or sign up for our weekly newsletter