It was during a trip to Australia about 14 years ago that Smith uncovered her adventurous side. A friend convinced her to go camping in the outback with just a simple rollout shelter, called a swag. Smith surprised herself and had a wonderful night watching the stars come out and seeing wildlife wander around nearby. “It wasn’t scary, it was just incredible,” she says. “From that moment on, I wanted more adventure in my life.” Her night under the stars inspired Smith to seek out other quirky places to spend the night. While some people look forward to snuggling under a feather down duvet covered in a high count cotton sheet, Smith can be found in the forest in a hammock or spending the night at the top of a hill. “It allows me to reconnect with the natural world,” she says. Her nocturnal escapades help her forget her worries and give her a break from email and social media. Although her adventures don’t always end with a night open to the elements. She often opts to spend the night in a bothy – a disused building such as a farmhouse or miners’ bunkhouse that is left open for hikers to spend the night. On one occasion, she was trying to get to a remote bothy in the Scottish Highlands during a hailstorm. The shelter was across a river and since there was no bridge, she had to brave the cold water. Once she reached the bothy, there was a surprise in store: a group of mates were already using it for a weekend away. But the men were welcoming and gave her dry clothes to wear. Smith notes the camaraderie that is often shared in bothies: “You never know who might turn up, because you can’t book them, so it’s a tradition to always bring a small bottle of whisky with you to be shared. Most bothies have a fireplace, so you share a drink and tales of your adventures over an open fire. Nothing warms you up in a bothy quite like a whisky.” So, as tradition dictated, the group shared a drink, and the next morning they even made pancakes for Smith – perhaps the start of a new tradition? Although Smith often sets off on her own, she also teams up for some expeditions. Next year she is joining forces with adventurer Dwayne Fields for an expedition to Antarctica, where they will walk to the south pole from the emperor penguin colony at Berkner Island. One of their goals is to raise awareness of wildlife conservation and environmental issues, so it will be a carbon-negative expedition. “We’re planting 50 trees each before we go to offset the carbon of actually getting to Antarctica,” says Smith. “And where we can we’ll be using sustainably sourced and environmentally friendly kit.” Smith and Fields are also partnering up to change the face of adventure and have named their trip “WeTwo”. As a woman and a black man, both have encountered discrimination, since they don’t fit the typical profile of an adventurer. Smith is actively trying to make adventuring more accessible. And in her podcast, Wander Woman, a twist on the classic superhero, Smith showcases women adventurers from the past who were pioneering but not recognised. Smith sees the outdoors as the ultimate leveller, since it rains on everyone regardless of gender, race and religion. She encourages people to push themselves out of their comfort zone, which doesn’t have to involve travelling far. It can be as simple as climbing the nearest hill or going for a night walk. “Adventure is a state of mind and the first step is just to do it,” she says. “Honestly, you won’t regret it.” Spirit of adventureShackleton whisky embodies the spirit of a legend and is made for those who are born adventurous – like its namesake, explorer Sir Ernest Shackleton.