‘Bits of people, drifting in time’Sarah Moss The Wellcome Collection’s permanent exhibition, Medicine Man, has plenty of disturbing objects. Partly because I arrive in and leave London through Euston station, just over the road, I often stop by if I’m early for a train (this kind of casual visiting is one of the joys of free museums), and so I find myself gazing out of the window at Watford Junction and still thinking about a box of false eyes or an amulet. It’s good to be a little haunted. I’d never noticed the tattoos. There are two of them displayed, part of a collection of more than 300 stored elsewhere. There’s a man’s face and a woman’s head and shoulders, inked on to what at first looks like vellum, with deckle edges like an old book. It is, of course, vellum of a kind: medieval books were written on split, stretched animal skins, and this is human leather. Like many of the objects collected by Henry Wellcome, the provenance of the tattoos is vague. They were bought in Paris in the 1930s from another collector, and probably removed from bodies in the late 19th century, probably in France. Human remains without provenance are worrying to curators. They can’t be returned to anyone, reincorporated into the culture or community from which they came. It’s hard to display them with dignity and compassion when there’s no story to tell, no history to offer context or connection. The tattoos appealed to me as a subject because research for my last novel, Ghost Wall, left me thinking uneasily about skin and leather, marking and preservation, and less nobly because like many of my fortysomething friends, I’d started to wonder if maybe I might like to get a tattoo myself. But when I first saw the two faces, I didn’t think abstractly about the fragile barrier between inside and outside the human body, the container of the self, but about individual bodies. There were the skins of two people, and also the work of two tattooists, and the faces of the subjects of the tattoos; the woman with her complex hairdo, above, and the man in the matelot top. And the work of the people who removed the skin from the bodies and pinned it out and preserved it, and the hands of the dealer who bought it for Henry Wellcome, though probably not the attention of the man himself who, like many Victorian collectors, was more interested in owning than seeing or handling objects of interest. I kept asking the museum’s curator: who were they? Why are they here? Where are all the others? What are you going to do with them? He answered as best he could, and referred me to some excellent research, but the individual stories are long lost. The tattoos are bits of people drifting in time, present among us at least a century after the rest of the bodies, and the bodies of the subjects and tattooists, turned to dust. They are cut off from their stories, and so the writer’s work is to make new ones for them. ‘The more you contemplate the chastity belt the less sense it makes’Imogen Hermes Gowar Years ago as a gallery warder at the British Museum I would often choose an object as I patrolled, and extemporise a brief story from it. I used it as a way to gather seeds for new voices, themes, characters and places. Some took, some didn’t; one, happily and surprisingly, grew into a novel. In the Wellcome Collection, the 16th century chastity belt was an easy choice for me. What drew me was the suggestion that this was not an “authentic” Crusades-era relic, and in fact such a thing is unlikely to ever have really existed in practical use. The more you contemplate it, the less anatomical sense it makes. Its design speaks to a lack of interest in – or ignorance of – the way women’s bodies really work; it eroticises control and restraint in a way that can exist only in fantasy. On the face of it, fakes and curios of this sort exist to bring pieces of the past into the modern world: in fact it’s the opposite, and their purpose is to sneak modernity into the past. They make history what we would wish it to be, retrofitting our own preoccupations and tastes to make them venerable and, therefore, unassailable. This chastity belt does not reflect medieval ideas about women’s sexuality. Only what Victorians wished them to be. ‘The scold’s bridle was a tool of shame and disgrace’Oyinkan Braithwaite The scold’s bridle is an instrument of punishment, torture and public humiliation, peculiarly created for the purpose of correcting the shrew-like behaviour of women; in other words, the perfect gift for a writer who is fascinated with women who misbehave. The bridle is a muzzle-like object placed on a woman’s head with holes for her eyes, nose, a slit for her mouth. It is near impossible to eat with the scold’s bridle on. It is a tool of shame and disgrace used to punish a woman for gossiping or being troublesome, and it would often come with a chain attached, to lead the woman in public, much as you would a beast of burden; all in the guise of curing her, teaching her. This one came from a prison in Brussels, and dates from the 14th century. I could not hold it, much less put it on; so I circled it, strained my neck to see all its angles behind its glass case. It was how I had imagined it, except it did not have the spike going into the mouth that some models have. I decided to keep that detail, as it was important to my tale. I don’t know how or why the scold’s bridle stopped being used, but in the realm of fiction, my characters could and would overcome it. • Homeless Bodies and Other Stories from the Wellcome Collection is available from 30 October on Audible.