Last month, it was Ian McEwan’s satire, The Cockroach; now it’s John le Carré’s latest thriller: two contemporary masters compelled into print by Brexit’s bonfire of ancient verities. Motivated by despair and disbelief, both these first responders to our crisis of political faith seem to have found consolation in literature. Where McEwan refracted his outrage through the prism of Kafka, here’s le Carré, feverish with “the German bug”, doubling down on his renowned and suspenseful opacity with an urgent first-person narrative that ranges from a Battersea health club to a hunting lodge in Karlovy Vary. Nat, an over-the-hill British spook, plus his semi-detached wife, Prue, is coming to terms with being put out to grass at 47. Le Carré’s indignation at the “unmitigated clusterfuck” of Brexit is unmediated by any third-person mask of discretion. In these pages, Brexit is an “act of self-immolation” in which “the British public is being marched over a cliff by a bunch of rich, elitist carpetbaggers posing as men of the people”. Angrier still, one of le Carré’s puppets describes the foreign secretary as a “fucking Etonian narcissistic elitist without a decent conviction in his body bar his own advancement”. Not our author’s words, of course, but certainly fuelled by his indignation, as is a memorable anti-Trump diatribe (“Putin’s shithouse cleaner”) on page 141. This novel, however, is neither a hissy fit nor a high-noon shootout, but an autumnal threnody that reconciles rage to storytelling. Ever since he was propelled into spy fiction by the cold war division of Europe, and the astonishing success of The Spy Who Came in From the Cold, le Carré’s de facto muse has been the zeitgeist. Remarkably, more than 50 years on, this source of inspiration has not deserted him with Agent Running in the Field. Like its bestselling predecessor, A Legacy of Spies, this new book demands the tribute of a rereading as much as a reading. Publishing such a thriller at the age of 88, a feat of imaginative stamina that surpasses the tenacity of his idol Graham Greene, le Carré confirms his place at the head of his profession. Not many writers half his age could so successfully put Goethe and Sting into the same sentence. This may not be the finest novel he has ever written – Tinker, Tailor and the other great novels of the 1970s remain in a league of their own – but it’s still touched with his magic. His readers will know from his first line that they are in the presence of a great enchanter. A sequence of Russian dolls drives the narrative to an ingenious and satisfying climax Le Carré delivers a tale for our times, replete with the classic seasoning of betrayal, secret state shenanigans and sad-eyed human frailty, all baked into an oven-hot contemporary thriller that’s partly inspired by the machinations of 21st-century Ukraine, today more than ever the fatal crossroads of great power politics. Once again, le Carré’s sixth sense about the thrilling fulcrum of jeopardy has not deserted him. Agent Running is right on the money, in psychology as much as politics, a demonstration of the British spy thriller at its unputdownable best. Le Carré’s portrait of Nat, the half-Scots half-Russian career spy whose final assignment “light miles from the mainstream” in “the Haven” goes horribly awry in the margins of the Brexit “clusterfuck”, is cleverly persuasive and unreliable in the same breath. Nat’s “rugged charm” and awkward relationship with his nemesis, Ed Shannon, the solitary badminton ace who’s raging at a world turned upside down, seems prescient and poignant. When Nat commits himself to Operation Rosebud, he will step into the usual wilderness of mirrors: double and triple loyalties, competing aliases and half-forgotten codenames (Pitchfork, Stardust, Woodpecker). As a sequence of Russian dolls is exposed, the darkest mystery of all – Operation Jericho – drives the narrative to an ingenious and satisfying climax. Le Carré has not lost his master storyteller’s command of momentum. His devoted readers will note that agent-runner Nat in the Haven is a long way from Smiley and the Circus. We are among the broken statues of old empires. Karla and the iron curtain are long gone and Britain’s spies cling to the wreckage as best they can, while turning a blind eye to post credit-crunch corruption. At the same time, although le Carré locates much of his plot in a unified Germany, some things don’t change. In the end, it’s the threat of Moscow Centre that will motivate Nat towards his final, desperate and most audacious covert operation, closing with 15 perfect lines about Nat’s “exfiltration”. To this reader, that’s a subtle, but deniable, nod of valediction. • Agent Running in the Field by John le Carré is published by Viking Penguin (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99