Since World Rugby saw red at the high-tolerance threshold of referees over dangerous tackles in the opening rounds of the World Cup, players have been receiving their cards. The governing body is unrepentant, adamant that its stance will force them, and their coaches, to focus on going lower and make the game safer. That stance makes playing against Japan all the more hazardous because of their ability to offload even when a tackler is aiming just below shoulder height and this is the challenge for South Africa on Sunday. The Springboks are confident their aggressive defence will stifle a team that struggled with Scotland’s counter-rucking last weekend. But if they get an early challenge wrong and are reduced to 14 men the hosts will, as befits their nickname, blossom. World Rugby held a briefing on Tuesday to review the pool stage, much of it taken up by the cancellations on the final weekend because of Typhoon Hagibis. But the blizzard of cards since the statement of 24 September pressing for greater tackle law enforcement was eventually brought up. Eight matches had been played when the edict was made, producing three yellow cards. The 29 matches since have generated six red cards and 23 yellows, two of which were shown to the Samoa wing Ed Fidow, who was sent off after the second. That amounts to one card a match and the message this week was there would be no let-up in the knockout stage. The World Cup is over for Ireland’s Bundee Aki after his three-week ban for a high tackle against Samoa, unless he appeals and wins. It was not intentional foul play, the player having just a split second to react, but his challenge was dangerous and reinforced the need for players to change their default position. It will not happen overnight and makes hazardous the forecasting of the outcome of the weekend’s quarter-finals. Seven dismissals in 29 matches amounts to virtually one in four so, on average, one player will be sent off this weekend. The referees involved in the last-eight matches have been responsible for three of the straight red cards. Two were flourished by Wayne Barnes, who takes charge of the Japan-South Africa match, and the other by Nigel Owens. The framework for high tackles has been in operation since May, but it was not rigidly applied during the summer when only one player was sent off. It meant players and coaches were not encouraged to make radical changes. That has changed and Japan and New Zealand, who prefer to shift the ball than go to ground, should benefit. It was noticeable that when Uruguay played Wales, their ball-carriers targeted the fly-half Rhys Patchell, who has this tournament tended to stand upright in a tackle after receiving a knee to the head when trying to bring down CJ Stander in Dublin last month, resulting in his third concussion in a year. Were they looking less to charge through him than provoke a challenge that would be ruled dangerous and give them a numerical advantage? Three of the quarter-finals mark a contrast in styles: reactive New Zealand against structured Ireland; organised Wales against chaotic France and devilish Japan against bruising South Africa. The exception is England against Australia. The Wallabies resemble their opponents in that they are proficient in the set pieces, strong in the maul and armed with bulldozing ball carriers to storm the gainline. The spontaneity Australia were once renowned for has largely been absent, as they showed in their failure to put away Georgia last week. Eddie Jones would have been put out by the postponement of last Saturday’s match against France having planned meticulously for the tournament. The England management team will have had some even later nights this week to recalibrate and, like the French, the question will be whether two weeks without a match will affect their sharpness. Wales were slow starters after a 10-day break before facing Fiji having begun their opening two matches strongly. Michael Cheika has spent much of the tournament yanking out what remains of his hair in exasperation at the crackdown on dangerous challenges, claiming at one point that everyone was against the Wallabies. Although after Scotland were charged with misconduct by World Rugby for taking exception to the possibility of their final pool match being called off, the head coach was fortunate to escape a summons to appear before a disciplinary committee after letting rip following Reece Hodge’s citing and suspension for a high tackle against Fiji. Australia need to resemble their head coach on Saturday, burning with rage and desire. England look the better equipped side, but a team whose weakness has been reacting when a match starts turning against them have not been extended this tournament. Australia need to show authority at half-back and move the point of attack against opponents who have been able to play the territory game, but their performances so far suggest an early exit. The other Oita quarter-final is an all-Six Nations clash. Wales and France have not served up many memorable encounters in recent years and this does not promise to be an exception. Les Bleus, as has come to be the case at a World Cup, are reported to be at war with each other while their opponents are living in harmony. The two Tokyo matches promise more. Ireland have won two of their last three internationals against New Zealand but the All Blacks, despite talking about not living in the past, have long memories. They will be determined not just to reach the next stage but to reassert their supremacy against a team coached by a wily Kiwi, Joe Schmidt. It promises much. As does the encounter between the hosts and a South Africa side that under Rassie Erasmus have rediscovered their purpose and hardness in a remarkably short time; it is a markedly different team in terms of attitude to the one Japan beat in 2015. The fire against the fury should be an epic. • This is an extract from our weekly rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.  