Channel 4’s Black History season continues with this reminder that when television ignores African history, it deprives us of some astounding stories. The story told by the Oscar-winner Lupita Nyong’o in this one-off documentary is like something out of a blockbuster Hollywood movie. Specifically, the 2018 blockbuster Black Panther, in which Nyong’o starred as Nakia, a spy for Wakanda’s Afro-futurist, all-female army the Dora Milaje. It seems that between the 17th and 19th centuries, the Dora Milaje had a real-life equivalent: the Agoji, from the Kingdom of Dahomey in present-day Benin. Armies of eroticised, exoticised and “unnaturally” aggressive women are a common trope in the victor-written history of colonial expansion, but the Dahomey Amazons are also familiar for other reasons. Soon after Nyong’o’s arrival in Benin, she was taken to the palace in Abomey where a centuries-old frieze depicted panthers and crossed swords. “All the kings of Dahomey are the children of the Panther King,” said the palace guide, to Nyong’o’s amazement. The question of where Marvel should send the royalties cheque was not addressed. This is news to Nyong’o because, while she may be the most prominent African in Hollywood (Djimon Hounsou? Charlize Theron?) she is not from round here. Did you know Africa is a hugely diverse continent, home to more than 3,000 ethnic groups speaking some 2,000 languages? Yep, and sadly, that still needs saying, so Nyong’o said it: “I just get frustrated when other people assume we’re all the same!” Indeed, according to Ancestry DNA, your 19% Benin-by-way-of-Jamaica reviewer has as good a chance as Nyong’o of being descended from a fearsome Agoji warrior. When Nyong’o pronounced the Dahomey emblem’s similarity to the “Wakanda Forever” salute “so dope … SO DOPE”, it was a reminder that this Mexico-born, Kenyan national is also pretty darn American. (One of the documentary’s incidental joys is the opportunity to hear an actor often cast in hauntingly taciturn roles be so effusive and chatty.) Yet Nyong’o wasn’t content to simply admire dusty artefacts; she wanted to feel a living link to the past. Or, considering the last Agoji is said to have died in the 1970s, get as close as possible. Fifteen princesses with machetes performing Agoji battle anthems felt pretty special, but that was soon topped by a mysterious encounter with an elderly woman sporting a Wakanda-esque tattoo on her forearm. Vodun beliefs about ancestor reincarnation made it difficult to discern her identity at first, but she was eventually established as the last Agoji, trained as a child by warriors and kept secret within the palace compound for decades. Told you it was a good story. This all sounds pretty ass-kicking, but of course the real Agoji weren’t actually comic-book heroes. That is reflected in their recruitment practice which, according to one oral historian, wasn’t always voluntary. “Girls who did not want to get married could choose to join the army,” he told Nyong’o. But also: “Married women who committed adultery were forced into the army by their husbands.” So, an expression of female power that also functioned as the patriarchy’s dustbin for troublesome women. We got a further hint at this, when an interviewee felt it necessary to emphasise his Agoji ancestor’s sexual appeal, saying: “She had huge buttocks and was a real woman … a woman must have big buttocks for men to desire her.” Which, well … even if she did have an arse for the ages, still seems an oddly disrespectful way to talk about one’s grandmother. This matters because, while the efforts of David Olusoga, Gus Casely-Hayford and others have brought a postcolonial perspective on Africa to the screen, the voices of African women are still relatively few. Nyong’o isn’t a historian, though, and it sometimes showed in unasked questions: what was the day-to-day life of the Agoji like? What was their status in wider Benin society? Other obstacles would have challenged any presenter, such as the fleetingly observed fact that “many of their treasures were seized in the 19th century by Europeans”. Plus, your average historian probably wouldn’t have had the Oscar-commended empathy required to conduct Nyong’o’s most moving interview. In it, the mother of her guide recounts a family story of kidnap and exposes the darkness of the Agoji trade links to European slavers. As Nyong’o concluded, looking out over the Atlantic Ocean, perhaps it isn’t quite like the movies, after all: “People are complicated … That’s why we have things like Black Panther.”