US secretary of state Mike Pompeo has admitted he took part in the July phone call that is at the heart of the impeachment inquiry into Donald Trump, in which the US president put pressure on his Ukrainian counterpart to look for compromising material against a political opponent. Pompeo made the admission on Wednesday while on a trip to Rome, after his participation in the call had been reported in the US press. When asked in a television interview 10 days ago about the Trump conversation with Volodymyr Zelenskiy, Pompeo had looked quizzical and implied he was hearing about it for the first time. When asked again on Wednesday, after a visit to the Vatican and meetings with Italian leaders, the secretary of state said: “As for was I on the phone call? I was on the phone call.” But Pompeo presented the conversation as part of normal state department business, trying to bolster a new Ukrainian government against the threat of Russia. He did not explain how Trump asking Zelenskiy for an investigation into the business dealings of the son of Joe Biden, a frontrunner for the Democratic nomination in the 2020 US presidential election, helped strengthen Ukrainian security. But he referred dismissively to the growing scandal engulfing the Trump administration as “all this noise”. Pompeo’s admission comes amid a struggle between the secretary of state and Congress over the demands of three House committees to see documents related to Trump administration contacts with Zelenskiy and his government, and to depose five current and former state department officials to testify on Capitol Hill. On Wednesday, Pompeo argued that the congressional demands violated the constitutional separation of powers, as he claimed the officials deposed were advised not to contact the state department’s legal office, or have anyone from the state department with them at their appearance before the congressional committees. “This has been reported to us,” he said. On Tuesday Pompeo dismissed summonses from the Democratic committee chairmen for the five witnesses, accusing Democrats of “an attempt to intimidate, bully, and treat improperly” the officials. The requested dates were “not feasible”, he said. The chairmen fired back, warning anyone trying to impede witnesses that such behavior could constitute obstruction of an impeachment inquiry. The speed of the investigation raises “significant legal and procedural concerns”, Pompeo wrote to the foreign affairs committee. “I will not tolerate such tactics, and I will use all means at my disposal to prevent and expose any attempts to intimidate the dedicated professionals.” However, it soon became clear that Pompeo had only limited power to stop the congressional committees from gathering evidence for an impeachment inquiry. One of the five witnesses deposed, Kurt Volker, former special envoy for Ukraine who resigned last week, confirmed he would speak to the committees in closed session on Thursday, according to the Associated Press. House sources were quoted as saying that a second witness, Marie Yovanovitch, former ambassador to Kyiv, would appear on 11 October, nine days later than originally scheduled. And perhaps most damaging of all, the state department’s inspector general, Steve Linick, who acts as an independent watchdog, informed the House committees that he wanted to brief them on Wednesday on documents concerning relations with Ukraine that had been obtained from the department’s legal adviser. That will also take place behind closed doors. It was unclear whether Pompeo had been warned of Linick’s move. Pompeo, speaking further in Rome on Wednesday, tried to deflect questions about the appropriateness of his and Trump’s conduct concerning the Zelenskiy call when he said he just wanted to help Ukraine “get graft out, and corruption out of their government” and that he wanted to “help a new government” be successful, with a thriving economy. “It was taking down the threat that Russian poses there in Ukraine,” Pompeo said. “It is about helping Ukrainians get graft out, and corruption out of their government, and to help this new government in Ukraine build a successful, thriving economy. “And that’s what we will continue to do, even while all this noise is going on,” he said.