“This is my body. And I can do whatever I want to it. I can push it. Study it. Tweak it. Listen to it. Everybody wants to know what I’m on. What am I on?! I’m on my bike, busting my ass, six hours a day. What are YOU on?” The full voiceover, there, from an inspirational Nike commercial from 2001, featuring the cyclist Lance Armstrong. For those who didn’t get the message with that one, Armstrong filmed another Nike ad a few years later to really push it home. “The critics say I’m arrogant, a doper, washed up, a fraud, that I couldn’t let it go,” this one brooded. “They can say whatever they want. I’m not back on my bike for them.” If you’re catching up with this millennium on tape delay, my apologies for the spoilers that follow. But Armstrong, that shining beacon of purity, was finally, finally dropped by Nike in 2012, accused of having “misled Nike”. This is really as close to athletic treason as you can get, and for a firm headquartered in a US state where capital punishment is still legal, I’m amazed it somehow doesn’t carry the death penalty yet. In order that they might save face for having been misled for so long, it was commercially vital for Nike to push the line that Armstrong was the most fantastically clever cheat in human history. He was basically the unbroken world record holder in cheating. Because the alternative is that something that was always too good to be true, in a sport we already knew was completely bent, turned out to be what many wise observers had been saying all along. Of course, “we are selectively gullible” isn’t really the Nike brand. And yet, at some point in the future – like 100 years from now or something – perhaps it will be seen as such. Back in the short term, I wonder if any corporate censure will even await Alberto Salazar, who has been banned for four years for doping violations, but who is still being supported by Nike in his legal appeals against the ruling. The critically misunderstood running mastermind behind the Nike Oregon Project, Salazar has the Nike swoosh tattooed on his shoulder (like a second-tier member of the Staines massive). So he will presumably be glad to note that a de-swooshing ceremony remains in the long grass. These are the sorts of questions Sebastian Coe should be asking. Unfortunately, he was a Nike ambassador for 38 years As Nike insisted in a statement to the BBC a few days ago, the decision on Salazar “had nothing to do with administering banned substances to any Oregon Project athlete”. Taking gold in hair-splitting, the firm added: “As the panel noted, they were struck by the amount of care Alberto took to ensure he was complying with the World Anti-Doping Code.” Guys, they were mainly struck by the need to ban him for four years for doping violations – but go on. “We support Alberto in his decision to appeal and wish him the full measure of due process that the rules require.” Nike’s CEO sent a global email explaining that Usada “upheld three charges against Alberto, all of which were committed without an intent or effect to dope or cheat”. Yup, listen up, employees. Any athletes considering speaking up now should certainly consider how clear the CEO has made his feelings. As the whistleblower Kara Goucher puts it: “He [Parker] should be apologising to all the athletes signed by Nike who were funnelled into that programme. He should be cutting ties and instead he’s doubling down and supporting him [Salazar]. Other athletes can’t speak out and say how they really feel because the CEO of the company they represent is saying ‘we support Alberto’. It’s a horrible toxic environment.” Indeed – and yet it’s one that basically seems to run world athletics. Seemingly half the pundits are sponsored by Nike or work for the sportswear giant, which runs its own secretive training programmes, pushing the association beyond mere conflicts of interest toward the sense that a vast percentage of the sport has basically been bought and paid by the firm in one way or another. Should any commercial company really be so powerful in sports? At what point would a governing body who understood the existential threat to athletics’ credibility start thinking about antitrust issues? How can any one firm wield so much influence, then claim to be little more than ingenues when agents of that influence are found to be cheats? These are the sorts of questions Sebastian Coe should be asking. Unfortunately, he was a Nike ambassador for 38 years, and only relinquished his role with regret, when it was pointed out that being IAAF president was a conflict of interest. He insisted it was just “noise”. Thus Nike is permitted to continue presenting itself as at once the most cynical and the most naive company in the entire world of sport. How else to explain the fact they seem to have bought Salazar’s claim that he was using his son as a lab rat to work out just how much testosterone you’d need smeared on you to test positive? That the Usada panel accepted this is what you might call intriguing; that Nike did so is even more of an eyebrow-raiser. Still, Nike specialise in adverts that produce all the chills, with their Colin Kaepernick ad – which told you not to listen to “non-believers” – last month winning the Emmy for outstanding commercial. So who knows, maybe they’ll find some way to enfold even this latest scandal in a spine-tingler that sells more shoes. There is a point, not very far away, where “non-believers” will destroy athletics. But sportswear? Sportswear will be just fine.