Given the weather doubts that afflict today’s Flat racing at Doncaster and Newbury, Cheltenham could find itself at the centre of attention a month earlier than normal. In any case, the jumps track provides a fascinating card of tricky handicaps, from which Duke Of Navan (3.10) may emerge as the best bet. Nicky Richards’s veteran has not achieved the heights that seemed likely when he won the Morebattle Hurdle six years ago but is very useful on his day. He was beaten by a head in this race last year by Modus and no rival of that quality faces him this time, while he gets to run from the same rating. A strong pace seems assured, with Saint Calvados and the newly visored Gino Trail in the line-up, so this might pan out very nicely for Duke Of Navan, a strong-travelling, hold-up type. 1.45 Doncaster Michael Dods has eked steady progress out of Troubador, including a fine second in Redcar’s Two-Year-Old Trophy on heavy going when last seen. 2.00 Cheltenham With the Nigel Twiston-Davies yard in its usual excellent autumn form, Cogry makes plenty of appeal at a track where he has three wins to his name, including in this race two years back. He came up short by a neck in last year’s renewal, beaten by a well handicapped rival. The opposition looks stronger in numbers than in depth. 2.20 Newbury If it’s mud, it must be Morando. Andrew Balding’s grey sloshed home six lengths clear in a similar race at Ascot last time. This is a more testing surface than last year, when he finished in a dead-heat with Young Rascal. 2.35 Cheltenham The five-length Chepstow success achieved by Torpillo a fortnight ago counts as the best form on offer. Quel Destin will be sharper for a spin on the Flat at Bath recently but he looked a bit ponderous that day. 2.50 Newbury There are some promising types in opposition but it is hard to go against Kinross in light of his eight-length romp on his debut at Newmarket. His yard continues in red-hot form. 3.25 Doncaster This Vertem Futurity should be the big race of the day but the usual anticipatory buzz has been subdued because of a disappointing entry and a dismal forecast. Mogul, a full brother to Japan, looks the correct favourite on the strength of his Group Two success but this ground will be a new test and his stablemate Innisfree is a danger. 3.45 Cheltenham Steeplechasing did not work out for Gunfleet last term but he has potential from this handicap mark over the smaller obstacles. There was something to like about his return to action, when fourth behind a stablemate at Stratford. 4.00 Doncaster He left his challenge a bit too late at Ascot three weeks ago but Came From The Dark can get it right here on ground that he clearly handles very well. Kelso 1.15 Highway Companion 1.50 Warendorf 2.25 Skyhill 3.00 Blue Flight 3.35 Think Ahead 4.10 Treshnish 4.40 Aptly Put 5.15 Get Help Newbury 1.40 Apollinaire 2.20 Morando 2.50 Kinross 3.20 Merryweather 3.55 Peaceful 4.30 Majestic Dawn 5.05 Luna Magic 5.35 Grandscape Doncaster 1.45 Troubador 2.15 Lost In Time 2.55 Future Investment (nap) 3.25 Mogul 4.00 Came From The Dark 4.35 Al ahwa 5.10 Howzer BlackCheltenham 2.00 Cogry (nb) 2.35 Torpillo 3.10 Duke Of Navan 3.45 Gunfleet 4.20 The Butcher Said 4.55 Secret Investor 5.30 The Newest OneChelmsford 4.50 Lyricist Voice 5.25 So Claire 6.00 Camelot Rakti 6.30 Filles De Fleur 7.00 Good Luck Fox 7.30 Midport 8.00 Edinburgh Castle 8.30 Tops No Winter officially started at midday here on Friday, as Cheltenham opened its doors and set the clock ticking down towards the National Hunt Festival in March, and Al Dancer was the first horse to put down a serious marker before the championship event in five months’ time with a winning debut over fences in the card’s two-mile novice chase. Al Dancer was one of the best novices over hurdles last season and set off as the 9-2 joint-favourite for the Supreme Novice Hurdle at the Festival on the back of a four-from-four record which included a convincing win in the re-arranged Betfair Handicap Hurdle at Ascot in February. He let his backers down badly, trailing home 10th of 13 finishers, but they had clearly either forgiven or forgotten on Friday since he started at odds-on to beat three opponents. The third fence nearly brought Al Dancer’s afternoon to a premature end, but he survived a serious mistake there and was much more fluent over the remaining obstacles on the way to a four-length win. “There was just one slightly noticeable sketchy jump,” Nigel Twiston-Davies, Al Dancer’s trainer, said. “A faster pace would suit him and he will improve for this. When he came here for the Supreme after winning at Ascot, it was quite close and it definitely showed on him. We don’t want to do that again. It’s only three weeks [to the next meeting at Cheltenham] so something like that [the Henry VIII Novice Chase at Sandown in December] would be a good target.” Al Dancer was available at 33‑1 for the Arkle Trophy on Thursday night but is now top-priced at 14-1 second-favourite behind Willie Mullins’s Melon, the runner-up in last season’s Champion Hurdle.