Years ago, I spent a few brilliant months in Argentina. Money was tight, so I lived mostly on empanadas: cheap, filling, delicious and somewhere in the territory of a punchy, chilli-spiked pasty. In Argentina, if you’re lucky, you’ll come across an empanaderia – a bakery with glass cabinets full of empanadas. It’s been years since I walked through the doors of such a place, but at this time of year, I find myself craving flaky pastry, chilli and things eaten in hands, all of which adds up to empanadas. I dip them in chimichurri, an Argentinian-style salsa verde. These are filled with squash, cheddar (not traditional, but I like the kick), herbs and quick-pickled red onions. Prep 45 minChill 1 hrCook 55 minMakes 10 1kg squash, peeled and cut into 1cm cubes2 tbsp olive oilA few sprigs oreganoSalt and black pepper1 red onion, peeled and very finely slicedZest and juice of ½ lemon1 green chilli, finely chopped100g cheddar, crumbled into chunks½ bunch parsley, chopped1 tsp paprika For the dough500g plain flour1 pinch salt160g unsalted butter, cold, cubed80ml olive oil50-100ml cold water1 egg, beaten with a dash of milk or water Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/gas 7. Scatter the squash on a roasting tray with the olive oil, half the oregano, salt and pepper, and roast for 25-30 minutes, until soft and slightly caramelised. Set aside to cool. Turn down the oven to 210C (190C fan)/gas 6½. To make the dough, put the flour, salt and butter in a food processor and blitz until it resembles breadcrumbs. Add the olive oil and blitz until the mixture has the texture of sand, then add the water, a little at a time, until it comes together into a dough. Tip out on to a clean work surface, shape into a disc, cover with a tea towel and chill in the fridge for an hour. Put the onion, lemon zest and juice in a bowl, then scrunch it all together with your hands until the onion starts to turn pink. Add the chilli, 70g of the crumbled cheddar, parsley, paprika, leaves from the remaining oregano, and season. Add the squash and mix until combined. Line a baking tray with greaseproof paper. Roll out the dough to 3mm thick on a lightly floured surface. Use a 12cm cutter to cut out 10 discs, then place a heaped tablespoon of the filling in the centre of each. Brush one side of the pastry with egg wash, then fold the other side over. Press down the edges with a fork, to stick them together neatly. Lay the empanadas on the tray, brush the tops with egg wash, grate over the remaining cheddar, add a little more salt and pepper, then place in the oven for 25 minutes, or until golden brown. Leave to cool for a few minutes before serving with a dollop of chimichurri. As well as being the perfect accompaniment for empanadas, chimichurri is also great as a dressing for roast veg or as a topping for a bowl of polenta. Prep 10 minMakes 1 small bowlful 1 small bunch flat-leaf parsley, finely choppedA few sprigs oregano, leaves picked and finely chopped1 shallot, peeled and finely chopped1 red chilli, deseeded and finely chopped1 garlic clove, peeled and thinly sliced or finely chopped3 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil1 tbsp red-wine vinegar1 tsp salt In a small bowl, mix all the ingredients to form a silky, herby sauce. Taste, adjust the seasoning if needed, and serve. This can be kept in a jar in the fridge for up to one week.