Hell hath no fury like a Brexiteer scorned. That’s the ostensible message of the lengthy memo sent on Monday evening by a Downing Street source to the Spectator’s impeccably connected political editor, threatening almighty vengeance if the prime minister has to extend the Brexit deadline yet again. The anonymous author – who might or might not be Dominic Cummings – suggested among other incendiary measures withdrawing cooperation on defence and security from EU countries that support any requested extension, or else forcing a general election in which the Tories would campaign simply to get the hell out. This was, the author suggested, the EU’s last chance. Reject our offer and we’ll make you rue the day. As the former cabinet minister Amber Rudd pointed out on the Today programme, this is desperate stuff; the sort of thing politicians say only when hopelessly cornered. And cornered Boris Johnson is, for all the heroic efforts to conceal the fundamental weakness of his position. Johnson said repeatedly over the summer that while he was prepared for a no deal, what he really wanted was a deal – a point he made even more strongly in private when trying to coax moderate Tory MPs on board the project. But it is rapidly becoming clear that he has failed to get one, with talks now expected to break down within a matter of days. Johnson said he would “die in a ditch” rather than delay Brexit any longer, too, but the Spectator briefing is a tacit acknowledgement that he may not now be able to avoid asking for another extension under the terms of the Benn Act. Even the threat to force a general election sounds increasingly hollow when one in his not in his gift. Threats to use an election to secure a no-deal Brexit will only make Labour MPs more determined not to grant one, and risk triggering a revolt by Tory MPs who couldn’t in all conscience stand on such a platform. Forget the noise and listen to the signal, which has been steady for a while now; retreat after retreat, but each time bombastically spun as the prelude to eventual victory. No wonder voters are hopelessly confused about what’s actually happening, unsure whether the blood-curdling threats they hear are real or just part of some gigantic bluff. Is this really what the prime minister wants, or just what some loose cannon in Downing Street thinks? Or worse, is it what they want people to think, cynical spin disguised as a burst of late-night temper? Anonymous briefings serve a legitimate purpose when used responsibly by both sides because they allow people to be more honest than they would in public. Force everyone on to the record and we would instantly know less about what’s actually going on. But the key word there is “responsibly”, because anonymous briefings can also be systematically abused to allow governments to say one thing while doing another. Anything said by an anonymous source can be easily denied, dismissed as gossip or kite-flying by ministers who couldn’t defend this stuff in public (or in theory by prime ministers who couldn’t keep their cabinets together otherwise). But for those who need to hear it, in Brussels or at home, the message gets out. Loyalists can believe whatever they choose to believe without ever being sure exactly what’s going on inside the prime minister’s head, while opponents tie themselves up in knots trying to work it out. But the confusion all this causes has real-life consequences. Late on Monday night, when the story started breaking, I got a panicky WhatsApp from a friend whose partner is diabetic and who is understandably frightened about insulin supplies in the event of a no-deal Brexit. Every time Downing Street rattles sabres, real people experience real anxiety, and real businesses inch closer to decisions that will impact on real jobs. If the glorified petulance disclosed to the Spectator really is Johnson’s plan, then he should have the guts to explain and defend it in person. If it isn’t, then Downing Street must recognise that they’re playing not with words but with lives now – and the country has had more than enough of such games. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist