If Eddie Jones set the verbal jousting tone with his spying accusation sideshow earlier this week Steve Hansen’s savvy change to his loose forwards could hold greater relevance for the World Cup semi-final. Having laughed off Jones’ spying revelations, Hansen did, however, set the record straight on the assertion from Jones that no one expects England to beat New Zealand on Saturday and they, therefore, have no pressure. It came with a not-so-subtle reminder that England failed to progress beyond the pool stages of their last, home World Cup. “I’ve talked about pressure ever since I’ve been an All Blacks coach because we’re under pressure all the time,” Hansen said. “Early in our history we ran away from it so it was chasing us down the street but these days we’ve had to acknowledge it’s there. We’re expected to win every game. “We know we’re under pressure. We don’t need Eddie to tell us that. He needs to work out what England is going to do with the pressure they’re under. They’ll have memories about a tournament four years ago that didn’t go that good so they’ll be under immense pressure themselves.” It is not the verbal battle but the vastly more important tactical stakes where Hansen may have edged ahead. Expectations abounded of the openside battle between England’s Tom Curry and Sam Underhill and their All Blacks counterparts, Ardie Savea and Sam Cane. With both sets of fetchers in superb form, the breakdown shaped as a focal point to deciding this outcome. That was until Hansen brought in Scott Barrett on the blindside and left Cane among the replacements, a switch that may catch Jones off-guard. Earlier this year, when Hansen first shifted Savea to blindside flanker to partner Cane and the New Zealand captain Kieran Read in the loose forwards, the All Blacks coach stated this was the best back-row he could put on the park – and it has been that way since. The Read-Cane-Savea loose trio is the most dynamic New Zealand possesses. Yet here Hansen is making a bold move, in the most significant match for four years, by throwing Crusaders lock Scott Barrett in at No 6 and pushing Cane, a 66-test veteran who has captained the All Blacks on three occasions, to the bench. “I’m not going to go into too much depth about that because otherwise I’ll give Eddie information he’ll have to work out pretty quickly himself. Obviously it’s strategic,” Hansen said. “Sam Cane is playing lovely rugby. However we’ve made some decisions around what we want to do and how we want to play and we’ve made that change because of it.” While Hansen is giving nothing away, the theory behind selecting a third versatile, mobile, lock in the starting team will allow the All Blacks to target England’s lineout, just as they did successfully in the second half of their victory over Jones’ men at Twickenham last November. Barrett played the second half of last week’s crushing quarter-final win over Ireland on the side of the scrum. He brings more size and ball carrying strength to the role but also far more proficiency to the lineout than the shorter Curry and Underhill, who may compromise England’s jumping options. With Barrett joining Brodie Retallick, Sam Whitelock and Read, the All Blacks four-pronged lineout weapons may tower over England’s two. The experienced All Blacks hooker Dane Coles, another who will come off New Zealand’s power-packed bench alongside midfielder Sonny Bill Williams and lock Patrick Tuipulotu, offered more insight into Barrett’s selection. “Scotty is a pretty genuine lineout threat so it creates options for our lineout leader to look for that and get up and win some ball as well,” Coles said. “Both ways it’s a great thing. Scott is pretty awesome in that department so hopefully it pays off.” New Zealand: 15-Beauden Barrett, 14-Sevu Reece, 13-Jack Goodhue, 12-Anton Lienert-Brown, 11-George Bridge, 10-Richie Mo’unga, 9-Aaron Smith, 8-Kieran Read (captain), 7-Ardie Savea, 6-Scott Barrett, 5-Sam Whitelock, 4-Brodie Retallick, 3-Nepo Laulala, 2-Codie Taylor, 1-Joe Moody. Replacements: 16-Dane Coles, 17-Ofa Tuungafasi, 18-Angus Ta’avao, 19-Patrick Tuipulotu, 20-Sam Cane, 21-TJ Perenara, 22-Sonny Bill Williams, 23-Jordie Barrett.