Fiona Benson’s second volume of poems, Vertigo & Ghost, which this week won the Forward prize for best collection, is so full of small, blindingly bright explosions that sometimes you almost drop the book. On the morning after winning the £10,000 prize, the author is suffering from a headache – brought on by adrenaline rather than alcohol – and is full of praise for her fellow shortlisted writers (there are Forward prizes for first collection and best poem, as well for best collection). These include Jay Bernard, Ilya Kaminsky, Raymond Antrobus and Holly Pester, “who read an amazing poem at the award ceremony, about an abortion – it was ragged and raw and beautiful”, she says. “Poetry is so rich and healthy and diverse at the moment.” In person Benson is quietly spoken, often ending an answer to a question with an apology – “sorry for the feminist rant” – or by checking to make sure she’s been clear. She describes herself as a “private person” living in Devon with her husband and two daughters, but her poems, written “as if nobody is listening”, are exposing. They peel away at the layers of the female body and examine, tenderly yet unflinchingly, its murky chambers. There’s a poem about the “ridged outer labyrinth”, the “intimate, violet latch” of the narrator’s placenta; another called “Ruins”, which describes the worn landscape of a post-partum body, its “inflamed trenches / and lost dominions”. The day Zeus came to the safe-houseand shoved a sawn-off shotgunthrough the letterbox calling softlylike he was calling to the catthat terrible croon,SWEETHEART,I’M HOME. Had them kettled for hours.Oh yes they were mightily changed.Maddened, fuguing. Dissolved to rivers,shaking like trees in a hurricane.Some of them damaged in their entrails,two thrown from high windows;impossible to save.  • Vertigo and Ghost is published by Cape (£10). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99. If it feels as if she is staking out new territory here, Benson herself denies originality, citing immediate forebears including Sharon Olds and Kate Clanchy, but also an older, near-forgotten history of popular ballads and folksong. “People keep talking about me and [fellow poet] Liz Berry as if we are doing something new and we’re not,” she says. “Popular ballads are full of things like incredibly physical, visceral accounts of pregnancy, child killing, sex and giving birth – there’s even one where there’s a caesarean. We need to retrieve all that. If we erase precedent and history we are constantly beginning again – and that’s wrong.” Benson, born in 1978, began writing as a child – “little flashes of things. After I read Cry, the Beloved Country by Alan Paton I wrote a very sincere anti-apartheid poem, and my grandpa had Alzheimer’s and I remember writing about that very young – it was a way of processing things I was finding traumatic. I didn’t start keeping a notebook till I was 17.” She has a doctorate in early modern literature, and poetry is her medium because, she says simply, “It’s just what comes.” Her first collection, Bright Travellers (2014), won the Seamus Heaney award. Vertigo & Ghost begins with a poem recalling a naive, adolescent longing for love and sex, but then plunges into a sequence of dazzling poems that use Greek myth as their handholds, in which Zeus, king of the gods, figures as a sexual predator. This is a deranged, raging god, the rapist of your darkest nightmares, who communicates in italicised capitals, who looks down amusedly at certain favoured mortals: “I LOVE THIS PRESIDENT. / HIS SHINY GOLD TOWER.” A number of these poems were written in a single burst, one half-term when she was visiting her parents with her children, and had an evening to herself. When she brought them to her editor at Cape, the poet Robin Robertson, “I was practically crying, because I didn’t know what he’d make of them.” He encouraged her, and sent her back to Ovid’s Metamorphoses to do more. Benson’s reforging of episodes from that work of transformations is spectacular, turning the Roman poet’s sometimes voyeuristic rapes (very much seen from “outside”, and often troublingly aestheticised) inwards into the female body. She worries, though, that the framework of myth protects the reader too much. “It makes it safe in a way,” she says. “I’ve been on Radio 4 and they want me to talk about myth but they do not want to hear, or feel they cannot broadcast, some of the transformations because they are so bodily. It’s still taboo to talk about rape and women’s bodies that way. So part of me feels like I have given people a safe way to think about it – and I’m not sure I want them to feel like that.” I wonder if the obverse is true, that by plugging into the matrix of myth the reader is given a means to confront what would otherwise be impossibly raw. The second part of the collection deals with the narrator’s rural life, her experience of childbirth and motherhood, so that the whole collection forms a kind of cycle of a woman’s life. The common thread through all this is anxiety, a feeling of fragility, of porousness. There’s a sense that things are OK, but they could crumble; and in too many places across the world, they already have. For example, in “Hide and Seek” a game with her children brings thoughts of “families squeezed behind false walls / or hidden under the floor” while hostile soldiers search. In another poem, “Eurofighter Typhoon”, a plane roars low over the garden, “with a metallic, grinding scream / like the sky’s being chainsawed open”, and the narrator comforts her frightened girls while she thinks of other mothers, in other places, digging their children “out of the rubble in parts like plaster dolls”. Benson mentions Sarah Kane’s play Blasted – in which the violence of the war in the Balkans explodes into a room in Britain, and fractures everything, including dramatic form itself. Even “Love Poem, Lucca”, which ends on a note of affection and tentative comfort, is afflicted by the vertigo of the collection’s title; the narrator wants to climb a lovely Italian medieval tower, but when she does so, she is a wreck, and all she can see is “the four walls sledging off through space”. I can’t think of anything else I’ve read that so accurately describes the seam of dread that lurks just beneath the surface of our times. Benson, above all, thinks of herself as a reader – a reader who has joined the great flow of literature that courses on and on. “It’s a great privilege to join in this conversation. I’ve studied early modern literature and I know how much gets lost. Most of it won’t be remembered, but those few poems that are remembered will reflect what’s been going on around them. It’s a privilege to be part of that river of voices.” • Vertigo & Ghost is published by Jonathan Cape. To order a copy for £8.80 (RRP £10) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.