Ralph Hasenhüttl described Southampton’s humiliating 9-0 defeat at home to Leicester City as a disaster and said he accepts responsibility for one of the darkest days in the club’s history. Southampton suffered their worst ever defeat as Ayoze Pérez and Jamie Vardy scored hat-tricks in a devastating rout to lift Brendan Rodgers’s side second in the Premier League. Rodgers labelled Leicester’s ruthless display as the perfect performance but insisted there is still more to come from his team. Southampton capitulated after Ryan Bertrand was sent off as a result of a high tackle on Pérez in the buildup to Ben Chilwell giving Leicester a 10th-minute lead. Youri Tielemans and James Maddison also got on the scoresheet before Vardy completed the scoring on a historic night from the penalty spot. The Southampton winger Nathan Redmond said it was an “embarrassing performance” which they will debrief in training on Saturday morning. “I must apologise for this performance,” Hasenhüttl said. “I take 100% responsibility for what happened. I want to say that I’m proud of the fans that were staying in the stadium until the end of the game because it was not easy to watch it for anybody who is a Southampton fan. We have to apologise for what happened. After the red card, every attack was a goal. There was no defending at all. When you act like this, you can’t be surprised when you concede nine. You can call it if you want ‘gave up’, you can call it ‘helpless’, you can call it what you want. It was a disaster.” The mood could not be more different for Rodgers and Leicester, who ran riot from start to finish. “It was the perfect performance,” Rodgers said. “We showed a wonderful demonstration of how to play against 10 men. The players made it look a lot easier than it actually is. Tactically they were very good. What was pleasing tonight is that you might see games like that before where there is a bit of showboating because you are comfortable but we played like a proper team and we stayed focused. “I’ve been in games with Liverpool where we were 5-0 up against Arsenal in 50 minutes and 6-0 at Newcastle away from home. The message at half-time when it was 5-0 was to see it as 0-0 and go out and show we’re a really, really good side by pushing and showing a hungry mentality. “To go out and do what we did and show that ruthless streak, it shows we’re making steps to being a ruthless side. I think we’ll get better, we will improve. Of course, the result and performance is perfect. But the players trust and believe in how we work. And we have young players who are only going to gain even more confidence. We will get better. We certainly won’t just be content with what we’re doing.”