Japan’s captain, Michael Leitch, believes the host nation can still achieve more at this Rugby World Cup and provide some comfort for the victims of Typhoon Hagibis. Leitch and his head coach, Jamie Joseph, revealed their players had spoken before the game about how they could help to ease the pain of those affected and said it provided extra motivation before their 28-21 win against Scotland. After the Brave Blossoms had secured their place in the quarter-finals for the first time in the tournament’s history, Leitch confirmed the deadly weekend typhoon had helped unite his team before the biggest game of their lives so far. “Before the match at the team hotel the players already knew this game was about more than just us, that a lot of people suffered in the typhoon for this game to happen,” said Leitch, whose side will now face South Africa next Sunday. “We are grateful for the opportunity to inspire Japan and we showed that for 80 minutes. It’s great for Japanese rugby and rugby in Asia. For us to qualify for the quarter-finals is shifting the goalposts. We’re not coming out next week to have a good game and lose. We’re coming out to win.” Joseph also suggested the team had wanted to deliver a result as a tribute to the victims of the worst storm to hit Japan in decades. “I think it is important to acknowledge what went on with regards to the typhoon,” the head coach said. “When we woke up this morning nine people had been killed and 12 are still missing. We talked about that as a team. Sometimes those sorts of things can be overwhelming, but I think it came out in the mix today. A lot of people are suffering.” Scotland, meanwhile, have acknowledged they could have few excuses after failing to make the knockout stages at a World Cup for only the second time. The full-back Stuart Hogg said: “I truly believed we could come here and get a victory but if I am brutally honest we got beaten by the better side. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales “Fair play to Japan, they took the opportunities on offer and if you give a team like Japan 28 points in a Test match you are going to have to do something exceptional to be on the winning side. It is going to hurt because we came here believing we could achieve something special. Instead we haven’t managed to get out of the group stages and it’s tough for us. We are bitterly disappointed, we can’t change anything and we are going home.” Scotland’s head coach, Gregor Townsend, also admitted his side had fallen short but suggested Japan could yet cause problems for the Springboks. “It was always going to be a challenge given the way Japan were playing and our short turnaround,” he said. “But we had the team and the ability to go on and win by the necessary number of points. That we didn’t is a huge disappointment. They have some really good players with pace and confidence. They’re a good side and they cause you problems in a number of areas. It’ll be tough for South Africa. That’ll be a very close game.”