Most teenagers want to leave home to experience their first taste of independence. I just wanted to move to a place where the door didn’t go “ding” every time someone walked through it. We moved to Coventry in the early 80s, when I was just coming up to my teens and the new-romantic movement was at its peak. Back then, it was enough of a concern trying to get my hair to flick right, so when we ended up living in a Chinese takeaway I panicked about the grease wilting my fringe. Little did I know that was to be the least of my worries. My parents and grandparents had emigrated from Hong Kong in the late 1960s. They were part of a postwar wave that had begun in the 1950s, of people arriving in Britain to work in a growing industry: Chinese food. It was affordable, exotic and suddenly very popular in the west. When we arrived in Coventry, we had already lived in Nottingham and Hull, but this converted two-up two-down terrace house was where we would stay. It was only recently that I found out the majority of Hong Kong immigrants who came over to work in restaurants and takeaways did the same, as it was the cheapest and most convenient form of accommodation. The downside was that they were trapped inside the building all day, with hardly any opportunities to socialise with the wider community. It was especially difficult for people like my mother, who was essentially uneducated (she left school at 13), because it severely limited the pool of other jobs she could do. Dad’s frustration manifested as frequent bouts of short temper, and both of them turned to casinos as an escape because they were the only form of after-hours entertainment available, which is probably one of the reasons there often seem to be a lot of Chinese people in casinos. No wonder they were, and still often are, known as the “silent minority”. But, as I say, I didn’t know that then. All I knew was that the ground floor of our home was taken up by the shop and extended kitchen. We made up for not having a living room by cramming an old sofa into my parents’ bedroom, alongside a table with a TV plonked on top. I remember spending hours poring over living-room pictures in the Argos catalogue, imagining a better life involving cornicing and pelmets. My sister and I were squashed into the other bedroom, which provided the only access to the bathroom. There was absolutely no privacy, so I missed out on doing all sorts of formative stuff, such as snogging poster pinups, for fear that someone would barge in at any second, desperate for a poo. Another challenge was that, even though our kitchen was industrial-sized, we couldn’t fit in a washing machine, which meant I had to go to the launderette every weekend because Mum was too busy frying pork balls. At senior school, I heard someone say to his mate: “Ugh, I can smell soy sauce,” while they both sneered at me, so I was paranoid about cooking odours clinging to my clothes. But no matter how much detergent I chucked in, our laundry always seemed to come out with an undertone of chicken chop suey. I would have liked to talk to my parents about my troubles, but I couldn’t because my Chinese was dire. For some reason, our parents never taught us how to speak our native language (although I do understand the odd phrase, such as “Come and gut these prawns!” and “One day you’ll inherit this takeaway!”). To complicate things further, my parents, who did speak Cantonese – the dialect most British Chinese people use – chose to speak Hakka at home, so the kids couldn’t communicate at all with extended family and friends, who would ridicule us for it. Add to that the fact that Mum hardly spoke English, Dad spoke good English, but didn’t like talking, and that my grandparents spoke no English at all, and you have a pretty sorry state of affairs. Random funny fact: mashed potato never existed for Chinese people before they came to Britain, so they didn’t have a word for it. They decided to call it by its English name, “mash”, but pronounced it “ma-see”. This, translated back into Hakka, means “horse shit”, which I’ve always found hysterical because I’m so infantile. I’m not sure why Chinese people bothered naming mash because they never eat it. When our grandparents attempted to make western food, we got spaghetti with golden syrup, and margarine and sugar sandwiches. Mum never made western food, and she never let us eat the food we served customers either because she said it had no nutritional value. Instead, we ate “proper” Chinese food, which consisted of bland steamed fish and vegetables, and sometimes chicken’s feet. My views on food became so skewed that one year I thought it would be honourable of me to donate a catering tin of bamboo shoots to the harvest festival at school. It wasn’t until it was on display in assembly that I realised how out of place it looked next to the custard creams and baked beans. After-school activities included bagging prawn crackers, chopping mushrooms and peeling prawns. Contrary to the “tiger parenting” now associated with Chinese child-rearing, all my parents wanted was for me to take over the business when they retired. I know they meant well, but I couldn’t think of anything worse than working 12-hour days with only Christmas Day off. So, instead of getting a pat on the back for top marks in art, I got a slap round the head for slicing the char siu all wrong. Once, I ended up chopping the end of my index finger off with a meat cleaver, which in hindsight probably required a trip to the hospital for stitches. But my parents didn’t believe in western medicine, and they just doused the wound with soy sauce and wrapped it up in a dishcloth. When I grew tall enough, aged 14, to see over the counter – just under 5ft (FYI, I’m still that height) – I had to start serving customers, and I hated it. Friday and Saturday nights were the worst, as that was when punters came in steaming from the pub. “How long’s it gonna be?” they would slur, jabbing at their watches as if they thought I needed a visual prompt. “About this long,” I’d say, indicating the length of the container it would come in. Then they would crack up and think they’d made a funny little Asian friend. I soon learned how to deal with them, by giving as good as I got. Occasionally, a fight would break out and I’d have to call the police because I was the only one who could speak good enough English. Once, a bloke started being racist to Mum, and my uncle – who was helping out – vaulted over the counter with a knife, Bruce Lee style, and chased him down the street while the whole neighbourhood watched. But all I could think was how embarrassing my family were and how much more bullied I would be if anyone at school found out. I’d been picked on all my life, though, so it was nothing new. At infant school, I was the only Chinese kid, and bullies would pull their eyes into slits at me and sing the Ching Chong Chinaman song. I used to go home, look in the mirror and think: “But my eyes are oval-shaped,” then get confused. By the time I went to secondary school, there were three other Chinese students: my older brother, my cousin and a boy I didn’t know. Takeaways and restaurants tend to be scattered about in different towns to avoid competition. The result is that we stand out wherever we go. Despite my growing insecurities, I managed to make a friend (let’s call her Tina). Tina was interested in meeting my family, but I was insistent that this would never happen. At the same time, I wanted to appear like any other “normal” teenager who invites friends over in a “normal” way, so I caved in. She had cornrows in her hair at the time, and as soon as she walked into the kitchen, Mum pointed at her and laughed because she thought Tina looked like an onion. Tina in turn thought this was the funniest thing she’d ever heard, and in her mind it made me the coolest mate she had ever had. Good job Tina wasn’t normal either. As if running a takeaway wasn’t stressful enough, Dad decided we should keep pets. The first was a fully grown alsatian called Lucky, who seemed to appear from nowhere. We didn’t know how to train her, so she kept escaping on to the main road and nearly getting run over (not so Lucky). Finally, she was given away to the man who delivered the beansprouts. Next up were two goats that Dad gave piggybacks to, up and down the garden (he was a bit eccentric). They were doted over, and allowed to roam wherever they wanted. But one day the brown goat got caught eating £20 worth of fivers out of the till and was sent off to live with Beansprout Man as punishment. Later, the black one broke into the shed, ate a whole bag of hops and exploded. I won’t even go into what happened to my little sister’s hamster. As soon as I was able, I left home and went to London with grand ideas of becoming an artist – which, perhaps unsurprisingly, wasn’t plain sailing. It took a long time to adjust to life outside a Chinese takeaway, especially as I didn’t have a clue about boys, booze or contraception. At the age of 19, I ended up pregnant and living in a King’s Cross squat. Twenty five years later, living happily in a house with a living room – and cornicing – I was asked by my agent whether I would consider a book about my childhood. I was horrified. Then I thought about all those other first-generation British-Chinese kids who probably experienced similar things to me, who might smile with relief and think: “So I wasn’t the only one!” I know they’re out there somewhere, and now I really want to hear their versions of the story. Hey, where are you? Don’t you think it’s time we stopped being the silent minority? Chinglish by Sue Cheung is published by Andersen Press (£7.99). To order a copy for £7.03 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846.