Australian Kelsey-Lee Barber showed nerves of steel, producing a huge final-round throw to win the gold medal in the women’s javelin at the world athletics championships in Doha. Having lengthened her run-up on the advice of coach and husband Mike Barber, the 28-year-old claimed the world title in dramatic style, moving from fourth place to first with the clutch final-round effort of 66.56m. “I didn’t know how far it was as I was still waiting to watch it fly over that line but it certainly felt like a really clean throw,” she said. “With easy, clean throwing you normally know they are quite good throws. “I thought it had snuck over 65 so I was just waiting to see the numbers come up. Then to see 66 and jump into first place my head was spinning a bit. But I was like ‘wait, I can’t celebrate too early because I have still got three girls to go’.” As it turned out, none of them were able to respond. The minor medals went to Chinese duo Liu Shiying (65.75m) and Lyu Huihui (65.49m) with German Christin Hussong relegated to fourth place. Barber came into the championships ranked No 2 in the world this year courtesy of a brilliant season highlighted by a personal best of 67.70m in Lucerne in July. But she looked out of sorts in the qualifying round in Doha on Monday, only scraping through to the 12-woman final in 10th place. Barber settled her nerves on Tuesday night with a solid opening throw of 62.95m, but with one round to go in the final she had only improved to 63.65m and a podium finished looked unlikely. Afterwards Barber paid tribute to her coach and husband. “It’s wonderful and I wouldn’t be able to do this without him,” she said. “And especially tonight my performance couldn’t have been achieved without him on the fence. “There were technical cues as much as anything but just to have the support to say ‘you’re good’ or ‘cool, calm down a little bit’. The emotional connection is what makes it so special and so enjoyable.” It was only the second throwing gold medal won by an Australian at a world championships. Barber also became just the ninth Australian athlete to win a world championships title. Earlier, Brandon Starc has continued his impressive late-season run of form, advancing to the men’s high jump final with a minimum of fuss. After a career-best campaign in 2018, which included Commonwealth gold and the Diamond League crown, Starc has done it tougher this year after being diagnosed with a bulging disc in his back in February. But the 25-year-old’s form and fitness have improved the longer the year has gone on. “One miss at 2.26 and the first attempt at 2.29 and that was it,” he said. “Five jumps all up so that was pretty good. The main thing was just to get through to the final. “It doesn’t really matter how pretty it was.” London Olympics finalist Steve Solomon scraped into the men’s 400m semi-finals. Solomon claimed the last of the qualifying berths after finishing fourth in his opening-round heat in 45.65 seconds. Veteran Lauren Boden and major championships rookie Sarah Carli both advanced to the semis of the women’s 400m hurdles. Competing at her fifth successive world titles, Boden clocked 56.00 in the opening round, while Carli came home strong to finish fourth in the concluding heat in 56.37.