Turkey sit top of their Euro 2020 qualifying group, ahead of France on head-to-head, but perhaps the most satisfying thing for the coach, Senol Gunes, and the Turkish Football Federation is that the results have come while picking young players who have had their football education in their home country. This is not how it used to be. Gone are players such as Arda Turan who, after breaking a singer’s nose and then threatening them with a gun in an Istanbul hospital, was always going to struggle to get his career back on track, and the old guard has been replaced by a group of young players who have the capacity to make waves at next year’s tournament, should they qualify. Gunes’s side face Albania on Friday night and then France on Monday. They take on Albania full of confidence, having beaten the same opponents 2-0 away and defeated France at home, and all their main players are 25 or younger. Roma’s Cengiz Under and Lille’s attacking midfielder Yusuf Yazici are 22, the Celta Vigo midfielder Okay Yokuslu is 25, Fenerbahce’s Ozan Tufan is 24 and Besiktas’s Dorukhan Tokoz is 23. And that is before you get to the defence. Turkey have struggled to produce good defenders for a long, long time but suddenly there is so much choice. Caglar Soyuncu, 22, has managed to replace Harry Maguire at Leicester City to such an extent that the Foxes fans are singing “Harry Maguire, Harry Maguire, We don’t need you, We have Caglar Soyuncu”. Meanwhile, the 21-year-old Merih Demiral has gone in three years from Portuguese third-tier football to earning a €19m (£16.5m) move to Juventus this summer. Then there is the 19-year-old Schalke centre-back Ozan Kabak as well as the 22-year-old right-back Mehmet Zeki Celik, who made the move from the Turkish second division to Lille, where he quickly established himself as a first-team regular. What really stands out is that apart from the 20-year-old Sassuolo defender Mert Muldur all the players named were developed in Turkey. For years, this has not been the case and it has always been counterproductive to credit Turkish football when players have had their education in another country. If a Turkish player was raised in Germany, trained by German coaches at a German club within the framework of the German system he is the product of German football regardless of whether he decides to represent Turkey. Turkish football is in a bit of an odd place. Domestic club football is in transition. The major sides are struggling to cope with pressure from Uefa and the Turkish Football Federation to become financially sustainable. With the threat of fines or worse, with the possibility of being kicked out of European competition looming, league sides have had to tighten their belt and address their debt crisis. The gravy train is over, so to speak. Clubs are having to be more transparent, which means more loan moves, fewer permanent transfers, slashing the wage bill and investing in scouting and youth development. All this leads to clubs having to play more players from the youth teams. The process is arduous but necessary. Turkish football has gone through quite a journey to get here. From the early 2000s, Turkey have played around with various foreign player restrictions in an attempt to make clubs invest in local players. However, that had the effect that the prices for Turkish players rocketed. Players’ value increased solely based on their nationality and there were not enough quality Turkish players to go around. It was a simple case of demand outweighing supply. In 2015 the foreign player restrictions were lifted, starting a process which has led to the clubs being where they are at the moment, being forced to invest in player development under the “Domestic Football Incentive System”. Fatih Terim was behind that scheme but believes it has been largely misunderstood by the media. “We were talking about foreign players when we should have been discussing how to improve domestic talent,” he said recently. “You cannot improve or increase the number of domestic players by restricting or banning foreign players. It just stifles competition. The current system still has not been properly understood. Clubs are obliged to have 14 Turkish players in their squad out of a maximum 28 players.” Looking down the youth ranks down as far as under-16 and under-15 level there is a wave of talent coming through that could end up surpassing the current crop, with more and more players moving to Europe’s top five leagues. Given the state of the domestic currency it makes sense for Turkey to be an export market. Before 2015 just €12m was made from the sale of Turkish players to Europe but that has risen to €89m across the three following seasons, with 14 players moving to the top five leagues. It is also fair to say that, with young Turkish players currently not having the same reputation as, for example, traditional player markets such as South America, France and Belgium they are undervalued. Turkey is a hotbed of player development. Well-trained youngsters, hungry for success, on low wages are aware that only through developing do they have a chance of breaking through. A meritocracy has been created as opposed to the previous system that rewarded some players simply because of their nationality. And this is good news for the national team. All young sides need some experience and Turkey are lucky that Emre Belozoglu is still around. He is 39 but possibly better than ever. “Emre is the team’s captain, older brother and father,” is how Gunes described his role in the side recently.