When Alan Wright* decided to take the plunge and spend £2,800 on new hearing aids, he thought he was buying a significant upgrade on his old NHS-provided models. The 70-year-old, who had largely given up going to the theatre and other similar activities due to being quite deaf in one ear, hoped that by spending the money he would be able to start going out again. But instead of a new freedom, he and his wife Angela say they have endured 18 months of frustration as the hearing aids spent more time at the Specsavers hearing centre in Solihull than in his ears. In the end the couple became so disillusioned with the Widex aids that they demanded their money back. “It was a lot of money but we thought it would be worth it to improve his quality of life,” says Angela. “After 18 months of repeatedly having to return the aids, which would only work for a short time, he has now gone back to using his NHS version. We now wish we had saved our money.” The couple may have just been unlucky and, after Guardian Money intervened, Specsavers refunded the couple in full. It repeated its view that neither it, nor the manufacturer, could find any problems with Wright’s hearing aids. However, his case, and others like it, raise important questions about when and if consumers should use one of the growing number of private firms that dominate the private hearing aid sector, or stick with the NHS. The dilemma is exacerbated by the fact that consumers face a bewildering range of aids to improve hearing – and a huge range of prices. The consumer group Which?, one of the few bodies that has investigated this area and come up with an excellent guide, found in 2018 that the average amount spent on a pair of hearing aids was £2,613. It is not uncommon for someone to spend £5,000 on the most technically advanced models, which may only last three to five years. When Which? asked its readers to rate their private hearing aid purchases, the highest score of 87% was awarded by those who had used an independent retailer. Boots Hearingcare was rated the best of the big-name firms with a score of 79%, while Amplifon and Specsavers scored 74% and 71% respectively. Scrivens was lowest at 62%. Francesca Oliver, audiology specialist at the charity Action on Hearing Loss (formerly the RNID), says people tend to put this off and wait far too long – typically 10 years – before seeking help with their hearing. She advises those needing help to start with the NHS to see what’s being offered before venturing into the private sector. “People appear to assume they will face long waits and be given old-fashioned hearing aids, but it is not the case. All the aids now provided by the NHS are digital and, while they tend to be the bigger behind-the-ear options, they are a proven technology that generally works.” She says most people will need a GP examination and subsequent referral to an NHS audiologist. The charity’s most recent research found that patients are mostly given a hearing aid within six weeks of being seen. In many cases the patient will be seen by one of the private firms that operate on the NHS’s behalf. Oliver warns users who are having their first aid fitted not to expect it to work perfectly immediately, as it takes time for the brain to adjust. As a result, return trips to the audiologist will often be required so it can be fine-tuned. “If you are going to venture into the private sector, I would strongly urge you to do your homework first. You should use a Health and Care Professions Council-accredited audiologist, and ideally use a firm that offers a decent, free trial period or money-back guarantee. You could spend thousands of pounds on a privately provided small aid but not notice a huge hearing difference,” she says. Most people go private to gain a smaller, more discreet in-ear aid, which in the past have been less available on the NHS. The very latest privately offered aids will come with hi-tech features such as phone links and apps, and are marketed as being more comfortable. The traditional behind-the-ear aids may be the most obtrusive; however they are versatile and reliable. While the in-the-canal and completely in-the-ear “invisible” aids may look much better, they tend to need repairing more often and can be unsuitable for those who are prone to ear infections. They are also vulnerable to malfunctions because of sweat and wax build-up. Natalie Hitchins, Which? head of services, says it is important to note that the NHS buys its digital hearing aids from the same manufacturers as private providers. “While it is probable that they won’t be the very latest models, the technology will still be up to date. There are advantages to going private such as convenient appointments, and a wider choice of styles is likely. However, it’s not a cheap option.” The NHS/private dilemma is not helped by the fact that the jury is out in online debates. For every person raving about their bought hearing aids, there are others who have returned to using NHS ones. The newest Siemens aids offered to NHS patients may be a factor in that, as this could represent a huge financial saving to the individual. What’s been your experience of buying hearing aids privately, or using the NHS? Join the debate below the line. * Alan and Angela Wright are not their real names. Elaine Green from Suffolk is one of those who bought an “invisible” in-ear hearing aid privately, only to later wish that she had gone to her doctor first. “It was about vanity. I realised that my hearing had declined but I didn’t want others to know, so I told the man that I wanted the smallest, most discreet aid possible,” she says. She went to a big-name chain and paid £700 for the aid, but says she almost immediately had problems with it, as sounds had become muffled. “Eventually I came to my senses and went to see my GP. The NHS audiologist did exactly the same test and came to exactly the same conclusion, but gave me a behind-the-ear hearing aid which she made up on the spot,” she says. “To be honest, it has been so much better. Sounds are no longer muffled, and though it can be seen by other people, I’m getting over that. As a society we have to stop treating people who are deaf as stupid and accept that older people can’t hear as well as they once could. A lot of people buying expensive hidden hearing aids are doing so because they want to keep their hearing loss a secret – I was one of them.” This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.