Seldom can a manager have greeted a last-gasp winning goal for his team so angrily. After Matt Targett struck in the fourth minute of stoppage time for Aston Villa, Dean Smith had an expression like thunder. He was still dismayed, he explained, by two things: his team’s all-round performance and what he considered to be the most outrageous intervention yet by VAR against Aston Villa, who had a goal contentiously disallowed for the third time this season. “I couldn’t even celebrate at the end,” said Smith. Nearly everyone else supporting Villa went wild, as Targett’s first goal for the club secured three points from a match in which Brighton had been dominant until Aaron Mooy got himself sent off in the 35th minute. The visitors had been leading thanks to Adam Webster, and although the excellent Jack Grealish equalised before the break, Brighton looked good value for a point until Grealish set up Targett for the decisive breakthrough. “We probably didn’t deserve to win,” said Smith. Brighton are a team transformed under Graham Potter, nothing like the side who trudged to Premier League survival under Chris Hughton last term. For the first half hour here they attacked with such fluency they made Villa look like dunces at a Mensa meeting. Less than a minute had elapsed when Neal Maupay fired off the visitors first shot, which whizzed just wide. Although it was not one-way traffic, Brighton’s superiority made one wonder how they had not scored in their previous three road trips. They soon put that right here, although, given their impressive movement, it felt wrong that their breakthrough came from a set piece. Pascal Gross curled over a free-kick from the left with a precision that Villa’s markers lacked, and Webster was free to guide a downward header into the far corner. Maupay, who continually found space between midfield and attack, forced Tom Heaton into a save in the 32nd minute and then, moments later, threaded a pass through to Connolly, who would have made the score 2-0 if not for Heaton’s rapid reaction. It took uncharacteristic clumsiness from Mooy to turn things in Villa’s favour. The midfielder was already on a yellow card when he committed himself unwisely to a tackle on Grealish, knee-sliding into his opponent’s ankle in the 32nd minute. Fresh optimism swept through Villa Park when he was ordered off. A mighty roar went up in the 42nd minute when Conor Hourihane rammed the ball into the net from 16 yards but the goal was wiped off following a review by VAR, Wesley having been judged to have fouled the goalkeeper in the buildup. It was true that Wesley’s elbow caught Matthew Ryan as the pair jumped for the ball but contact does not necessarily equate to a foul and Smith was adamant there had been no clear and obvious reason to reverse the on-field decision. It was the third time this season that Villa have had disallowed a goal ruled out after a review by VAR but Smith found this decision even more difficult to accept than the ones against Burnley and Crystal Palace. “For the first time, I believe, VAR has got involved in a subjective decision,” said Smith. “I must have missed the memo where they said that’s what it is for.” Good thing, then, that Grealish struck a legitimate equaliser moments later. Struck is a generous word, as the midfielder did not meet Frédéric Guilbert’s low cross cleanly. But he was in the right place at the time to bundle the ball into the net from close range, finishing a move he had started. Being cut to 10 men and pegged back on the scoreboard barely dulled Brighton’s ambition. They continued to attack when they could in the second half and defended defiantly when they had to. They were on course for a point until Grealish skilfully teed up Targett for an emphatic finish.