We can look closer to home than Germany, the US and Finland to combat rough sleeping (Hundreds of people are dying on our streets. Let’s give them homes, Editorial, 3 October). As a result of Blair’s cross-departmental initiative introduced in 1997, rough sleeping stood at 532 on any given night in England in 2001. By 2018 it had risen to an estimated 5,000 people, and, as your editorial points out, 726 people, or on average two a day, die on the streets. Yes, a Housing First approach is urgently needed, not least because of the neglect of social housing by successive governments over the last 20 years. A desperate situation has been compounded by draconian cuts since 2010, the impact of universal credit on the most vulnerable, and the cutting to the bone of preventive services to address mental health, drug and relationship problems when they first arise. It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that we are creating a welfare system underpinned by punishment, regulation and deterrence, that legitimises the sacrificing of the street homeless.Prof Mike SteinUniversity of York • Emergency action is needed very soon to house in secure, affordable accommodation the ever rising number of homeless families in temporary accommodation and rough sleepers on the streets. It will take 10 years or more to build enough adequate, truly affordable homes. Some families have already been in temporary arrangements for over 10 years. Young children are spending the vital early years of their education at the mercy of landlords and council officials, who have moved them several times, tearing them out of one community after another. Quantitative easing was used to save the banks. It can also save the homeless. It ought to be used urgently to enable councils to buy and renovate empty and unused properties and let them out at a truly affordable rent. Rev Paul NicolsonTaxpayers Against Poverty • Liam Byrne (Homelessness could happen to any of us. This is a crisis, Journal, 2 October) is absolutely right. Poor housing (not just homelessness) in Britain is probably the biggest single cause of human misery, underachievement and loss of potential, not to mention poor health. Reform of housing would almost certainly outperform proper funding of the NHS, the care system, schools and the legal system – all rightly in politicians’ sights – in improving the human condition. Come to that, it would probably on its own make the NHS more affordable and hugely improve the performance of the schools system. Yet New Labour almost totally neglected it – apparently nobody in Tony Blair’s cabinet was interested in it, possibly because none of them had personally experienced any problems; the Tories neglect it because they believe that by providing cheap housing you just create more Labour voters. Of course, Labour does have a housing policy: it’s long, complicated, unreadable and completely unbelievable, especially in view of its invisibility at conference. All that is needed is a simple declaration: by the end of the first Labour parliament, every citizen will be properly housed, no matter what we need to do to achieve it. Jeremy CushingExeter • Following your column advising on how best to help the homeless as we encounter them on the street (G2, 24 September), last Monday morning I asked a woman sitting on the pavement outside a sandwich shop if I could buy her a sandwich. She said: “No, but a coffee would be good.” When I asked her how she liked it, she said: “Just tell them it is for me – they know how I prefer it.” I duly bought her the coffee, the staff saying it was her fourth that morning. They clearly disapproved of my action, no doubt regarding it as encouraging a vagabond to squat outside their shop. There are no simple answers, but I shall strive to avoid cynicism and consider small gestures of help in the future.Geoff SmithClayton West, West Yorkshire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition