Michael Cheika has fended off questions about Australia’s woeful recent record against England and sidestepped talk of of his own future in a defiant start to Rugby World Cup quarter-final week. The Wallabies coach also dodged a series of questions about his relationship with England counterpart Eddie Jones and insisted his mind was solely focused on 80 minutes of rugby in Oita on Saturday. Cheika’s men have suffered six straight defeats against the Jones-coached English since the last World Cup. That was water off a duck’s back to the coach, who repeatedly described himself as a “believer” that his players can defy the underdog tag. “Call me a sucker. I believe in my lads,” Cheika said at the team’s training base in Odawara on Monday. “I know there’s other people who won’t give us much of a chance but I believe that when you believe in yourself you are much closer to being able to create history.” He said it was pointless to reflect on why the Wallabies had struggled so badly against England of late. They have won just two of the last 12 Tests, one of which was the drubbing of the tournament hosts at Twickenham in the 2015 World Cup pool stage. England’s average winning margin in the six Tests since has been 15 points. “I think it’s irrelevant, really. There is reasons, I’m not trying to avoid it, but why go back and talk about all those games?” Cheika said. “I talked about those games in those press conferences after those games. Looking backwards is only going to give you a sore neck.” • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales Cheika’s enthusiasm waned when quizzed on Jones. The former Randwick club teammates have enjoyed some verbal sparring over the years but the Wallabies mentor did not seem interested in sparking another round. Their relationship was “fine”, he said. “I don’t see him very much. Yeah fine, it’s all good.” This week will potentially be the last at the helm for the five-year coach, who has said he will only apply to stay on if the Wallabies hoist the Webb Ellis Cup. A smiling Cheika told an English reporter he wouldn’t offer a crumb of detail about his future plans. “I know you don’t know me very well but I’m only thinking about today. I’m genuine. Actually you’d get on pretty well with my missus, she’s always asking what’s going on tomorrow or next week or the week after. I never tell her because I want to enjoy today.” In a rugby update, Cheika provided positive news on captain Michael Hooper and lock Adam Coleman, who were both late scratchings from Friday’s win over Georgia. Both had shaken off minor niggles, leaving the only question mark hanging over fullback Kurtley Beale, who is undergoing concussion protocols.