Your article (Tories five times more likely than other MPs to vote against bills to tackle climate crisis, 12 October) insinuates that Conservatives are less supportive of climate action than other political parties. While we welcome the statement that it is “not intended to be a definitive evaluation of an MP’s green credentials”, we feel this article was exceptionally misleading and did not reflect the Conservative record on climate action thus far. It was a Conservative government that set a world-leading net-zero target, supported record levels of investment in renewables, decarbonised faster than any other major economy, announced the phase-out of coal power stations, doubled international climate funding to £11.6bn, and successfully bid to host the UN climate talks next year in Glasgow. These significant achievements were in large part the result of sustained campaigning by green Conservative MPs. But as none of them was subject to votes, they are not accounted for in your scoring system. This does not mean we are complacent. We know we must go further and faster to meet our upcoming carbon budgets and map out a route to net zero. We have spoken in parliamentary debates, tabled questions to ministers and written letters calling for greater ambition. We have pushed and continue to push the government for new green policies on home insulation, electric vehicles, cycling, tree planting, carbon capture and storage, renewable energy and more. We are proud of our campaigning and the record of our government. We are happy to debate the best policies to reach net zero and to have our actions on this vital issue scrutinised by the media. But the scrutiny must be fair, which your article wasn’t.Vicky Ford MP, Antoinette Sandbach MP, Peter Aldous MP, Oliver Letwin MP, Philip Dunne MP, David Warburton MP, Andrew Selous MP, Nigel Evans MP, Tim Loughton MP, John Howell MP, Scott Mann MP, Rachel Maclean MP, Matthew Offord MP, Richard Benyon MP, Kevin Hollinrake MP, Derek Thomas MP, Alex Chalk MP, Neil O’Brien MP, Sarah Newton MP, James Gray MP, Victoria Prentis MP, Bim Afolami MP, Maria Caulfield MP, Oliver Heald MP, David Tredinnick MP, Nicholas Soames MP, Henry Smith MP, Pauline Latham MP, Steve Brine MP, Caroline Spelman MP, James Cartlidge MP, Richard Graham MP, Peter Bottomley MP, Bernard Jenkin MP, Gillian Keegan MP, Michael Fabricant MP