Donald Trump has called for China to investigate his leading political rival, in defiance of impeachment proceedings in Congress where he stands accused of abusing his office to put similar pressure on Ukraine. At the same time as calling for an investigation of the former vice-president and frontrunner in the Democratic primary, Joe Biden, and his son Hunter, Trump noted that the US was in trade talks with China and “if they don’t do what we want, we have tremendous, tremendous power”. The president was speaking as his former special envoy on Ukraine, Kurt Volker, was giving evidence to House committees about what he knew about parallel contacts with Kyiv conducted by Trump and his personal lawyer, Rudy Giuliani, and aimed exclusively at obtaining compromising material on the Bidens. Hunter Biden was on the board of a gas company in the eastern European country, where Joe Biden, as vice-president, pressed for the dismissal of the chief prosecutor. There is no evidence of wrongdoing by father or son. Trump has denied any wrongdoing in his dealings with the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelinskiy, and has even accused an intelligence whistleblower of treason for providing evidence that the president used the power of his office – the withholding of military aid and a summit meeting – for his own political ends. However, on the White House lawn on Thursday, he openly called for both Ukraine and China to investigate the Bidens. “If they were honest about it, they would start a major investigation into the Bidens,” Trump said. “Likewise, China should start an investigation into the Bidens. Because what happened in China is just about as bad as what happened with Ukraine.” On a 2013 trip to China, the then vice-president took his son with him on his official plane. The younger Biden was in the process of setting up a private equity fund with money coming in part from Chinese investors. Hunter Biden later acknowledged having met a prospective partner during the trip, though a spokesperson told NBC News it was a social encounter. There is no evidence the Bidens did anything illegal. On Thursday, Trump also noted that Chinese negotiators are due to come to Washington for the latest round of high-stakes trade talks, and threatened negative consequences if Chinese leaders did not make concessions. “The Chinese are coming in next week,” he said. “We’re going to have a meeting with them, we’ll see, but we’re doing very well. I have a lot of options on China. But if they don’t do what we want, we have tremendous, tremendous power.” Commenting on Trump’s remarks, the former FBI deputy director Andrew McCabe said on CNN that to ask a “foreign nation – especially one that doesn’t have the greatest reputation of rule of law and democratic protections to people under investigation – pushing that country to investigate a US citizen is a remarkable departure from everything we have seen to this point.” McCabe was fired by the Trump administration in March 2018, shortly before becoming eligible for retirement benefits. The author of The Threat, a book about his experiences under Trump, he is the subject of a Department of Justice investigation into whether he lied about a leak to the media. Trump’s actions, McCabe said, were “a shocking abuse of the presidential power to conduct foreign relations”. As pressure increases on Trump, he and his supporters have increasingly focused on the business activities of Hunter Biden and the support he received from his father. Democrats point out that Trump and his children are continually blurring the line between the presidency and the commercial activities of the Trump Organization.