Australia’s latest hit animal export may be wild, frightening and a little nuts, but it’s not exactly native fauna. Instead, it’s the Melbourne-made Untitled Goose Game – a video game that lets you be an annoying goose – which is taking the internet by storm. “Even in our wildest dreams we never thought it would be like this,” says Stuart Gillespie-Cook, one-quarter of the independent development team House House. “Our ambitions were, like, maybe this will be a popular video game. “It’s been really interesting to see it reach this other cultural threshold, where people who I would never expect to be talking about it are talking about it.”The game, in which your goosey goal is to wreak havoc through a peaceful village, has become an internet phenomenon with shout-outs from celebrities including Chrissy Teigen and Blink-182, as well as an unstoppable deluge of fan art, videos and memes spreading across social media like a goose frantically flinging your laundry across a garden. Untitled Goose Game (2019) pic.twitter.com/SMHIuoxQWk The game’s critical reception has been just as strong, with high review scores across the board and chart-topping positions on Switch in the UK, US and Australia, beating out Nintendo’s latest Zelda remake at times. “To know that people do enjoy the game and find it worthy on its own merits, that’s a step up,” Gillespie-Cook says. He says the team was afraid they had made something that was only good “as a funny little internet video”. The team attribute the game’s broad appeal to its easily understandable premise, though they also made deliberate overtures to ensure it is entertaining to a prospective audience as well as the player. “We’ve always had a really conscious effort to make that stuff readable to someone who understands the logic of newspaper comics as well, not just games,” Gillespie-Cook says. “I think maybe our saving grace is that even if you’re not pulling off the most complex heists or having the finest motor control of the goose, it’s still hopefully a bit funny. There’s still that immediate joy of pushing the stick and seeing the goose walk in a weird way.” Gillespie-Cook identifies two kinds of joy from creating something and putting it out into the world: the joy of people doing new and unexpected things with your project; and the joy of people noticing and observing the things that you did intend. pic.twitter.com/lGeatGcFaY “It is very joyous, to see people having discussions as a result of things that we talked about internally when developing, to see that something we considered very heavily is actually received, and talked about, and noticed.” The team are not yet concerned with the pressure that this sudden, overwhelming burst of attention has brought them, though they do think of it as an issue for the future. “I do think it can only help, in that we can probably get a meeting we wouldn’t get otherwise based on the success we’ve had,” Gillespie-Cook says. Untitled Goose Game is one of a raft of locally made games supported by funding from Film Victoria, which Gillespie-Cook credits with making House House a viable studio. “There’s no way without funding we could have made [previous game] Push Me Pull You,” he says. For its part, Film Victoria is just as thrilled about the studio’s success. “Our expectations were that we hoped to see a creative team explore a playful concept, and work out how to reach a modest market,” chief executive Caroline Pitcher tells Guardian Australia. “Obviously they far exceeded these expectations.” MY PARENTS, 30: • bought a house • busy raising two kidsME, 30:• bought a video game • busy pretending to be a horrible goose that runs around stealing, breaking things & honking at people The Melbourne games scene, home to more than half the country’s game developers, is thriving, and Pitcher hopes the team’s global success will bring even more attention to local developers. “It shines a light on just what our Victorian games community is capable of,” she says. Gillespie-Cook is similarly enthused. “Seeing other friends’ games get funding and seeing these varied projects that wouldn’t get off the ground otherwise, it’s very inspiring and makes you feel like it’s worth something culturally,” he says. Of the many, many goose memes that have taken off, the team’s favourites are the ones that come from unexpected places. “We have an item in the pub area, a butter knife, which we didn’t think would be a big deal,” Gillespie-Cook says, “and now there’s a million images of the goose holding the knife, the goose rotoscoped over a popular vine of a little kid running with a knife, stuff with audio … it’s very good.” 'let me see what you have!'#untitledgoosegame pic.twitter.com/QU6pteWDX2 So too is the crossover art that has swamped the internet: fan-made artistic representations of that damned goose getting up to shenanigans across all kinds of game worlds. “Seeing a goose dressed up in these very ornate designs from a game like Fire Emblem, which I only know vaguely about – it’s a good, weird feeling,” Gillespie-Cook says. a challenger appears pic.twitter.com/QIbIHMSohJ “Most players of video games are already this weird, antagonistic force that goes around poking at everything and seeing what they can break,” he says. “So the goose as video game character is, I think, a very easy sell.”