The Netherlands’ record goalscorer Vivianne Miedema said her first Women’s Super League goal against Manchester City was a reward for the manager, Joe Montemurro, trusting her after a week of limited training. Miedema picked up a minor calf strain against Charlton last week but struck on the stroke of half-time to end the Blues’ unbeaten league run and keep Arsenal’s hopes of retaining the title well and truly alive. “I’ve been struggling this week,” Miedema said. “I haven’t really trained so I had to have a bit of extra energy. It was just smart for me to not train this week and I love that Joe trusts me and still played me and I think I paid him back today.” Montemurro said: “Viv’s a player for the 94 minutes on a Sunday and if we need to do certain things in the week to get her ready for Sunday then we will.” Chelsea came from a goal down after Adriana Leon struck for West Ham to leapfrog City at the top of the WSL table. Goals from Sophie Ingle and Ji So Yun within two minutes of each other and a injury-time effort from Drew Spence ensured Emma Hayes' side took full advantage of Manchester City's defeat. Kirsty Hanson and Jess Sigsworth scored either side of the break as Manchester United saw off Reading to keep them within three points of Man City and Arsenal. Everton earned their third win of their league campaign (matching last year's tally), Chloe Kelly scored for the fourth time in five WSL games before City loanee Esme Morgan headed in a second against Brighton. Tottenham stayed level on points with both United and Everton after two goal in as many minutes from Kit Graham overturned Abi Harrison's first half strike for Bristol City. Birmingham picked up their first points of the season with a 2-0 defeat of Liverpool. An early goal from Kerys Harrop was added to by England midfielder Lucy Staniforth late on to leave Liverpool rooted to the bottom of the table with a single point. Suzanne Wrack Though City were top of the league with four wins from four, it could be argued there was no better time for the champions to face them. The defender Aoife Mannion ruptured an anterior cruciate ligament against Atlético Madrid this month, Keira Walsh was suspended, and Ellen White’s slow return from injury had meant she could only be on the bench. “She’s a massive loss,” said Jill Scott of Walsh. “I do think she is one player in this team that is irreplaceable. We all bring different strengths as a midfield but I don’t think anybody can do what Keira does.” Arsenal dominated possession and passed the ball crisply, but City’s strategy of cutting off the Gunners’ attack at its roots, forcing them to play out from the back through former City defender Jen Beattie by sitting Janine Beckie on Leah Williamson, was very smart. With Williamson unable to pick out the between-the-lines passes at which she is normally so adept, Arsenal struggled to find a way through the two banks of four to which City frequently reverted. Scott, playing deeper in the absence of Walsh, did well to keep Arsenal’s creative central pairing of Jordan Nobbs and Kim Little quiet. But with a minute left of the half, a fortunate deflection from Katie McCabe’s cross fell at the feet of Little who slipped Miedema through one on one and, with the centre back Gemma Bonner woefully out of position, the Gunners’ forward fired low past Ellie Roebuck to put Arsenal ahead. On 66 minutes Nick Cushing, the City manager, replaced Beckie with White to make her first appearance in a Manchester City shirt – and first since her World Cup heroics. But Arsenal continued to dominate, pressing high and testing the composure of Roebuck at every opportunity, looking more likely to get a second than concede. Cushing was left ruing a lack of chances. “We didn’t have a shot against Man United and we didn’t have a shot against Arsenal today. “Having Ellen back will give us hopefully more firepower but we’ve got to get on the training pitch as a group and improve.” Chelsea came from a goal down after Adriana Leon struck for West Ham to leapfrog Manchester City at the top of the table. Goals from Sophie Ingle and Ji So-yun within two minutes of each other and an injury-time effort from Drew Spence ensured Emma Hayes’s side took full advantage of Manchester City’s dropped points. Kirsty Hanson and Jess Sigsworth scored either side of the break as Manchester United saw off Reading to keep them within three points of City and Arsenal. Everton earned their third win of their league campaign (matching last year’s tally), Chloe Kelly scored for the fourth time in five league games before City loanee Esme Morgan headed in a second. Tottenham stayed level on points with United and Everton after two goals in two minutes from Kit Graham overturned Abi Harrison’s first-half goal for Bristol City. Birmingham earned their first points of the season with a 2-0 defeat of Liverpool. An early goal from Kerys Harrop was added to by England midfielder Lucy Staniforth late on to leave Liverpool rooted to the bottom of the table with a single point.