Julie-Lou Dubreuil, 47, is of French origin and works as a shepherd in Paris and its suburbs. She joined a group of urban shepherds and then moved to the suburbs and founded the Clinamen collective. “For 10,000 years, sheep have lived with men: we have forgotten that sheep are capable of many things, like walking on a sidewalk, staying calm, stop[ping] at red lights. The sheep of the urban shepherds are city dwellers, born in the city. The city is their medium, like us. The proof: the urban flock hate flies like any good city dweller.” Julie-Lou Dubreuil with her dog The collective made me what I am today; people believe in people who build themselves from scratch, and great ideas will not be realised out of the blue “We go to the border of Paris twice a month, to graze in the course. On a daily basis, the herd grazes an immense 400-hectare park in La Courneuve. And five days a month, they eat in the city on circuits of 9-15km, in an urban area north of Paris that extends from Aubervilliers to Garges-lès-Gonesse.” Dubreuil studied architectural engineering, as her father did, in her hometown of Bordeaux, but she did not finish her studies because of their difficult financial situation at the time. Dubreuil got a job as a field manager, building and renovating homes, and was the only woman in that line of work where she was living. The sheep gather around the table for lunch Speaking about her shepherding activities, Dubreuil said: “This summer [2019] we have exceptionally had the authorisation to go around Paris [a 144km journey] for 12 days and arrive at the Invalides [in the centre of the city], through the Trocadero and the Eiffel Tower; maybe we will do it again in 2021. “All our trips are under the control of the authorities. The goal is gradually to make room for the animal – whether wild or domestic – in the urban space.” Dubreuil tends to the sheep at her farm outside Paris She said she was not willing to continue with the field manager role after a few difficult experiences and had dreamed of finding something better. The sheep pass by a canal The idea of being a shepherd came to her mind while she was watching a herd of sheep. Dubreuil said she felt like she was facing a closed door and the sheep were telling her to open it. The flock inspect potential bargains at a shoe shop Dubreuil humbly describes her six years of being a shepherd, saying: “It was the sheep who taught me how to be a shepherd.” Those willing to learn must keep their eyes open “for the signs the animals communicate to you”. She added: “Many women are very shy, and I tell people there are thousands of women who are working in every sector, but they do not appreciate our capabilities as women. As always. I thought to myself, ‘Paris would appear quite pretty with sheep’. The sheep graze with Paris in the background “Once, I was sad when I passed by an area under a bridge in Paris where migrants had set up camp. Usually, the sight of sheep in the streets brings a smile to people I pass by, but it did not happen with them. I thought happiness could at least pass momentarily through their minds when they see the sheep, but unfortunately it didn’t happen. I was very sad after, I kept wondering what life on this Earth did to them.” Even if part of my job is filthy, I still love it – it’s my work Dubreuil said she was inspired to become a shepherd by watching a herd Dubreuil continued: “Generally, people are happy and especially children, because for most of them, it’s their first time in life to see real sheep. We occasionally pass by a group of snobbish people, who look down on us. However, I feel quite comfortable with my sheep in such fancy places – that is my little revenge against capitalism.” The sheep graze at a park in Paris She comes to the city twice a month with her herd, and spends the rest of the time in her village in the countryside. Members of the public flock to the sheep