Surprising it took Apple this long to get on the original-content video-on-demand (VOD) bandwagon, but here it is, launching 1 November: a glossy-looking library of brand-new, all-star, Apple-produced series, documentaries and films, with everyone from Oprah Winfrey to Sesame Street on board. Subscriptions are £4.99 a month (new Apple device purchasers get a year free). Hottest contentBuzz so far has centred on scripted series, with comedy The Morning Show featured foremost in the marketing: starring Jennifer Aniston, Reese Witherspoon and Steve Carell, it’s a slick look at breakfast-TV politics aiming for both popular and critical cred. Also getting hyped: Dickinson, a period sitcom with Hailee Steinfeld as the young poet, and a reboot of Steven Spielberg’s Amazing Stories. Hidden gemsThere’s been less talk about cinematic content, but it seems Apple is seeking to challenge Netflix as a go-to for US indie film-makers. At Sundance in January, they made their first festival purchase: Hala, director Minhal Baig’sa well-received coming-of-age study of a Muslim teen at an American high school, streaming from 22 November. How essential is it?That remains to be seen as it grows. It will launch with a relatively small starter collection, so whether or not to subscribe depends on which individual attractions take your fancy: if you absolutely must be first to see The Morning Show, for example, a fiver (after a free week-long trial) is fair enough. But its place in the market doesn’t seem unique just yet. Best forFamilies with diverse interests needing extra viewing options. (One account serves up to six household members.) Very small people get the Sesame Street spinoff Helpsters and a new educational Peanuts cartoon, Snoopy in Space; older children get a Ghostwriter reboot and Prehistoric Planet. Parents get the big-name dramas. They sayApple CEO Tim Cook: “It’s not about whether Netflix wins and we lose, or if we win and they lose. Many people use multiple services, and we are now trying to become one of them.” Score: 7/10Hard to rate sight-unseen, but thus far their launch has been characterised by all the polished presentation and classy celebrity endorsement we expect from the Apple brand. Now it’s time to see if their programming lives up to it. What is it?Soon to be a one-stop shop for all things Disney, both films and TV, as well as subsidiaries Pixar, Marvel Studios, Lucasfilm, 20th Century Fox and National Geographic. There’s no confirmed UK date yet but it arrives in the US, Canada, Australia and beyond next month, and industry experts predict an early 2020 UK launch at around £5.99 a month (rumour has it that the later launch here is due to pre-existing licensing deals). Hottest contentThe entire Disney film library will eventually be available, but Captain Marvel will be their first cinema release to stream exclusively on the service. It’s also the only place to stream all 30 series of The Simpsons, and the new Star Wars spin-off series The Mandalorian, launching in November. An updated Lady and the Tramp will be their first live-action remake to bypass cinemas. Hidden gemsThough the primary selling point of Disney+ is its gathering of already familiar favourites, there are some swerves in the promised lineup, particularly in factual content. Who can resist the sound of The World According to Jeff Goldblum, a series in which the eccentric star explores such everyday subjects as trainers and tattoos? How essential is it?Given that this will eventually be the only place to access the entire Disney canon, not to mention the Star Wars and Marvel franchises among other ubiquitous fixtures of pop culture, Disney+ is likely to become indispensable to a wide audience. Loyalists of physical media may hold out, at least until the original content becomes a sufficient draw. Best forParents, first and foremost: family entertainment is the name of the game here, to the extent that no films with an adult age restriction from Fox or Fox Searchlight – The Favourite, for example – will be included. But child-free fantasy fans and comic-book geeks will also be subscribing en masse. They sayDisney exec Agnes Chu: “We’re not making a large volume of things just to make them. Everything we do, we have a very clear focus that it needs to meet the standards that the originals set, and hopefully take it to another level on Disney+. So we’re pretty thoughtful about harnessing the nostalgia.” Score: 8/10Disney is the dominant force in contemporary entertainment, and this promised colossus looks set to cement that: this is the one giving Netflix bosses the most sleepless nights. Still, the lack of details about its UK launch is beginning to frustrate fans. What is it?A solution to streamline the tangle of free VOD services offered by British TV channels, Britbox will gather new and classic series from ITV and the BBC in one place. An internationally tailored version has proven popular in the US and Canada; it will belatedly launch on home turf later this year (date TBC) at £5.99 a month. Hottest contentYou can already sample Britbox’s wares on the limited beta service they’re testing. It’s only a taster, though it offers many of the current popular phenomena (Love Island, if you feel the need to catch up) and throwback favourites (from Prime Suspect to Fawlty Towers). Hidden gemsBritbox appears to be mainly about familiar comfort viewing rather than off-the-radar surprises. But the inclusion of Alan Bleasdale’s gritty Liverpudlian landmark Boys from the Blackstuff in the initial lineup suggests it may also be an archive for tougher British drama. Exclusive original content is also promised, though details are scarce. How essential is it?That really depends on how much British TV you want in your life, on top of what’s readily available. The picture has been clouded a bit by the BBC’s newly announced plans to revamp the free iPlayer service including digital box sets alongside regular programming, and removing that peskily narrow 30-day viewing window. This risks undermining the worth of Britbox. Best forOld-school TV nostalgists who no longer bother with physical media and thus have no other way to wallow in the lush 1980s pleasures of The Jewel in the Crown. Younger audiences are likely to find their favourite British programming by another method. They sayThe BBC director general, Tony Hall, likens Britbox to the Beeb’s DVD collection: “This is just a modern-day version of that... a better version of that, because it used to be infuriating when you’d seen a programme on the BBC and you couldn’t get hold of the DVD.” Score: 6/10The quality of the programming isn’t in doubt, but many punters will quibble with paying a subscription fee for content their TV licences have already covered. The appearance of the beta site, meanwhile, is functional rather than exciting: one hopes they’re saving some sparkle for the official launch. What is it?In case you’ve just emerged from a 10-year coma, the former DVD rental service Netflix has evolved into the biggest name in streaming, with nearly 150 million subscribers worldwide. Initially a library of existing films and TV, it has, since 2012, gone into producing original content, winning Oscars and Emmys. Subscriptions start at £5.99 a month. Hottest contentIt’s increasingly to keep up with what’s hottest on Netflix: popular favourites include Ryan Murphy’s satirical drama series The Politician, which stars Gwyneth Paltrow, critically acclaimed true-crime miniseries Unbelievable and the final series of loopy philosophical sitcom The Good Place. On the film side, anticipation is feverish for their biggest original production to date: Martin Scorsese’s three-and-a-half-hour gangster saga The Irishman. Hidden gemsNetflix’s archive has dwindled since they poured funds into original content, but you can still find surprises including Pioneers: First Women Filmmakers, a fascinating anthology of early silent cinema by female trailblazers including Alice Guy-Blaché and Lois Weber. That they’re rubbing shoulders with Queer Eye is Netflix in a nutshell. How essential is it?As essential as any streaming service can be right now, despite flawed presentation and deep reserves of dross. There’s too much content here essential to the current cultural conversation – be it BoJack Horseman or Alfonso Cuarón’s Roma – for anyone wishing to remain in the loop to do without it. Best forEveryone, really. The more Netflix invests in its “Originals” (sometimes a misnomer for films they’ve acquired rather than produced), the less they seem to cultivate any kind of demographic, aiming at teens (To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before), highbrow cinephiles (Senegalese Cannes winner Atlantics, coming next month) and everyone in between. They sayMartin Scorsese explains why Netflix is now a film studio in its own right: “The movie business is changing hour by hour – not necessarily for the better – and many places we would have gone to for funding in the past were no longer viable. Then we started talking to Netflix. We agreed on everything, most importantly that we all wanted to make the same movie.” Score: 9/10There’s a reason why Netflix has become a noun (or verb) bigger than its own brand, as in the proverbial invitation to “Netflix and chill”: for younger generations in particular, the streaming giant isthe default, and their content production is only getting more elaborate and far-reaching. What is it?The most brand-entangled of all these services, Amazon Prime Video is effectively a side perk of Prime membership – some might value it less than free same-day delivery on their online purchases. But for a side perk, it’s grown into rather a good one, with access to a vast library of films, TV, original content and even live-streamed sports events as part of a £7.99-a-month Prime subscription. Hottest contentPrime’s original programming never quite attained the fashionability of Netflix’s, even when it’s been very good, but the now-departed Transparent and the glossy, Emmy-guzzling The Marvelous Mrs Maisel have granted them a lot of cred. And last month, Amazon signed the hottest name in TV, Phoebe Waller-Bridge, to create and produce multiple shows exclusively for the platform in a £50m deal: hopes are high. Hidden gemsPrime’s film selection is packed with mainstream favourites, but the surprises come with the service’s glut of add-on channels – pick the ones you want, and each will appear on your interface for a monthly top-up fee. They range from an Amazon-allied edition of the BFI Player to horror service Shudder, while cinephiles should seek out FilmBox Live, with its menu ranging from Tsai Ming-Lliang’s The River to Luchino Visconti’s Ossessione. How essential is it?Some people take an either/or approach to Netflix and Prime, given the similarity of their remits. If you’re choosing one, it’s a matter of priorities: Prime’s original programming hasn’t made them invaluable yet, but their back catalogue is a bit stronger. If you’re already a regular Amazon shopper, that tilts the balance in favour of a Prime subscription. Best forDiscerning adult viewers who can afford the slightly higher subscription cost (particularly when you factor in extra channels), to whom the service’s best programming is generally aimed. If they’re parents with Peppa Pig-addicted toddlers, so much the better: multiple series of the pink terror’s antics are available. They say Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos: “Our goal with Amazon Prime, make no mistake, is to make sure that if you are not a Prime member, you are being irresponsible.” Score: 8/10It’s not the most well-presented streaming service on the block – browsing beyond its homepage offerings gets a bit fiddly – but it’s gradually shaking its “Netflix’s dowdier sister” image and asserting its own brand of cool. What is it?Named to reflect the logo of American TV channel NBC, this is one of multiple US network-based streaming services striking fear in the hearts of Netflix with plans to reclaim exclusive streaming rights to their most beloved shows. It launches in the US next April, with UK plans unconfirmed – though word is that an international version will eventually be free to Sky subscribers. Hottest contentThe primary draw, as it stands, will be streaming access to a library of NBC Universal’s most popular drama, comedy and reality series, including 30 Rock, Battlestar Galactica, Will & Grace, Friday Night Lights and, er, The Real Housewives franchise. If you’re already nostalgic for any of these, a banquet awaits. Hidden gemsThere’s less hype about the service’s original content, but elaborate series plans include a new adaptation of Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World, set to star Alden Ehrenreich and Demi Moore, a dramatised version of the true crime podcast Dr Death with Jamie Dornan and Alec Baldwin, and a Battlestar Galactica reboot from Mr Robot’s Sam Esmail. How essential is it?No way of knowing yet, at least until we find out how good those new series are. But if you’re a certain kind of sitcom junkie and Peacock becomes an exclusive online home for your favourites, you’ll be more in need of it than others. Best forAddicts of mainstream American television with a yen for the days before cable programming made everything a bit artsier. Beyond that, we’ll wait and see. They sayPeacock head of programming Bill McGoldrick: “We do want to be loud, first and foremost. We want a name or a concept that gets our audience base excited. That will also be informed by our vast library with 15,000 hours of programming.” Score: not yet ratableWith plans for its UK launch still so undefined, and little preview content to speak of, we can only guess how this is going to turn out. But Peacock does suggest that American network TV is ready to modernise.