The horrific discovery of 39 dead Chinese men and women in the back of a lorry in Essex on Wednesday was the culmination of two fateful journeys. The first involved the tractor unit, or cab, of the lorry – the front of the vehicle – which is known to have been driven by 25-year-old Mo Robinson. Robinson lives in Laurelvale, a village outside Portadown in County Armagh, Northern Ireland. He regularly posts photos on his Facebook feed showing the Scania lorry, which has a sticker on the windscreen reading “Ireland, the ultimate dream”. There was initially confusion over the route the lorry had taken to the UK as police said it was believed to be “from Bulgaria”. It later emerged that the vehicle was registered in the Bulgarian coastal town of Varna under the name of a company owned by a female Irish citizen. The Bulgarian prime minister is reported to have said the vehicle was last in Bulgaria in 2017. Robinson entered the UK via Dublin, crossing the Irish Sea to Holyhead in north Wales on Sunday. Hauliers in Holyhead have told the Guardian that border control efforts are often cursory. Rafael Bolewski, from Poland, said security checks at British ports were infrequent. Bolewski, who also uses the port of Fishguard in Pembrokeshire, said that in his 17-year career he had only ever been stopped twice by border control for a “proper” check. At 2.49pm on Tuesday, another journey was under way, as the lorry trailer – the long cargo hold section at the rear of the vehicle – which contained the 39 Chinese nationals and was reportedly refrigerated, arrived at the Belgian port of Zeebrugge. Around 4,000 lorries travel through Zeebrugge every day to and from the UK. There have been concerns raised about the state of security at the port. Theo Francken, Belgium’s asylum and migration minister, said last year that the 600 CCTV cameras at the port were insufficient. British authorities have issued repeated warnings of the rising threat of people-smuggling via Belgium in the past three years. Border Force officials highlighted Zeebrugge as a key embarkation point for migrants seeking to enter the UK in a 2016 threat assessment. The route taken by the trailer before it reached Zeebrugge is unknown. The trailer is owned by an Irish firm, GTR, which has a registered address in Dublin. It is not known when the trailer left Dublin, nor is not known where the trailer had been before it arrived in Zeebrugge. It was reportedly rented from a GTR depot in County Monaghan on 15 October. One line of inquiry may be GPS tracking. On its website, GTR says all its trailers are fitted with GPS monitoring and it uses a company called Blue Tree Systems to track vehicles’ movements. Blue Tree Systems declined to comment. Later on the afternoon of 22 October, the ship carrying the trailer left the port of Zeebrugge and sailed for Purfleet in Essex. The shipping and terminals company that facilitated the trailer’s crossing to Purfleet is called C.RO Ports, also known as Cobelfret. Gary Walker, the C.RO Ports chief executive, said: “C.RO Ports is deeply saddened by the discovery in Grays, UK, yesterday of a trailer in which 39 people were found dead. It has been widely reported that the trailer entered the UK by ship via C.RO Ports’ Purfleet terminal, originating at our terminal in Zeebrugge. C.RO Ports confirms this is the case. “We continue to fully assist UK, Belgian and other law enforcement authorities with their ongoing investigation. It will be understood that as there is an investigation under way, we are not able to say anything further at this stage. Our thoughts are with the family and friends of those found yesterday.” In Purfleet, the journeys of the tractor and trailer met. At 12.30am on Wednesday, Robinson’s cab collected the trailer, and by 1.05am they had left the port. The East of England ambulance service alerted Essex police at 1.40am to the discovery of the 39 bodies in the rear of the vehicle. The ambulance service has not confirmed the exact time it received a call, and it has not said whether it was Robinson himself who raised the alarm. The route the Chinese nationals took to Zeebrugge will be central to the cross-border investigation launched by multiple law enforcement agencies, including Essex police, the National Crime Agency (NCA) and Immigration Enforcement. There have been other high-profile cases of Chinese trafficking and smuggling into the UK in which the routes were established. In 2000, 58 Chinese nationals were found dead in a lorry in Dover. They had set off from China weeks before the lorry entered the UK, having paid £20,000 each for the journey. They initially flew to Belgrade and were taken to a safe house before being taken on to Hungary, Austria, France in vans, then the Netherlands, where they were put in another safe house. In Rotterdam they were put in the lorry where they would meet their untimely deaths. As in the most recent case, the lorry travelled via Zeebrugge. A government report in 2012 said another common route was Vietnam to China to Russia to northern or western Europe and on to the UK.