Steve Hansen has warned Ireland that recent form will count for nothing when the two sides meet in the World Cup quarter-final at Tokyo Stadium on Saturday evening. Ireland have beaten the All Blacks twice in three meetings since the last World Cup, including a 16-9 victory in a relentlessly physical encounter in Dublin last November, and they arrived in Japan at the top of the world rankings having nudged New Zealand off the top. “Ireland are a very good side and our last three results against them are lost, won, lost,” said Hansen, who is in his final month as the All Blacks’ head coach having taken over from Sir Graham Henry at the end of 2011. “We are now at the stage of the tournament where games are do-or-die and that makes it pretty exciting. “They won last November because they were better than us on the day in a titanic struggle. Like us, they have a settled way of playing that works for them. We enjoy facing Ireland and that has not changed because they have beaten us. A lot of people get caught up in the past, but it is what happens on Saturday that is relevant.” The All Blacks will go into the match having not played for nearly two weeks after their game against Italy in Toyota last weekend was called off because of Typhoon Hagibis, but Hansen is not worried that his players will go into the quarter-final underdone. “We were locked in our hotel on Saturday and having a week off is not a bad thing,” said Hansen. “It allowed us to work really hard on Friday when the GPS numbers were just above what a normal Test match would be so we don’t feel we have lost an opportunity to be where we need to be. “We would like to pass on our sympathies to people in Japan who have lost family members. Having been through a natural disaster myself, I know it can be pretty shaking. We are very supportive of them.” Hansen paid tribute to the hosts Japan who made it to the knock-out stage for the first time when they defeated Scotland in Yokohama with some of their play, especially in the opening half, reminiscent of the All Blacks in terms of passing, handling, support play and speed. “It is a good way of playing footy,” he said. “It worked against Ireland and now against Scotland. People have said who do you want to play? They are the form team so I am quite happy they are on the other side of the draw. They way they are playing they have to be considered a tier one nation. They are up to seventh in the world rankings and showing real quality. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales “Japan should be very proud of their team and what a marvellous thing it is for the tournament that they have made it into the quarter-finals. It has given the game and the people here a boost after what was a dreadful weekend.” The New Zealand flanker Sam Cane said all the squad watched the match against Scotland, most in the team room and a few in their own quarters. “Japan were pretty impressive, especially in the first half,” he said. “They showed a really high skill level. “I know their captain, Michael Leitch, who had three years at the Chiefs, and he is a special guy, a seriously impressive individual. Japan’s rise under his leadership is no surprise to those who know him: it is a huge reward for him personally.”