South Africa are using the experience seven of their squad have of playing in the Premiership to aid their preparation for Saturday’s World Cup final against England, with particular attention being paid to the flankers Sam Underhill and Tom Curry, who both played significant roles in last weekend’s demolition of New Zealand. Francois Louw has been providing the lowdown on his fellow Bath back-rower Underhill while the scrum-half Faf de Klerk is a teammate of Curry at Sale. In addition the hooker Schalk Brits spent nine years at Saracens, who supply half of England’s pack. Louw, who won the vital penalty that gave South Africa the position to overcome Wales five minutes from time in Sunday’s semi-final, will next week return to Bath for a ninth season. He remembers Underhill joining from Ospreys in the summer of 2017. “My first impression of Sam was that he was a quiet, softly spoken guy,” he said. “He loves a beer, and I have joined him for many of those. He has developed massively as a player in two years and the way he has refined elements of his game came through last weekend, especially in defence. “He has the ability to stop momentum in the tackle and he packs presence at the breakdown, where he poaches the ball. He is discovering what rugby is about and that there are so many different ways to play the game. Being the young guy he is, he gets exposed to different concepts and strategies and varied players around him. “He has adapted and he has a massive hunger to learn. That is one of the ultimate traits of a professional, the burning desire to better yourself continuously and he has been rightly rewarded by being given England’s No 7 shirt.” Curry and Underhill, whose three appearances in the Six Nations have all been as a replacement, did not start a match together until August this year, when Ireland were beaten 57‑15 at Twickenham. Billy Vunipola was the No 8 then and the trio have taken the field in all England’s five matches here. The South Africa head coach, Rassie Erasmus, said that while the feedback has been invaluable, it will also work in reverse and Curry will have given England’s management an insight into De Klerk, the Springboks’ tactical inspiration who likes to wind up opponents. “Tom has been amazing for England this year,” the Springbok scrum-half said. “I do not think he has missed a minute. He is always willing to work hard and he is up there with most of his stats. I know him pretty well and I have some stuff on him I can share with the group, which is a bit of a positive.” De Klerk actually reignited his international career after joining Sale. “Your understanding of the game changes because conditions in England mean the game is a lot more tactical,” he added. “As a scrum-half that means being able to adjust, knowing when to attack and when to kick. I was not surprised at how England played against New Zealand or that they had the better of them tactically.” Louw has been used from the bench with South Africa’s captain, Siya Kolisi, occupying his position. “Siya plays with great courage and leads by example,” he said. “He has a lot of weight on his shoulders with regards to the make-up of our nation, where we have come from and where we are now. He is self-aware, knowing his strengths and weaknesses, and that is what you want in a leader. “It will be an immense battle on Saturday. We are at the final stage of the ultimate competition in our game. Both groups of players will have to dig really deep and front up, but afterwards I will have a good time with my five Bath colleagues who are in the England squad.”