There is a plaque on the wall at Rugby School, commemorating the exploits of William Webb Ellis, who “with a fine disregard for the rules of football first took the ball in his arms and ran with it”. There are reasons to be suspicious about this origin myth. Like the idea, wildly implausible to anyone even vaguely acquainted with the species, that any self-respecting English PE teacher would have praised Webb Ellis’s wit and ingenuity rather than cursed him for his pig-ignorance and set him to doing press-ups in punishment. Still, that’s the story and, two centuries later, it’s Webb Ellis’s name on the trophy that they’re all playing for over here in Japan. For a game that started with “a fine disregard” for the rules, rugby has grown into one that has become irritatingly pernickety about them. This World Cup tournament is supposed to be all about opening the game up to a new audience. One of the main sponsors is running an ad campaign about a confused man in a crowd of rugby fans who isn’t sure whether or when he is supposed to be cheering, till he finally realises it doesn’t much matter anyway. “You don’t need to know all the rules”, their slogan goes. A good thing, too, because they have grown so byzantine that even the experts don’t always seem to agree on them any more. Throughout the opening rounds of this tournament it felt like every other match ended in a spat about who hit who how, when and why and where they did it, and exactly what their punishment ought to be. And all that’s before you even get into the tit-for-tat whatabout of what the guy on the other side got up to in the 52nd minute. The referees don’t seem to agree with the judicial committees, who keep clashing with the coaches, whose players seem to be confused about what they are being told to do by World Rugby, whose instructions seem to be at odds with a lot of what the referees are doing on the field. So we have seen tackles the referee and television match official didn’t think were worth so much as a penalty, but which the disciplinary panel then decided deserved a three-week ban. Tackles that, one head coach was convinced, should have cost the opposition a penalty try, but which went entirely unpunished. Tackles where the referee and television match official agreed there were mitigating circumstances, but the disciplinary panel didn’t, so the players who made them ended up being given the very same sentence as the guy whose appallingly cynical shoulder charge damn near decapitated the man at whom it was aimed. “I am embarrassed here,” said Australia’s head coach, Michael Cheika. “I do not understand any more.” Well, Cheika tends to blow hard when he’s hot. But it’s not just him. After Samoa had two players suspended, their defence coach Alistair Rogers put in a special request to World Rugby’s high-performance manager Alain Rolland for more clarity on exactly what his players were supposed to be doing in the tackle. This was just days after Rolland told us all he was confident that the teams all understood the details of the new high tackle framework because he and his deputies had personally briefed them on it all right before the tournament. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales The strange part is that reason they introduced this new framework was so that, as one of the men who designed it explained in a recent podcast, everyone can look at the same tackle and see the same thing. It’s all part of World Rugby’s ongoing effort to overhaul the entire culture of the sport. Which they need to do, and soon, because a game where some concussed players are launching negligence lawsuits against their clubs, and others are being forced into early retirement on medical advice, isn’t going to have much of a long-term future, however many new fans it makes in these few weeks. World Rugby’s research shows that 76% of the concussions happen in the tackle, and that the chances of suffering one are 4.3 times higher if the tackler is upright rather than bent at the waist. So that is what they are trying to cut out. And they argue, rightly, that the debate that has lit up around these incidents is a sign that the culture of the game is already starting to change. They say the way fans and journalists swarm around slo-mo replays of these moments shows that people are starting to cotton on to the need to deal with a problem the sport has ignored for years. They are even prepared for the coaches to kick back at it, because they know that they will complain about anything which compromises their team’s performance. What is more problematic is that lack of consistency between what they are saying, what the referees and television match officials are doing, and the judicial review groups are deciding in those hearings. Between them, they are delivering mixed messages. It feels like there has been a communication breakdown. It was a bad omen that no one at the ground has been able to listen to the conversations between the refereeing team during this World Cup because the special ref mic app World Rugby has developed has been broken since the beginning of the tournament. This is difficult stuff, players and referees are making split‑second calls. But right now, World Rugby has got a lot of angry coaches, confused players, inconsistent officials, and befuddled fans. This change in the game is for the good, but it has a long way to go yet.