The bronze medal has turned into the crying game. Not because the physical and emotional investment put into their World Cup campaigns by New Zealand and Wales culminates in the anti-climax of a contest where the winner will still be seen as a loser, but because the two respective head coaches, Steve Hansen and Warren Gatland, are taking their final bows after a combined 20 years in charge. Hansen, an impassive former policeman who is generally unruffled by the vicissitudes of sport, looked close to tears this week, but for all his disappointment at losing to England in the semi-final he took what was a chastening defeat with dignity, enhancing his reputation as the senior statesman here, keeping his cool when the temperature rises. He has been involved with the All Blacks for 16 years having served his international apprenticeship with Wales, first as one of Graham Henry’s assistants and since late 2011 as head coach. He has a win record of more than 90%, but the defeat against England has turned what had been expected to be a coronation for his attack coach, Ian Foster, into an election, with other candidates, including Japan’s Jamie Joseph, reportedly being considered. The New Zealand union learned in 2007 not to panic. Had it carried on sacking coaches after World Cup failure – the current England defence coach, John Mitchell, was a casualty in 2003 – it would have been very different for Henry and Hansen, and any inquest into the All Blacks’ failure to hold on to the trophy should reflect on wider issues, rather than whether Scott Barrett should have started in the back row against England or the wisdom of shaking up the back division and omitting experience. The growing financial divide between north and south has meant the Rugby Championship nations lose numerous players to Europe. The All Blacks have kept their first-choice players but their undercard has been depleted, restricting their options. When Hansen lamented the selfishness of the Six Nations in turning down World Rugby’s plan for a nations league, which would have led to a more even distribution of income, he attracted predictable howls of indignation. Scotland were the main culprits and what did they supply this tournament with other than insensitive remarks before the worst typhoon here for 60 years? There have been times when the All Blacks reacted badly to their elimination, not least in 1991 when they turned up to the play-off against Scotland at their sourest in a 13‑6 victory. They are embracing this week as an opportunity to give Hansen a fitting send-off and even the hardened front-rower Dane Coles could not hold back the tears when he reflected on the Hansen years and how he had struggled to come to terms with the defeat to England. Like Hansen, Gatland is not given to outbursts of emotion but he spoke movingly this week about his 12 years in charge of Wales. Both men deserve to depart on a winning note, but only one will. It will be Gatland’s 12th tilt at the All Blacks and he has yet to put one over on the side whose bench he warmed 19 times in the 1980s and 90s. A first victory for Wales in the fixture for 66 years would not be the triumphal exit winning the World Cup would have been, but it would be some finale. Gatland said on his first day with Wales that he wanted to leave the national side in a better state than when he took over and not even his sternest critic could deny him that. Moreover, he is the first Wales coach to have done so since the 1970s. Small wonder the Wales skills’ coach, Neil Jenkins, the only one of Gatland’s management team who will be part of Wayne Pivac’s new regime, said on Thursday: “For me, he is a god of the game. I have been very, very lucky to be involved with him. He has done an incredible job, taking the boys to new levels and giving them the belief that they can beat anyone, but life goes on. Nothing ever stays the same.” With Hansen and Gatland regarding the play-off as an opportunity rather than a curse, it should be a celebration of rugby. The safety valve will be off and both sets of players will be given licence to thrill. The future can wait. The two coaches are moving on, but it will not be so easy for their respective teams to do so, such is the impact they have made. As Gatland said, success is measured not in achievement but over-achievement. Both pass that test and that they are going out on a low-key occasion is a crying shame.