The prime minister of Ethiopia, Abiy Ahmed, who forged a peace deal with Eritrea last year, has won the 2019 Nobel peace prize. The award recognised Abiy’s “efforts to achieve peace and international cooperation, and in particular his decisive initiative to resolve the border conflict with neighbouring Eritrea”, said Berit Reiss-Andersen, the Norwegian Nobel committee’s chair. One of Abiy’s biggest victories since coming to power in April last year was the peace deal signed three months later, which ended a nearly 20-year military stalemate with Eritrea following their 1998-2000 border war. Abiy has also pushed through reforms at home, dramatically changing the atmosphere in what was known as one of the more repressive states in Africa. His public renunciation of past abuses drew a line between his administration and those of his predecessors, as did the appointment of former dissidents and large numbers of women to senior roles. Abiy said: “I am so humbled and thrilled ... thank you very much. It is a prize given to Africa, given to Ethiopia, and I can imagine how the rest of Africa’s leaders will take it positively to work on peace-building process in our continent.” Other figures who were considered in the running for this year’s prize included the 16-year-old Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg, Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, and Hong Kong pro-democracy activists. The New Zealand prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, whose response to the Christchurch shooting was widely praised, was also thought to be in the frame, as were Alexis Tsipras and Zoran Zaev, the prime ministers of Greece and North Macedonia, who ended 30 years of acrimony between their countries. Ninety-nine Nobel peace prizes have been awarded since 1901, to individuals and 24 organisations. While the other Nobel prize laureates are announced in Stockholm, the peace prize is awarded in the Norwegian capital, Oslo. Last year the award – a gold medal, a diploma and SKr9m (€828,000) – went to two people fighting sexual violence: Denis Mukwege, a Congolese gynaecologist, and Nadia Murad, a Yazidi activist. According to the Nobel peace prize website, 301 candidates were put forward for this year’s award. The committee does not disclose the names of nominees until 50 years have passed. Abiy, 43, a former military officer specialising in cyber intelligence, has forged a reputation as a daring leader prepared to take risks to tackle decades-old problems. The peace deal with Eritrea surprised and delighted tens of millions of people across east Africa. The conflict had cost both countries dearly in lives and scarce resources, and was a brake on development across much of the volatile region. More recently Abiy played a key role in brokering a political deal in neighbouring Sudan that halted a slide into chaotic violence after the fall of the veteran dictator Omar al-Bashir while retaining many of the gains made by pro-democracy protesters. Abiy, who often relies on bold personal initiatives and charisma to drive change instead of working through government institutions, is the country’s first leader from its largest ethnic community, the Oromo, who have long complained of economic, cultural and political marginalisation. Domestic reforms have included lifting bans on political parties, releasing imprisoned journalists and sacking a series of hitherto untouchable officials, some of them accused of torture. In Addis Ababa, huge crowds have been welcoming home exiled dissidents. Residents who once feared speaking publicly about politics now talk of little else. Flags and symbols long banned by the Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Democratic Front fly across the city. Other initiatives, such as the planting of millions of trees, have won further international support and sympathy. Born in western Ethiopia, Abiy joined the resistance against the regime of Mengistu Haile Mariam as a teenager before enlisting in the armed forces, reaching the rank of lieutenant-colonel. He has a doctorate in peace and security studies. After a stint running Ethiopia’s cyber-intelligence service, he entered politics eight years ago and rose rapidly up the ranks of the Oromo faction of the EPRDF, which has historically been at odds with the Tigrayans. Analysts say Abiy’s mixed Christian and Muslim background and his fluency in three of the country’s main languages help him leader to bridge communal and sectarian divides. Dino Mahtani, a deputy director of International Crisis Group’s Africa programme, said: “Abiy’s award is a reflection of the west’s hope for transformational change in Ethiopia. But peace in Ethiopia is under threat by outbreaks of violence following Abiy’s political liberalisation project that, despite all its good intentions, has also contributed to unleashing centrifugal political forces in the country. “Abiy must develop plans to channel the demands of his people and deliver well thought-out policies to put some of these genies, such as mass human displacement, back into the box.” In an interview with the Guardian shortly after Abiy survived an apparent assassination attempt in 2018, one personal acquaintance of Abiy’s said the leader was “always looking ahead for the future”. Former colleagues said shelves of books on religion, philosophy and science filled Abiy’s office. “He is physically active and very well organised ... He did not have a secretary because he wanted his office to be accessible. His office door was literally never closed,” one said.