The results were not kind to the punters at Longchamp on Sunday, when Enable, in the Arc, and the world’s top-rated sprinter, Baattash, in the Prix de l’Abbaye, were among five beaten favourites on the card. The track itself, however, did its best to make up for it with a much warmer welcome than a crowd of around 40,000 spectators had “enjoyed” last year. Longchamp was woefully under-prepared for the thirsts and appetites of the 15,000 or so travelling fans in particular when it re-opened last year after a €140m (£123m) redevelopment. There were reports of hour-long queues for food and drink and of supplies running out completely long before the main race. On the journey home, racegoers seemed to be spending more time on social media complaining about their miserable experience than spreading the word about a fantastic race between Enable and Sea Of Class. But to be fair to France Galop, which runs French racing, it got the message. A serious investment in (temporary) infrastructure for the one day of the year when Longchamp sees a proper crowd meant that the raceday experience was vastly improved this time around. Rather than spend all of their time queueing, spectators could actually circulate around one of the most elegant and storied racing environments anywhere, and admire, for instance, the clever ways that the ultra-modern new grandstand has incorporated elements of the old Longchamp, including several of the magnificent trees that are dotted around the enclosures. The architect actually designed around quite of few, putting holes in the walkways to accommodate them. As a result, the response to the day was all about the disappointment of Enable’s narrow defeat with no complaints at all – or none that I could see – about the overall experience. Where last year some fans were swearing they would never return, this year it seems more likely that they are already booking up for the first weekend in October next year. After its very unsteady start, European racing’s showpiece got its mojo back on Sunday and France Galop now has a firmer footing on which to build as they prepare for the 100th anniversary of the first running of the Arc next year. It would be wonderful if the race’s centenary renewal could be run in front of the sort of crowd that turned up to see Golden Horn win the last Arc at the old Longchamp. Around 55,000 were there for that one, when a ticket cost €20, but a big hike since has seen the local walk-up attendance in particular drop significantly. It would be fascinating to know how all the numbers stacked up on Sunday, and whether the day was any closer to breaking even (a situation that was discussed in this column a couple of months ago). It made no sense at all to tempt tens of thousands of people into your racecourse and then have them standing in queues all afternoon when they could be spending money instead, so if the add-ons – including betting turnover – are up, there could yet be scope for a cut in the ticket price for next year’s race. Enable will – almost certainly – not be in the line-up, as her retirement is surely imminent. Sottsass, who finished third, could well be in the field, however, as it has been confirmed that the French Derby winner will stay in training at four. With just seven races behind him, including a placed effort in the Arc, he still has much left to do. Pontefract’s meeting is the latest to succumb to the wet weather, which leaves Windsor – where the going is soft – as the only Flat card on turf and Secret Return (4.10) looking like the best option in the most competitive race. Paul George’s mare was all out to hold on by a neck when successful off a mark of 77 at Bath last time out, but she was perhaps in front a little too soon. The time of the race was good, she is up just 2lb in the ratings as a result of the narrow margin and she can make the most of that. Escapability (3.40) and Wild Hero (2.10) should go well on the same card, while Poetic Choice (7.30) has obvious claims at Newcastle. Pontefract 2.00 Stag Horn 2.30 Spygate 3.00 Alotabottle 3.30 Forewarning 4.00 Make Me 4.30 Storm Ahead 5.00 Grazeon Roy (nb) 5.35 Al Mureib Windsor 2.10 Wild Hero 2.40 Back From Dubai 3.10 Plait 3.40 Escapability 4.10 Secret Return (nap) 4.40 Lofty 5.10 Stay Forever  Stratford 2.20 Onthefrontfoot 2.50 Maire Banrigh 3.20 Neverbeen To Paris 3.50 Chimes Of Dylan 4.20 Onboard 4.50 Full Of Roque Newcastle 5.30 Troop 6.00 Live Your Dream 6.30 Dandy's Angel 7.00 Gleaming Arch 7.30 Poetic Choice 8.00 Kodimoor 8.30 Eldelbar