The death of 19-year-old Harry Dunn following a collision involving Anne Sacoolas, the wife of a US intelligence official who claimed diplomatic immunity and promptly returned to her home country, has placed a renewed focus on the laws protecting foreign diplomats. On Tuesday, the chief constable of Northamptonshire police force where the fatal incident occurred gave a press conference to provide greater clarity on the circumstances surrounding the teenager’s death. A fuller picture of the timeline of events has now become clear. 27 August: Sacoolas is believed to have been driving on the wrong side of the road when she hit the teenager riding on his motorbike outside RAF Croughton in Northamptonshire. She cooperated with police at the scene and was breathalysed. However, this first account was not treated as an interview under caution. Officers decide not to arrest her in what in what Northamptonshire police chief constable Nick Adderley later said was the right decision. 28 August: Officers visited her address where she provided an account of events and said she had diplomatic immunity. Northamptonshire police applied for a waiver to render this void. US embassy notifies the FCO that the spouse of a member of staff at RAF Croughton had been involved in an accident. 29 August: Specially trained liaison officers are embedded with the Dunn family, including parents Charlotte Charles and Tim Dunn, and Northamptonshire police’s investigation continues in the belief they cannot detain Sacoolas. 30 August: The US asserted that Sacoolas was covered by diplomatic immunity. 5 September: The Foreign Office formally requests the US embassy to waive immunity. 13 September: The FCO was informed by the US embassy that it would not waive immunity and she would be leaving the country imminently, unless the UK had strong objections. However, foreign secretary Dominic Raab immediately objected in “strong and clear terms”. 15 September: Sacoolas leaves the UK on a US Air Force plane. 16 September: The FCO approaches the US embassy and was informed that Sacoolas had departed. It immediately notified Northamptonshire police that the waiver had been declined and Sacoolas had left the UK. Officials asked police to delay telling the family by up to two days so it could decide next steps. 18 September: Harry Dunn’s funeral takes place at an Oxfordshire crematorium. 23 September: The Dunn family inform the liaison officer they have been made aware of a suggestion that Sacoolas had left the UK. Police confirm this is true. 24 September: Police had wanted to meet the Dunn family, but the parents were unable to. 26 September: Police meet with the Dunn family to officially confirm her departure, and officers go through what they know. 7 October: Raab expresses his disappointment over the decision with the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo. Boris Johnson said: “I do not think that it can be right to use the process of diplomatic immunity for this type of purpose.” 8 October: Number 10 confirms the prime minister would personally appeal to Donald Trump if the Pompeo does not act to ensure justice is served. US government said her immunity was “no longer pertinent”, given she had returned to the country. 9 October: Johnson raises the case with Trump. 13 October: The Dunn family’s lawyer, Mark Stephens, protested that: “[Sacoolas] wasn’t entitled to diplomatic immunity in the first place.” 15 October: Dunn’s parents visit the White House following an invitation by Trump, and the former reality TV host told them that Sacoolas was waiting for them in an adjoining room and wished to meet them. 19 October: Dunn’s parents said they were “not impressed” with the US president’s offer, which he delivered unannounced and which they refused to comply with. 21 October: Raab tells the Commons he had commissioned a review into immunity arrangements for US personnel and their families at RAF Croughton in light of the case. He told the House: “The UK government had been notified of the American family’s arrival in the UK in July 2019, and this diplomatic immunity was the result of the arrangements agreed between the UK government and the US government back in 1995. Under those arrangements, US staff at RAF Croughton and their families were accepted as part of the US embassy in the UK. Pursuant to these arrangements, staff and their families were entitled to immunity under the Vienna convention on diplomatic relations. Under the exchange of notes in relation to the Croughton annexe, these arrangements waived immunity for employees, but the waiver did not cover spouses.” 22 October: In a press conference, Adderley reveals that Sacoolas, without naming her, has requested for officers from the force to personally interview her under caution in the US. Adderley confirms the Crown Prosecution Service will decide whether it will seek to bring charges, potentially death by dangerous driving which could trigger an extradition request. However, they can only do so after they have received the suspect’s account.