It is rugby league’s Harlem Globetrotters versus the Dirty Old Town. A modern-day sporting dynasty against the unfashionable underdogs. Rarely is a Super League Grand Final short on narrative, but on Saturday evening there will be stories everywhere you look at Old Trafford as St Helens attempt to curtail one of the more remarkable sporting fairytales in recent memory. In one corner are Saints, the runaway Super League leaders by a record 16-point margin. That alone makes them heavy favourites as they look to secure a first title in five years, but it would be doing Justin Holbrook’s side a disservice to focus on the league table. No team has been as refreshing to watch as Saints in 2019 – underlined by the way they dismantled Wigan in the semi-finals two weeks ago. “That performance was six weeks in the making – and we’ve got another one in us,” says the prop Alex Walmsley, one of a handful of players left from their 2014 Grand Final success. Many believe if they replicate the performance that saw them beat their great rivals 40-10 a fortnight ago, success is an inevitability but try telling that to their opponents, who have made a habit of defying expectations this season. Salford Red Devils will become the eighth team to compete in a Grand Final but no team has enjoyed a journey quite like this to the season-ending showpiece. “I liken it to Leicester City,” says their forward Mark Flanagan. “Historically we’re the dirty old town, no money, no fans, a bunch of misfits – look what we’ve done and where we are.” Salford were considered more likely to be relegated this season than make the play-offs. Given they have the second-lowest budget in Super League, that is perhaps no surprise. But with a squad comprised of players who have been discarded by bigger clubs – including Flanagan, who was released by St Helens in 2015 – they have provided one of the game’s greatest feelgood stories in years. “Saints didn’t have any money for me in their budget, and they had to move me on,” he recalls. “Every player in this squad has a story of hardship, not being wanted by other teams. I’ve driven past Old Trafford plenty of times thinking I’ll never get another chance to walk out here. It’s incredible that together we can all do that on Saturday night.” But the narrative does not end there. Saturday is a story of cementing a legacy, but it is also the closing of a chapter for both sides. Salford will bid adieu to several key players after the Grand Final – including the Man of Steel, Jackson Hastings – making this their only shot at glory, plus a first title for the club in 43 years. It will be an emotional night regardless, with about 13,000 fans from the Manchester area heading to Old Trafford to support Salford, which is no mean feat for a club usually averaging 4,000 spectators. Their opponents are also waving farewell to a key individual: their coach. Holbrook has revolutionised the Saints’ onfield play during his three seasons in charge, and has restored the entertainers tag with which they were synonymous in the early noughties. But having failed to win either the Grand Final or the Challenge Cup, there is a feeling that Holbrook’s reign may be remembered for the wrong reasons if the Saints lose this match. “I have to make sure I’m saying goodbye holding that trophy aloft,” says Holbrook, who will return to Australia to coach Gold Coast Titans in 2020. “Salford deserve to be here for sure, but we have to ignore all that and make sure we’re ready to go on Saturday night.” That sentiment is shared by Walmsley, who admits the perception of their magnificent season hinges on one game. “With what we’ve done in the league this year, being so far ahead, it’s been a remarkable year. But we’re here to win big trophies and big competitions, and it probably would be a failure if we didn’t win this one. We don’t want to be sat on that field on Saturday night knowing we’ve had a great year playing-wise, but fell at the final hurdle.” Dirty Old Town, written by Ewan MacColl about his native Salford in 1949, tells the tale of a character dreaming by the canal. If it is the Red Devils lifting the trophy on Saturday evening, there will be more than dreams taking place by the Manchester and Salford Canal, there will be one hell of a party. Standing in their way, however, are a team looking to cement their own rugby league legacy with the victory that has evaded them for so long.