Last spring, I did something I consider utterly indulgent – I ordered rooted dahlia cuttings. On the whole, I am a seed person, but I deviated for these dahlias. ‘Honka’ is a star dahlia, each petal a slim, slightly incurved ray of palest lemon yellow around a darker butter-yellow centre. It looks like a child’s drawing of a flower, charming in its simplicity. I had a vision that they would sit so prettily next to ‘Golden’ chard (from realseeds.co.uk), which has amber midribs and glossy green leaf tops. So I ordered seven robust, healthy dahlia cuttings from Halls of Heddon (hallsofheddon.com), one of the most reputable dahlia growers, sowed my chard and waited for complementary perfection. And, you know, it worked. The whole thing looks resplendent backlit by the late autumn light and, on duller days, resembles a pool of sunshine on the ground. I like this marriage and I want to repeat it next year. In the next month or so, when the frosts take down the dahlia foliage, I shall dig up the tubers to store over winter. It is possible, particularly in sheltered gardens, to leave dahlias in the ground, with a good thick layer of mulch to protect them from the cold. But in my garden, the slugs will make doilies of the tubers, so I’m not wasting my purchase. Dahlia tubers need to be stored frost-free, preferably in ever-so-slightly damp sand or compost. I use recycled fishmonger’s polystyrene boxes and keep them in my covered walkway; a shed is an equally good spot. But before all this I’m going to collect seed. Inspired by my visit to June Blake’s garden outside Dublin, I am intrigued to do a little amateur breeding. Dahlias almost always flower in their first year from seed. The cultivars don’t flower true to type, meaning the offspring may be wildly different from its parent. You just have to select the ones that please you the most. Unless you are on it with deadheading, you probably have seed ready to be saved. Clean the seed from the seed head and store somewhere cool and dry over the winter. Sow next spring, and they will be up in seconds with a little bottom heat, or placed on a warm windowsill. If you have a frost-free greenhouse, you can sow as early as February, but if you are working on a kitchen windowsill I would wait until April, as once they are potted on, the seedlings will need to be kept frost-free until they can be planted out in late May or early June.