François Ozon’s new film is sombre, restrained and painful – inhibited perhaps by its sense of moral seriousness and the legal difficulty of making a movie about a case that is ongoing: a Catholic child-abuse scandal in France. Bernard Preynat is a Lyon priest who has admitted molesting 70 boys over 30 years, following an online campaign by the now middle-aged abuse survivors. Preynat has been defrocked, though a criminal trial is pending – delayed partly, it is said, by the existence of this film about him and the issue of whether it prejudices his case. Two separate court judgements have ruled in Ozon’s favour. Quite apart from Preynat, there is the question of the cover-up; this year, his superior Cardinal Philippe Barbarin served a six-month suspended prison sentence for failing to report the abuse. The title of this film – Grâce à Dieu, or By the Grace of God – is taken from the staggering Freudian slip Barbarin, made during his 2016 press conference about the case. Talking about the statute of limitations, he remarked casually: “La majorité des faits, grâce à Dieu, sont prescrits.” (“The majority of cases, by the grace of God, are inadmissible.”) Charitably, we might suppose he was saluting God’s grace for not putting the abuse survivors through the additional trauma of appearing in the witness box. But it just seemed like a flash of arrogance: by the grace of God, the alleged abuse happened too long ago for the Church to be investigated. Melvil Poupaud plays Alexandre, a devout and conservative banker who was abused; in middle age, and now taking stock of his life, Alexandre requests a healing “encounter” with the elderly Preynat – played by veteran actor Bernard Verley (the adulterous husband in Éric Rohmer’s 1972 film Love in the Afternoon). Preynat seems genuinely sorry and even haunted by his actions, but makes it crystal clear he has no intention of asking Alexandre’s forgiveness, suggesting only that they pray together. Alexandre keeps the pressure up, infuriated by the realisation that Preynat is working with children. (A slightly melodramatic camera movement during one scene in which these young children are reading Jesus’s words about “suffer the little children” reveals snowy-haired Preynat teaching them). Alexandre’s growing campaign involves the vehement and angry François (Denis Ménochet), whose presence gives the film more energy. Ozon has made a decent and valuable film, though it often seems like the drama part of a docudrama: some of the scenes feel like respectful re-enactments that could have gone into a documentary. It does not have the dramatic punch and snap of Tom McCarthy’s 2015 Oscar-winner Spotlight, about an abuse cover-up in the US Catholic Church. But like Spotlight, Ozon’s film indirectly raises a chilling question: how long has this abuse been going on? Decades? Centuries? Millennia? • By the Grace of God is in UK cinemas on 25 October.