Running With Scissors author Augusten Burroughs has revealed an unusual detail about himself that he failed to mention in any of his previous seven memoirs: he is a witch. Burroughs’s Toil & Trouble, out this month in the US, reveals how he first became aware of his “magickal” powers: aged eight, he was on the school bus and became convinced something terrible had happened to his grandmother. When he got home, his mother – whose decision to give Burroughs away to be raised by her psychiatrist is detailed in Running With Scissors – was on the phone, having learned that Augusten’s grandmother had been in a car accident and was in hospital. “Hesitantly I asked, ‘Mom? How did I know?’” writes Burroughs. His mother replies: “‘You are my son. That’s how you knew,’” and explains that many of his ancestors were witches, escaping witch trials in Lancaster, England because “they were witches and could elude detection”. She goes on to tutor him in magick, telling him the absence of “ancient texts” on the topic is because “so much of our written early culture was destroyed. So it has always been the Way for one witch to verbally pass the knowledge on to another.” He learns that while “a witch can’t turn a person into an owl. Or fly on a broom. Or defy the laws of physics. We can’t do anything that’s impossible. But we can do many things that people believe are impossible. When something is hanging in the balance, as they say, we can add more … sort of molecular weight on the side of the outcome we desire.” In an interview with the Rumpus, Burroughs said he suspected that being a witch was genetic, “but I don’t know if it’s universally encoded within all humans or only in certain humans, say humans with a certain percentage of Neanderthal DNA, or what other variables may be at play. “It would make sense to me if the thing called witchcraft began in the very earliest days of our human journey, when the male was out hunting and the woman was left at home in the cave,” he speculated. “If harm were to arrive at the cave, she would need a way to communicate this to her mate. She would need to text him, basically. So to have cellular tissue that could send and receive data without respect to distance would greatly benefit the species.” St Martin’s Press, his US publisher, described the memoir as “a chronicle of one man’s journey to understand himself, to reconcile the powers he can wield with things with which he is helpless”. The publisher added: “There are very few things that are coincidences, as you will learn in Toil & Trouble. Ghosts are real, trees can want to kill you, beavers are the spawn of Satan, houses are alive, and in the end, love is the most powerful magic of all.” Pan Macmillan, which has published all of Burroughs’s previous books in the UK, has no current plans to release Toil & Trouble.