It is a sign of the extraordinary times in which we live that a government assurance that it would obey the law was big news on Friday. In legal papers submitted to the court of session in Edinburgh, the government appeared to admit for the first time that the prime minister is bound by law to request an extension from the EU if no deal is agreed by 19 October. But just a few hours later, Boris Johnson took to social media to contradict this. “New deal or no deal – but no delay,” he tweeted. Our prime minister has such scant regard for the rule of law that he continues to threaten to break it, even as his government’s legal submissions acknowledge it would be illegal for him to refuse to request an extension should he fail to get a deal. Whether or not Johnson will obey the law – and ask, in good faith, for an extension – is far from a moot question. Yesterday, the EU rejected Johnson’s proposals for a deal as the basis for intensive negotiations. Unless Johnson produces new proposals that honour the commitments made by the government at the start of negotiations with the EU, any chance of reaching a deal at the EU council later this month are close to nil. The government argues that the proposals it produced last week represent an olive branch to the EU in the spirit of trying to find a workable compromise. They are no such thing. It is true that, for the first time, there is concrete substance as opposed to vague bluster to Johnson’s proposals. But all that substance represents is the government retreating from the commitment Theresa May made at the start of the process to reach an agreement that preserves the Good Friday agreement. It is no surprise that the EU has declined to negotiate on the basis of what the government has produced. Johnson’s proposals are aimed not at honouring the UK’s obligations under the Good Friday agreement, but cobbling together something that can win over the Tory Brexit ultras and the DUP. It is far from clear that they will even achieve this. But in proposing a two-border solution to the Irish question – a customs border between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland and a regulatory border between Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK – the government has put forward proposals it knows the EU cannot accede to. They would mean that Northern Ireland would essentially remain in the single market for all goods – therefore in regulatory alignment with the EU – but would leave the customs union, along with the rest of the UK. This requires customs checks on the Irish border in order to reduce the scope for smuggling, to protect the integrity of the single market and to assure third-party trading partners that the border holds. The customs proposals that Johnson has put forward are no different to those the government suggested, and which were rejected, in 2017 – on the basis that they do not meet these tests. Johnson cannot obscure the reality that there is no technology that would avoid the need for physical infrastructure at a customs border, which unravels the Good Friday agreement. The need for a customs border in Ireland is not the only problem. In order to get the DUP on board, Johnson has proposed that Northern Irish participation in the EU’s single market for goods must be contingent on the agreement of the Stormont assembly, and thereafter subject to a vote every four years. This effectively amounts to a DUP veto, as a result of Stormont’s “petition of concern” mechanism, whereby any contentious issue must have the support of both unionists and nationalists. Giving the DUP what is essentially a one-sided veto trashes the principle of governing by cross-community consent that is so key to the Good Friday agreement. In a mark of how fragile the situation already is, the assembly has not even sat since power-sharing broke down in 2016. A four-yearly DUP veto would undermine the prospects of restoring it and thus the very peace process itself. The two-border solution would also put businesses in Northern Ireland at a huge disadvantage. They would be required to meet different regulatory standards to sell goods in the rest of the UK, but could also face tariffs on imports and exports to Ireland and the EU. Little wonder, then, that these proposals have been condemned by every major party in Northern Ireland, other than the DUP, and by its business community. If enacted, they would represent the sacrifice of the Good Friday agreement on the altar of a hard Brexit. They will never be implemented, however, because the EU, which appears to be taking its international obligations to the Irish peace process far more seriously than the UK, will reject them on this basis. Johnson knows this: his proposals are just a charade to try to strengthen his electoral chances by shifting the blame for the failure to reach a deal on to the EU. Nothing has changed since Theresa May agreed to the backstop. There is no way for Northern Ireland to leave the customs union that does not compromise the critical equilibrium that permits the citizens of Northern Ireland to feel Irish or British. The Good Friday agreement created a fragile peace that ended 30 years of bloody conflict. A hard Brexit that takes Northern Ireland out of the customs union cannot but put that at risk. But even as anonymous government sources deploy irresponsible hyberbole to warn of “killings” and “lynchings” if a deal were put to a referendum, they continue to ignore the very real risk a hard Brexit would pose to a peace settlement that has saved countless lives. It should be a source of great shame.