Wang Hao shocked the chess elite this week when the 30-year-old, who had talked of giving up the game, is out of favour with Chinese officials, and who has not played for China’s Olympiad team since 2012, scored a lifetime best result to share first prize in the Isle of Man with the world No 2, Fabiano Caruana, and take the trophy on tie-break. In the final round England’s David Howell, who needed a win to become a world championship candidate, bizarrely gifted material to Wang, who required only a draw to qualify, in a totally equal position. Howell later tweeted “Victory would have been life-changing, but it wasn’t to be. My nerves let me down.” His one-move blunder Bd5?? cost $19,000, the difference between equal second and equal ninth. Wang’s success will cause mixed feelings in Beijing. China now has two of the eight candidates who will compete in March next year for the right to challenge for Magnus Carlsen’s global crown. But unlike the world No 3, Ding Liren, who has been groomed for stardom and has full state support, Wang Hao works on his own, has no financial backing, and depends on his income from tournaments and his work as a chess trainer. He almost withdrew from Douglas because he was tired after the World Cup. He came without an aide and with only his computer to prepare for his opponents. Now he would like to hire a small support team but said: “I’m not sure if I will be able to.” Caruana had led all the way until the final tie-break, and was well satisfied, but Carlsen, who finished in a tie for third half a point behind, said: “The streak was nice but the performance was mediocre.” Stern self-criticism, yet there were still vintage moments for the Norwegian. The world champion’s final-round draw clinched his 101-game streak without defeat against elite opponents, surpassing Ding Liren’s 100. However, his target has suddenly jumped further into the distance. In 2004-05 the Russian-Dutch GM Sergei Tiviakov played 110 successive games unbeaten. His results included elite tournaments, even a game against a youthful Carlsen, but also several events and speedy draws against much weaker rivals. As Carlsen’s achievement was praised, Tiviakov came out with fighting talk: “Real chess players know that I have the record!” Carlsen’s manager replied: “Magnus is super-heavyweight, while Tiviakov is middleweight,” but support for the 110-game sequence to count has been enough to make it advisable for Carlsen to continue unbeaten in his four classical games in the Grand Tour finals at London Olympia on 2-6 December and the first six rounds of Wijk aan Zee in January to reach 111. Wang now joins Teimour Radjabov and Ding (World Cup finalists), Caruana (defeated 2018 challenger) and Anish Giri (rating list) as a candidate. Three places for Ekaterinburg in March have yet to be decided. Fide’s Grand Prix will supply two after its remaining legs in Hamburg and Tel Aviv, with Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi and France’s Maxime Vachier-Lagrave the favourites. The final organiser’s wildcard is most likely to be a Russian, for obvious reasons. If Nepomniachtchi does not need it, the criteria for selection are narrow. The choice will be between the experienced Alexander Grischuk and the rising star Kirill Alekseenko, 22, who was third on tie-break in the Isle of Man and whose rating has jumped 40 points in a month. Isle of Man proved a competitive, fascinating, and impressively organised event in the tradition of the old interzonals from former years. It might work better still with two or three candidates places rather than just one and with 100 players rather than 150, although the wildcards chosen proved their worth. Women had their own prize list and several outperformed their ratings; while under-16s from Denmark, Germany and India qualified as grandmasters. Howell blew his chance in the fateful last round after a fine run of wins, Luke McShane faded after his strong start and Gawain Jones never got above 50%. Still nursing their wounds, England’s weary trio travelled to Batumi, Georgia for the European team championship, which began on Thursday. England cannot take it easy, for Batumi represents another great opportunity following their silver medals behind Russia at the world teams at Astana in March. The five-man squad are No 2 seeds after Russia, with Michael Adams on top board and Nick Pert as reserve completing the team. Nigel Short (rated 2630 against Pert’s 2571) was apparently not asked whether he was available. England drew 2-2 with Austria in Thursday’s opening match, with Pert winning but Jones losing. Games are free and live to watch online. Russia’s Daniil Dubov scored a fast win and said later:”It’s not team preparation – it’s my preparation. I think my team captain was surprised. They actually asked me to calm down and not play ridiculous lines … If [8…d5!] works then it’s a groundbreaking discovery.” 3642: 1 Rh7! If Ke1 2 Ba8! Kf1 3 Qb7 and 3 Qh1 mate. If Kc1 2 Bh8! Kb1 3 Qg7 and 4 Qa1/b2 mate. Julian Guisle was for decades the specialist chess bookseller in Paris on Rue St Jacques, and he lived until age 99. This is his only known composition, published under the pseudonym of J Quike and winning first prize with Le Figaro in 1956.