Darren Weir’s Melbourne Cup runner Red Cardinal was given electric shocks on race day last year as part of an illegal training regime, court documents allege. The revelation was among a series of explosive allegations levelled against Weir, his assistant and fellow trainer Jarrod McLean – both suspended from racing – as well as stable hands William Hernan and Tyson Kermond. They face a combined 34 charges – ranging from corrupt betting, conspiring to deceive stewards and animal torture – involving thoroughbreds Red Cardinal, Yogi and Tosen Basil. Poly pipe and electric shock devices were allegedly among the implements used on Red Cardinal and Yogi at Warrnambool during last year’s spring racing carnival, between 24 October and Cup Day on 6 November. The techniques were allegedly part of an “illicit covert training regime” designed to deceive racing stewards while giving horses an edge for betting purposes, according to charge sheets released by Melbourne magistrates court on Wednesday. Allegations against McLean also include a corrupt $100 each-way bet on Red Cardinal which could have reaped $5,200. He allegedly placed similarly corrupt bets on horses including Yogi in the days prior. Also revealed in court documents are allegations Tosen Basil was shocked with an electric device at Warrnambool on 30 October. All three horses had been in contention for the Melbourne Cup but Red Cardinal was the only one to get a start and was the last horse to cross the line. Weir, McLean and Kermond are all also charged with conspiring to cheat and defraud Racing Victoria stewards during last year’s spring racing carnival, between 24 October and 17 November. Hernan is accused of putting a $50 bet on Yogi during a race on 2 November in a bid to win $600, using information passed to him about the alleged illicit training regime by McLean. The four men faced court on Wednesday for a filing hearing. Their lawyer indicated the case could be moved to Warrnambool after additional documents were tendered. Weir and the other men remain on bail and are expected back in court on 14 February, 2020.