The artist known as “What” was not prepared to be awarded Australia’s richest art prize. When his grammatically confounding name was called – it is not really a pseudonym, as his partner, his friends and even his parents call him “What” – the artist appeared stunned. A space opened up around him. Camera shutters snapped wildly. His partner, who had accompanied him to the event, burst into tears. What, who is supremely difficult to Google, has previously been a finalist in the Wynne, Sulman and Doug Moran prizes. His painting of Go-Betweens frontman Robert Forster was chosen from nearly 1,000 entrants and awarded the $150,000 Doug Moran portrait prize at Juniper Hall in Sydney on Wednesday morning. “That’s highly unexpected,” said the artist when his win was announced. “That is a life changing sum [of money].” “This is the third time I’ve painted Robert,” he said. “Robert was so important to me as a baby artist in Australia. Great music. Wearing lipstick, wearing dresses.” The Doug Moran prize is awarded to an original work from an Australian artist of an Australian subject, painted at least partly from life. This year the judging panel was comprised of artist and 2013 prize-winner Nigel Milsom; Kelly Gellatly, director of the Ian Potter Museum of Art at the University of Melbourne; and Peter Moran, whose parents Greta and Doug Moran established the Moran Arts Foundation in 1988. What’s painting, a multicoloured work shimmering with a synaesthetic sensibility, shows Forster floating, vibrant and kaleidoscopic, amid a white space. His depiction of Forster was described by the judges as “[embodying] the endless possibilities of portraiture and painting”. “[It] is intriguing for its lack of solid form, and for the way in which the subject hovers on the canvas like a vibrating aura,” wrote Gellatly and Milsom. “He is like a technicolour apparition; neither concrete shape nor exact likeness.” The artist notes that accompany the artwork read: “I picked Robert up in my SAAB 900. He understood the car, I made him a pour over coffee. Robert played my concert classical guitar, out of tune. He loved the tuning. He was thinking about the guitar. And the coffee. And the SAAB. I put the brush down when I saw Robert in tune.” This is not What’s first portrait of Forster: the artist was a finalist in the 2017 Archibald prize for another. “Looking at Robert Forster I see / Six-foot-three of absorbency /Electric literary guitar / Red-hot Brisbane bricks / And French ultramarine stovepipes / Shaping rhythmic legs,” the description for that work read. “I am actually a musician as well, I’m a classical guitarist,” What told Guardian Australia. “But back when I was a teenager I was into rock and roll.” Forster was doing in Australia in the 70s and 80s what the artist loved in bands like the Smiths and the Cure in the UK. “I’ve followed his career ever since and he’s just such a great person to paint. So tall, beautiful and a gentleman,” the artist said. “I think that picture has a sense of joy.” In person, What was a tall, slender figure in RM Williams boots, and an unassuming grey linen jacket over a fuchsia shirt, hiding an infectious laugh and charming smile underneath a bushy grey beard. A practicing artist for 30 years, he refused to reveal his legal name, saying his nom-de-plume has “a certain mystery to it which I like to maintain”. “There’s not enough mysteries in the world. I’m not on Instagram, I like to keep a fairly low profile, and don’t like to tell the world everything that I’m doing and thinking. That’s what my painting is for,” he said. Art by What features in a number of public collections, including the Art Gallery of New South Wales and National Gallery of Australia. Interested parties can seek out information about his work and forthcoming exhibitions at Blockprojects gallery in Melbourne, by whom he is represented. Finalists in this year’s Doug Moran prize include a swathe of emerging artists, who are openly encouraged to enter, alongside established practitioners such as Yvette Coppersmith, Anthony Lister, Rodney Pople and Michael Zavros. Each of the finalists will receive $1,000. Sitters include ordinary members of the public as well as those with a public profile. Portraits of actor Barry Otto, Sigrid Thornton and Noah Taylor, and the late former prime minister Bob Hawke, were among those shortlisted this year. All 30 finalists of the Doug Moran, including the winner, will be on show to the public for free in Juniper Hall’s Georgian-era surrounds from Friday.