It is the grandest rivalry in English football. It’s just a pity that Manchester United v Liverpool matches regularly resemble those mid-2000s Birmingham v Bolton clashes that not even Sky Sports Premier League finds airspace to replay. Each of the last three seasons has featured a 0-0 draw in a fixture that gets the loudest fanfare for the most diminished returns. By now, you know the drill for the buildup: a Jimmy Nesbitt voiceover or a local poet delivering Vogon verse atop a soft-focus glimpse of life in the north west’s two great cities, soundtracked by either Pete Wylie or the Stone Roses, depending on which is the home side.Could Sunday’s showdown be any different? With Liverpool riding high and Ole Gunnar Solskjær, the Moyes-faced Assassin, looking increasingly befuddled, the worst is feared at Old Trafford – a humbling at the hands of the old enemy. United chief suit Ed Woodward has been getting some pre-emptive strikes in before Gary Neville, Graeme Souness and Roy Keane deliver their weekly post-match lecture on what is going wrong for Big Red. “There is a myth that we have non‑football people making football decisions, and it’s insulting to the brilliant people who work on the football side in this club,” roared Ed. The briefing has been broad. Poor, poor David Moyes had zero chance of success, it has been admitted. Daley Blind, yes Daley Blind, that Dutch chap who didn’t cost much and was actually quite decent in midfield, central defence and at left-back, was exactly the wrong player for Manchester United. Lord Ferg’s recruitment process was too reliant on a nod and a wink for any of Ed’s four managers in six years to be able to replicate. But don’t go blaming the Glazer family, that real-life version of Succession season four, the one set after Logan Roy has breathed his last, who pay Ed an annual stipend north of £4m a year and took out £23m in dividends last year, according to United’s 2018-19 accounts. “What’s important is the commercial side is never allowed to take priority over the football side,” said Ed, thumbing the Mr Potato keyring in his pocket. As Jürgen Klopp toked on his post-training Lucky Strike on Friday, he might have exhaled sympathy for his counterpart. Liverpool spent more than two decades trailing in United’s wake but are barrelling towards the Premier League title. They have Pep Guardiola on the run, let alone Ole’s Scott McTominay-inspired army. And it has been achieved through careful planning, a workable hierarchy and a recognisable style of play, each of which appear well beyond the ken of those running the show at United. Should the worst happen on Sunday, and despite Ed’s protestations and great promises for the future, those sat under Old Trafford’s leaking roof will be letting the directors’ box know exactly who they think is responsible for the mess. “I’d go for dinner and a drink but obviously not the after-hours stuff. I was the lame guy who never did anything, haha. People didn’t understand; then, when I started playing for the first team, they began to. Some didn’t even know, then they’d see me play. It’s a personal challenge now more than anything, the time invested. I want the pride of finishing. It’s harder because of the distance. I have to go back for exams” – university student and Manchester City record signing Rodri gets his chat on with Sid Lowe about being at university while at Villarreal and his ongoing education. “Is Phil Parkinson’s quote about joining Sunderland (yesterday’s News, Bits and Bobs) the most ambitious use of the word ‘immense’ in history?” – Tim Woods. “Re: yesterday’s Fiver. The report that the North Korean government banned the attendance of supporters and press, in fear that a defeat to their most deadly rivals be revealed to the world, leads me to hope Old Trafford is equally deserted this coming Sunday” – Nigel Sanders. “If South Korea’s Portuguese manager was challenged to a fight in Japan, would Paulo Bento box?” – Mark Graver. “Myself and Mark Cameron have potentially bad news for Trent Alexander-Arnold with regards the book of Guinness World Records (Wednesday’s News, Bits and Bobs). Having driven an electric golf cart for 1,333km from Pattaya, just outside Bangkok, to Phuket for charity, we set a world record – only to discover there are 44,000 or so them, of which only about 4,000 are listed in the book. So he may have a world record but not able to show it. We did get a photo on the inside back cover, though” – Graham Haslam. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’the day is … Nigel Sanders, who wins our last copy of Per Mertesacker: Big Friendly German. A special edition of Football Weekly can be found right here, while there’s also Football Weekly Extra. STOP FOOTBALL dept: the season’s first clásico has been called off due to ongoing protests in Barcelona, with Real Madrid now expected in town on 18 December. Krasmir Balakov has reportedly done one as Bulgaria boss. In what will likely prove problematic in his role as AFC Wimbledon manager, Wally Downes has been suspended from all football activity for 28 days and fined £3,000 after he admitted breaching betting rules. Big Mo Pochettino claims he still has the support of his Tottenham players … and has the texts to prove it! “When you receive a [message] from the players inviting you and the staff for a dinner – only two things can happen,” he cooed, sending Weird Uncle Fiver’s mind racing. “It’s because they want to say goodbye. Or because they feel they love you and they want to show they are with you. I think it’s the second.” Meanwhile, Spurs will feature in the latest Amazon docuseries All or Nothing, based on their 2019-20 season. Where they’re going to get the ‘All’ from remains to be seen. N’Golo Kanté’s groin-twang has got Frank Lampard’s Chelsea manager Frank Lampard feeling funky. Liverpool fans aren’t best pleased after their Boxing Day trip to Leicester was pushed back to an 8pm kick-off. “The Premier League and TV companies repeatedly ignore the welfare of supporters,” sniffed the Spirit of Shankly group. And there will be around 21,000 fans at Slovan Bratislava’s Big Vase game with Wolves next week, an impressive achievement for a match being played behind closed doors. In accordance with Uefa’s rules, children under 14 have been given all the tickets, including an adult for every 10. Ten Premier League fixtures, 10 things to look out for. You know the drill. Louise Taylor gets her chat on with Newcastle’s likable siblings Sean and Matty Longstaff. Proper Journalism’s David Conn casts his critical eye over the absolute state of Manchester United’s finances and legacy under the Glazers. Håland to Manchester City? Kessié to Wolves? These and more are among the nuggets of gossip churned out by today’s Mill. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! You can get your hands on some of David Squires’ favourite cartoons of his from down the years at our Print Shop.