According to Wired, chiropractors are the latest group to try their hand at being online influencers, led by chiropractic physician Joseph Cipriano. His back-cracking antics have made him a YouTube sensation over the past 18 months, with more than 880,000 subscribers and millions of viewers watching videos of him perform on his clients. It seems that virtually any hobby, job or activity can have its own influencer. Where there is a niche, there will be an audience for it somewhere. Here are some of the more unusual. The bathfluencer Given the popularity of health and wellbeing influencers, it makes sense that aesthetically pleasing bathing content has started spilling over on to our social media feeds. The New Yorker calls it “the age of bathfluence”, as our fascination with photogenic bath set-ups and elaborate celebrity bathing rituals has created a sophisticated (read: unattainable) trend built on an appetite for the simultaneously everyday and aesthetically elaborate. Think sprinklings of rose petals and water churned purple with acai powder. The taxidermist Some might consider it bizarre to stuff and mount dead animals for a living, or indeed just for fun. But James Cranfield, taxidermy enthusiast and owner of Cranfield’s Curiosity Cabinet in Essex, boasts more than 44,000 followers on Instagram, where he publicises newly curated sculptures, from two-headed ducklings to giraffes, moths and fox cubs. Elsewhere, more unfortunate mammals have ended up on the Crap Taxidermy Instagram account. The insect enthusiast Adrian Kozakiewicz, or Insecthaus, started breeding insects when he was 10 years old and made a name for himself by putting bugs of all shapes, sizes and colours on his face. He posts photos and videos of his collection of beloved creepy-crawlies – some of which he has bred himself, others he has collected on world travels – to the delight of his 635,000 Instagram followers. In similar fashion, Bee Influencer uses a 110,000 strong Instagram following to raise money for bee conservation using CGI-generated images of bees posing in protests, on the beach, painting watercolours and everything in between. The CGI influencer So convincing are the popular CGI Instagrammers Miquela (1.5 million followers) and Bermuda that their followers often don’t realise they aren’t real. Even Barbie is a YouTuber now (one with more than 7.6 million subscribers). The unfluencer We come full circle to the unfluencers: influencers against whom people rebel, doing and wanting the opposite of anything they recommend. Despite being turned off by their controversial, sponsored or clickbait posts, some followers cannot help but read on, knowing they will be disappointed and/or infuriated. The name of the game remains, however, that whether you love it or hate it, you most definitely saw it.