It is a rainy Friday morning on an unprepossessing street in the Bronx. Step inside the squat, utilitarian collection of buildings, however, and it’s a very different story. Statuesque, extravagantly coiffed figures strut about the corridors in wigs, sequins and retro block-colour suits. Elsewhere, lithe dancers in garish-glamorous leisurewear languidly limber up, presided over by MC Pray Tell (recent Emmy winner Billy Porter), in an extravagant ensemble befitting a pearly king. In the middle of it all, underneath the biggest disco ball imaginable, is powerhouse television hit-maker Ryan Murphy. We are on the set of Pose, Murphy’s flamboyant drama (co-created with long-term collaborator Brad Falchuk) set in the New York underground ballroom scene of the late 1980s, and his latest bid to capture the zeitgeist through a story from the recent past. Murphy’s 2018 mega-deal with Netflix sealed his title as “the most powerful man in TV”, but he has earned his crown creating groundbreaking shows both about and starring people whom TV has traditionally ignored. Before the first episode even aired, Pose was already making history, with five of the leads – Indya Moore, Mj Rodriguez, Dominique Jackson, Hailie Sahar and Angelica Ross – played by transgender women, and another 45 trans performers cast in the wider ensemble, the most ever in a scripted television show. Season two jumps forward 18 months to the summer of 1990, when Madonna’s Vogue was No 1 in the charts, and ballroom culture was going mainstream. Yet it was also a time when New York’s LGBTQ community was hit by the HIV/Aids emergency. “I was interested in the idea of a community in crisis and under siege,” says Murphy, who is also directing today’s episode. “The medications that have helped stop the plague, the holocaust, came out in 1996, so I hope to end the show right as that happened, to really show the decimation of a world.” A self-declared “gay kid from Indiana who moved to Hollywood in 1989 with $55 in savings in my pocket”, Murphy has always been drawn to the margins. And, difficult though it may be to recall, there once was a time when – rather than the man who, last February, signed a whopping $300m deal with Netflix – he was “somebody who couldn’t sell a script and was being told that everything I did was too gay or too out-there”. The feedback did not cause him to deviate from his vision. “I only wrote or created shows that I really wanted to watch, so they inevitably had gay characters and trans characters and minorities,” he says. “And I made them the leads instead of the sidekicks, because that is what I did in my own life.” Murphy, 53, has been writing for a living since his late teens, first working as an entertainment journalist before moving into screenwriting in the late 1990s with the teen comedy Popular. He truly came to prominence, however, with Nip/Tuck, his dark psychological comedy set in a plastic-surgery practice. Since then, he has indisputably changed the industry, taking mainstream his offbeat celebration of the camp with high-school pep-squad musical comedy-drama Glee, teen murder mystery Scream Queens, and the miniseries Feud: Bette and Joan, a colourful dramatisation of the rivalry between Bette Davis (Susan Sarandon) and Joan Crawford (Jessica Lange) during the making of Whatever Happened to Baby Jane?. If that wasn’t enough, Murphy is also responsible for popularising the much-imitated anthology format both with the twisted American Horror Story, which features a rotating cast of Murphy regulars (Sarah Paulson, Jessica Lange, Kathy Bates) in a range of ghoulish setups, and the ripped-from-the-headlines American Crime Story, which has earned acclaim for its retelling of the OJ Simpson trial and the 1997 murder of Gianni Versace. But, beyond the colourful content and genre-busting approach to format, what makes Murphy most notable is what his collaborator, the writer, producer and director Janet Mock – with Pose, the first trans woman of colour in the writers’ room of a Hollywood television series, and also the first to direct an episode of a TV show – calls “showrunning as advocacy”. With his radical, pro-LGBTQ hiring policies and representation, Murphy is changing the face of the industry, on both sides of the camera. “I think I only really began to understand the power of the medium around the time of OJ and The Normal Heart [the film Murphy directed about the Aids crisis in New York City in the 1980s],” he says, speaking in front of a red glitter curtain between takes. “The Normal Heart aired, and I remember looking at Twitter, and so many young people had posted about it, saying: ‘I had no idea this happened.’ And then I saw it with OJ, with the rehabilitation of [prosecutor] Marcia Clark, from shill to feminist hero.” With Pose, he says, “the whole theme of the show is: what does it feel like when you are invited to the party, when you suddenly have a place at the table? And what does it feel like when that invitation is then taken away? Look at the world we live in, and look at who our president is. A lot of us thought that we had made it – Obama was president! – but no. Those rights are now more fragile than ever.” He is more than happy to admit that his shows are political, and that their mission is to educate as much as entertain. “There is not a lot of LGBTQ history out there; I grew up knowing nothing,” he says. “In the first episode of season two, we introduce a place called Hart Island, which I’d never heard of, an island off Manhattan where the bodies of thousands of people who had died of Aids were put on shipping containers and buried in mass graves.” They recreated the island for the show. “That’s a powerful thing to put out into the world.” When Murphy sleeps is anyone’s guess; alongside season two of Pose, this year has also seen the release of The Politician, his first original show for Netflix, starring Ben Platt and Gwyneth Paltrow. Murphy has said that the show cost as much as The Crown to make, part of a commitment on his part to do things that are “big and commercial, fun and shiny”. His tone, which he describes as “baroque”, is anything but subtle, and tends to divide critics – this newspaper called American Horror Story “the Marmite of TV shows”, and The Politician has taken some flak for its frantic and somewhat artificial style. Whatever Murphy creates, it tends to stir conversation or controversy. He is currently working on the next instalment of the American Crime Story anthology: Impeachment, which will tackle the Monica Lewinsky sex scandal and the subsequent impeachment proceedings against Bill Clinton. In something of a coup, Lewinsky herself has signed on to be a producer, part of an attempt by the former White House intern to “fully reclaim my narrative”. As if the series wasn’t controversy-courting enough, its release date is scheduled for autumn 2020, smack in the middle of US election season. (Murphy, apparently surprised by the backlash to the proposed date, has said that he has “not committed yet on when we’re going to release it”.) Less controversially, Murphy is also adapting pioneering LGBTQ Broadway play The Boys in the Band into a Netflix film to air next year. “The stuff I always wanted to make, now, mainstream companies will step up and give you millions of dollars to do,” he says. “They know there’s an audience for this, and they will show up. That is a very big difference from when I was starting out, when I wasn’t allowed to even write a gay character.” And it’s not just him – the Murphy effect is tangible. “More and more showrunners, writers, networks, are taking people who are marginalised and making them the leads,” he notes. “These people have gone from being sidekicks at best to being captains of their own story. And that’s significant.” by Stuart Heritage Bette and Dot Tattler American Horror StorySarah Paulson has long been an AHS MVP, but in Freak Show she was required to play conjoined twins; one of them introvert and one of them extrovert. Hijinks ensue. Sam Evans GleeIf you left Glee behind after season one, you will have missed dumb-haired Funko Pop doll Sam forming a band called the Justin Bieber Experience. YouTube will rectify this. Bette Davis FeudEither lead from Feud could have qualified for this list, but Susan Sarandon’s Davis gets the nod for her berserk rendition of Whatever Happened to Baby Jane?, based on a real Andy Williams Show performance. Modesto Cunanan The Assassination of Gianni VersaceSure, his murderous son Andrew got all the notoriety, but connoisseurs of bad parenting found their Jesus figure in Modesto. Arguably the worst dad in TV history. Georgina Hobart The PoliticianGwyneth Paltrow is more a meme than an actor now; an out-of-touch wellness maven who doesn’t recognise her own co-stars. Her character on The Politician is the perfect crystallisation of that mindset. Pray Tell PosePose isn’t exactly shy and retiring, but Billy Porter’s Pray Tell manages to outshine the rest of the cast put together. He rightly won an Emmy for his star turn. Season two of Pose begins with a double bill  Saturday 26 October, 10.20pm, BBC Two