Eddie Jones has been a model of restraint, not chirping about referees, cursing the balls or outrageously winding up opponents as had been his tendency since taking over at the end of 2015, a policy of deflection. His focus from the start was the World Cup, something that is his raison d’être as a coach. That drive here has taken him from one match to the next, blinkers on, no distractions. What is notable compared with the three tournaments since England defeated Jones’s Australia to win the 2003 final is that nothing damaging to the cause has emerged from the camp, no drunken tossing of dwarves, dalliances with chambermaids in hotels or diving into harbours. England have fulfilled their media obligations and no more; scripts have been stuck to. It is all about winning the Webb Ellis Cup and each match has been planned for with precision. Tonga and the USA were dealt with clinically and so were Argentina, who obliged England by having a man dismissed before the end of the first quarter. Jones is not so much trying to avoid radar detection as keep the pressure off his players, who are led by the similarly taciturn Owen Farrell. Jones is relying on his own experience of three tournaments with Australia, South Africa and Japan, as well as the research he conducted on England’s previous two abortive campaigns which both had calamitous ends. Say nowt, or very little, do it and win. Top of the world rankings at the start of the tournament, whirled around by Japan last Saturday and left in a spin. “The humidity is something we are not used to playing with,” said a sighing Joe Schmidt after the laboured victory over Russia on Thursday. It rains in Ireland, doesn’t it, so they should be accustomed to a wet ball and their final match, against Samoa, will be under a closed roof in Kobe where teams have found it especially hard to retain possession. Victory would be enough to take Ireland into the last eight, where they would face South Africa or New Zealand in Tokyo, and Schmidt is relying on the weather pattern in Japan’s capital remaining true. “I am told that it starts to cool off in October,” he said. “If that happens, we will not have to make the same adjustment.” Schmidt is in his final month in charge having been their most successful coach, but the defeat to Japan and struggle to subdue Russia, a match when Johnny Sexton lasted 40 minutes, prompted a claim that Schmidt had become a zombie coach while their former second-row Neil Francis said the only way they would have an extended stay is if they had bought return tickets through Thomas Cook. Ireland have been underwhelming having struggled against the unfamiliar, but they were their usual imposing selves against Scotland and they will be more comfortable against New Zealand and South Africa than they were against the hosts because they know what to expect and they have dealt with it before. “We can be bloody brilliant at times,” said the Scotland fly-half Adam Hastings. “At other times you are thinking: ‘What are we doing?’ The best teams are consistent and in the end it comes down to us.” The chastening opening defeat to Ireland meant Scotland had to win their final three matches, including against Japan in Yokohama, which will end the group stage, to get into the last eight. But the loss was followed by a therapeutic victory over Samoa that, gradually, saw confidence returning to the point where the Scots now seem in finer fettle than Ireland. “The game against Japan will be massive but only if we turn up against Russia,” said Hastings. “Otherwise, it won’t matter.” There have been some gripes about how Japan have been pampered by the organisers, no short turnarounds, for instance, with their matches at least a week apart. It is no different to what all hosts have been treated to but Scotland will have four days between Samoa and the final game and Gregor Townsend has the dilemma of whether to rest players such as Finn Russell and Stuart Hogg or start them and hope victory and the bonus point are banked early so he can bring them off. Scotland will be returning to Yokohama, venue of their opening weekend defeat, to face Japan. Few neutrals will be rooting for them and for many it would be karma if the country behind the collapse of the nations league, and the pathway to the top for emerging nations, were knocked out by a tier-two country. While their Celtic rivals are fretting, Wales are sitting snugly, two from two, top of their group and in control of their own destiny. “If we do not win our next three games, I will be unbelievably disappointed,” said their defence coach, Shaun Edwards. “If we do, we are in the semi-finals and back to where we were in 2011 [when they lost to France by a point having played the final hour with 14 men].” The most pessimistic of Welsh supporters would fear going back to where they were in 2007 with Fiji next up in Oita on Wednesday, the city that will stage the quarter-finals on Wales’ side of the draw. It was their last match in the pre-Warren Gatland era, an afternoon in Nantes when they were suckered into playing sevens by the Fijians and came second, the third time in five World Cups they had failed to make the knockout stage. Fiji know victory would be highly unlikely to take them through after losing their first two matches, but they have the incentive of finishing third and pre-qualifying for 2023. Wales, though, have none of the vulnerabilities that cursed them and what was most impressive about last Sunday’s victory over Australia was how, in the final 10 minutes, a period of the game when in the past their heads had tended to explode, they were calmer and more measured than their opponents who were the ones to show panic. Such is the system Gatland has built that players come and go with little discernible difference as Aaron Wainwright’s rise shows. That makes them a force.