Bernie Sanders addressed a rally in New York City on Saturday, his first since he paused his campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination due to health concerns. “We got a permit for 20,000,” he said, “and we had to close the doors.” He added: “I look at this huge crowd, brothers and sisters, I have no doubt that the political revolution is going to sweep … Donald Trump out of office and bring the change that this country has long needed.” Sanders was joined by Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, the New York congresswoman and progressive star who gave him a surprise endorsement. Ocasio-Cortez’s district is less than a mile from Long Island City, the Queens neighborhood where Sanders set his stage. In her remarks, Ocasio-Cortez said: “It wasn’t until I heard of a man named Bernie Sanders that I began to question and assert and recognize my inherent value as a human being that deserves healthcare, housing, education and a living wage.” The Vermont senator abruptly paused his campaign at the beginning of October, after undergoing treatment for an artery blockage. Sanders had a heart attack, his campaign said as he was released from hospital. At 78, Sanders is the oldest major presidential candidate. If elected, he will be the oldest president inaugurated. As he was recovering, Sanders said his campaign was going to change. He told reporters outside his home in Burlington, Vermont he had felt “more fatigued than I usually have been” and should have “listened to those symptoms”. But just a day later, the old Bernie was back. He said he “misspoke” and would be getting “back into the groove of a very rigorous campaign. I love doing rallies and I love doing town meetings.” The media, he said, “drives me a little bit nuts to make a big deal out of it”. In New York, he thanked “the many people across this nation who in my time of illness sent me and my family their prayers, their well-wishes and their love”. “Along with the great medical care that I received,” he added, “I am happy to report to you that I am more than ready to carry out with you the epic struggle that we face today. I am more than ready to assume than ready to assume the office of president of the United States … “To put it in one way: I am back.” Though Sanders trails the former vice-president Joe Biden and Senator Elizabeth Warren in most polls, he is beating them in fundraising. From July to September, Sanders raised $25.3m, edging out Warren’s $24.6m and Biden’s $15.2m. Ocasio-Cortez’s endorsement is expected to boost or at least sustain Sanders’ support. Before she became a political celebrity in her own right, she was an organizer for Sanders. Some founders of Justice Democrats, the political action committee that helped organize her campaign, are former Sanders staffers. “I was born across this river in the Boogie-Down,” she told Sanders’ New York crowd on Saturday, with a reference to the Bronx borough’s role in the early days of hip-hop. “And like many first-, second- and third-generation Americans, I was born in multiple contexts. “My mom was born in Puerto Rico, my dad was born in the South Bronx while the Bronx was burning … when landlords began to turn to arsonists because the insurance payouts were more valuable than the people living in these buildings. “That was the backdrop by which my parents started their lives, and the backdrop in which I started mine was a one-apartment bedroom in Parkchester in the Bronx. They worked hard, they had a mattress on the floor, they had a crib in the closet, and that’s how we started our American dream.” She also paid tribute to Sanders, saying “in 2016, he fundamentally changed politics in America”. “I’m proud to say,” she added, “that the only reason I had [any] hope in launching a long-shot campaign for Congress is because Bernie Sanders proved that you can run a grassroots campaign in an America where we almost thought it wasn’t possible.” Sanders paid tribute in return. “It is hard to believe the degree to which a less than one year this woman, the youngest woman ever elected to Congress … has transformed politics in America. “She has been a defender of the working class in our country, she has taken on the greed of Wall Street … she has been the leader in the fight of gentrification, rent control, affordable housing, and all within one year, she has electrified this country when she introduced the concept of the Green New Deal. “Alexandria has become an inspiration to millions of people, not just across New York but across this country, who now understand the importance of political participation and standing up for justice. In Tuesday’s debate, when asked how he would “reassure Democratic voters that you’re up to the stress of the presidency”, Sanders plugged the New York rally and said it would just be a continuation of his “vigorous” campaign. On Saturday, he said: “I am so delighted that Alexandria is part of our campaign, and I look forward to traveling with her all over this country.”