Donald Trump can betray American allies, be accused of sexual misconduct by 43 women and enrich himself, his family and businesses by his presidency – and he just bounces along, unashamed. He really could “stand in the middle of Fifth Avenue and shoot somebody” and still not lose any voters. Boris Johnson too is operating in a shame-free zone. It’s not just the lies in the lead-up to the Brexit referendum, his rhetoric damning “elites” when he went to Eton and Oxford, and the allegations of unwanted thigh squeezes to women in 1999. Recently he was accused of lying to the Queen. Prince Andrew has refused to be ashamed of his friendship with convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein, his friends telling an incredulous public via the Sunday Times that the three days he spent in Epstein’s mansion were allegedly for the purposes of ending their friendship. And in Australia this week, the daytime television presenter Kerri-Anne Kennerley showed no shame when she said that Extinction Rebellion protesters deserved to be run over by motorists (they should “use them as a speed bump”) or starved in jail. The following day her network, Channel Ten, said the remarks were “clearly a joke”. It didn’t sound like a joke and no one was laughing, but that’s maybe because protesters such as Heather Heyer in Charlottesville have been killed in such a manner. Bad behaviour has been around forever, but shame has historically kept the behaviour in check by operating as a warning mechanism not to transgress in the first place or, if that fails, triggering consequences for transgressing. If we feel ashamed about something, we either hide it or resolve to amend or examine our behaviour so the shameful act isn’t repeated. It’s how we’ve evolved – our animal or reptile brain with its instincts towards pleasure, aggression and other base instincts is kept in check by the prefrontal cortex. This is the rational part of the brain that responds to situations with good judgment, conscience and an awareness of social norms. The 19th century Russian philosopher Vladimir Solovyov believed shame is what separates us from animals. Although he was a creature of his time, hung up on sexual shame, his writing can be applied to all areas of shame, including speaking unthinkingly, lying, hurting others, being violent or aggressive to others, being disloyal. He believed “a being who is ashamed of his animality in that very fact proves himself to be more than a mere animal”. So the awareness of shame itself denoted a higher level of consciousness. Although these days you can spend decades in therapy trying to exorcise your shame (or if you go to Jungian therapy, at least integrate your shadow side), some small measure of shame still serves a social and moral purpose. It is part of what provides social cohesion, particularly if a community has a common understanding of shameful behaviour. You would think a community that for example believes it to be shameful to sexually harass women would be a community where fewer women are sexually harassed because a social taboo has sprung up that enables a) the individual being able to refer to his conscience and principles before acting on primitive instinct and b) reprisals in the form of community disapproval and public shame should the harassment takes place. When you take away shame at the highest levels of leadership, there is the initial, primitive and disturbing thrill of seeing the normally regulated and submerged id unleashed (the early days of Trump’s Twitter feed prompted such a “can’t look away” impulse). In a post-shame era, leaders who previously appeared before the public in a cloak of civility now shoot off at the mouth, unscripted and unconcerned for what they say and what the consequences may be. In this mode of communication you have tweets from Trump like the one in 2017 about Morning Joe host Mika Brzezinski, calling her “low I.Q. Crazy Mika” and saying she had recently had plastic surgery. It was a shocking, shameless and completely bizarre thing for a leader to say. It was also a taste of what was to come. Part of the popularity of the shameless leader derives from the fact that there is no pretending any more – the id is unmediated and allowed free rein. There is a sense that this is the real person. All the rest of them – Obama, Blair, even Bush – spoke with a degree of civility and convention that is now missing in public life. Often that civility hides a multitude of sins. Now the sins are still there but no one is trying to hide them, and no one feels ashamed when they are challenged about these sins. This lack of shame means that there will be no examination of conscience. Without an examination of conscience – or external sanctions – an individual cannot change. Lack of shame has also short-circuited a traditional role of the media, whose power we have realised is largely to shame public figures by exposing things. The expectation is that the subject will feel so ashamed by the exposure that they will quit. But then if they don’t quit and the public re-elects them, the media is exposed as being impotent. This new shameless mode of rhetoric has a lineage that can be traced back to internet trolls. On the internet you can tell someone what you really think, that is that they are ugly and disgusting and need to die violently right away. This type of speech has had a coarsening effect not only on our leaders’ discourse but I think on how we treat each other. Just look at a social media pile-on if you want to see our unmediated, uncivil, shameless selves. You won’t have to look far.