Argentina are far from peaking for what their coach, Mario Ledesma, has described as their “final” against England in their third match at this World Cup on Saturday. The test against Eddie Jones’s team is Argentina’s biggest since they lost their semi-final to Australia at Twickenham four years ago. Only a win in Tokyo will reignite Los Pumas’ chances of qualifying for the quarter-finals after the opening defeat by France. Losing would send them home with a dead-rubber game against the USA to be negotiated four days later. In 160 minutes of rugby so far, Argentina were abysmal against France in the first half and very good in the second but left it too late, losing a game they should win from there nine out of 10 times; they started strongly against Tonga only to drop their performance in the last 50 minutes. Beyond form, the task is also defined by the fact that the last time Argentina beat England was a decade ago in Salta, and both their previous World Cup encounters have gone in England’s favour. In the face of that challenge, Ledesma has remarkably dropped Nicolás Sánchez, Argentina’s top points scorer and a regular for the last nine seasons while also placing the former captain Agustín Creevy on the bench. There has been plenty of debate about Argentina’s ability to reach its minimum goal of the knockout stages since Ledesma announced the squad for the tournament, and now he has dropped the country’s top scorer from the playing 23 it has added fuel to the fire. Sánchez has 733 points – 11 tries, 102 conversions, 146 penalties and 12 drops – to his name since his first international in 2010. Needless to say, Sánchez’s absence from Saturday’s squad was a big topic at the team announcement. “It is a tough moment for Nico but the team is bigger than its players,” Ledesma said. “He is not the only one that wasn’t selected. We were thinking about what is best for the team and we believe this is the team that can beat England. We are always thinking [about] what is best for Argentine rugby.” For Ledesma that also meant selecting Julián Montoya at hooker – man of the match against Tonga – ahead of Creevy, who will become his country’s most capped international with 88 presuming he takes over from Montoya at some stage of today’s Saturday’s game. The big surprise among the replacements was the inclusion of Lucas Mensa, with one solitary cap and not a member of the Super Rugby side Jaguares, ahead of Sánchez. On Friday the reserve scrum-half Felipe Ezcurra insisted that the whole team could learn from Sánchez’s reaction to his omission. “Nico is an example … in terms of how he is conducting himself and how he transmits to everyone that the important thing is the group and not individuals. That makes us very strong.” But there is a wider significance to Sánchez not being in the team. It means that if anything was to happen to the incumbent fly-half, Benjamín Urdapilleta, there is no natural No 10 to replace him as Mensa prefers to play at 12. Ledesma has taken a huge risk. “Urdapilleta has proven himself in France, playing 80 minutes in very big games [including winning the Top 14 final],” Ledesma added. “We will have two playmakers as Jerónimo de la Fuente is who best knows our system. If needed, he’ll move to 10.” Despite studying England ad nauseum, Ledesma nonetheless preferred not to discuss Saturday’s opponents, save for a brief analysis of their tactical kicking game, and how they would need to deal with it. In this team selection, Emiliano Boffelli will be in charge of dealing with the bombs. Jones, meanwhile, has probably had to put his analyst on overtime to find out about Urdapilleta. There is no going back now for Argentina and Ledesma, who made the decision with the input of his coaching team. A shock win over England will give him the opportunity to take a place in Argentinian rugby’s folklore. And as for what a loss would mean, it was hard to tell from his stance. “This is the biggest game in this team’s history,” he said. “Los Pumas have had very important games in their proud history and now these players have the opportunity of being part of that history.” Lisandro Olearo is a rugby writer for El Ciudadano