As predictable as English downpours are the pools of water I have to sidestep in hospital corridors, caused by the leaking, rickety, 1950s roofs. One flood came from burst internal sewerage pipes. That was infinitely worse. It smelt exactly as you’d expect and caused an entire assessment unit to be closed for weeks. I’ve sat in doctors’ messes infested with cockroaches, and once looked up at the scuttling to find myself face to face with a rat. This is the grim reality of so much NHS real estate. Threadbare, dilapidated, in dire need of refurbishment. Staff struggle to care for their patients these days amid collapsing ceilings, crumbling buildings, broken boilers and unsafe fire cladding. Some 43% of NHS buildings are now more than 30 years old and an astonishing 18% predate the founding of the NHS in 1948. I’ve conducted ward rounds in huts that resemble the old codebreakers’ cabins of Bletchley Park. Freezing in winter, sweltering in summer – hardly a healing environment. So you might imagine we’d be positively rejoicing this week at Boris Johnson’s much-hyped announcement of 40 “new” hospitals for the NHS. If only. Even more infuriating than the revelation that the number of new hospitals was at most only six, was knowing that this apparent largesse follows a systematic, year-on-year degradation of the NHS estate. For the last six years, government ministers have deliberately diverted money from the NHS’s capital budget to pay for its day-to-day running costs. It’s like allowing your car brakes to fail so you can keep on buying petrol. It’s not exactly conducive to safety. As a consequence, trusts can no longer afford to repair their threadbare buildings, let alone upgrade them. It’s small wonder NHS hospitals are falling apart when we now spend a mere 0.3% of GDP on health infrastructure, compared to 0.6% in comparable countries. With a general election looming, the prime minister is clearly desperate to convince us of his “NHS love”. Presumably he sees chasing votes in marginal seats with the promise of shiny new hospitals as smart electoral practice. But the constituency he neglects – the one that sees through all the spin – is the NHS workforce. Yes, basic refurbishments are vital. But state-of-the-art new hospitals? Ask any one of the 1.5 million of us and we’ll tell you it’s people, not bricks and mortar, that the NHS is really crying out for. I understand that long-term NHS workforce planning isn’t the snazziest electoral bribe on the doorstep, but any politician who truly puts patients first would champion this above anything. Our current shortfall of 40,000 nurses and 10,000 doctors is putting patients at risk in every setting. Whether hospital, GP, ambulance or community, NHS understaffing is endemic. So where are Johnson’s workforce upgrades – the expansions of nursing, doctor and allied health professional training places the NHS so desperately needs? Why won’t he commit to reinstating the vital nurse-training bursary? Why isn’t he commissioning robust NHS-wide research into doctors’ and nurses’ reasons for quitting, the better to improve staff retention in the future? And why – above all – with Brexit looming, is he not guaranteeing settled status for every one of my priceless EU27 colleagues who keep the NHS afloat today? Does the need to neutralise the Brexit party vote really elevate maintaining the hostile environment above patient safety? The answer, I can only surmise, as promises of glitzy new health tech are sprayed like Bollinger across the Tory conference hall, is that votes must matter more than patients. A veneer of NHS love – all these tantalising promises of hospitals, apps and revolutionary genomics dangled before voters like medical baubles – are the opposite of careful, methodical NHS planning. And they serve only to deaden the morale of overstretched staff for whom working conditions are routinely brutal. For me, as temperatures begin to fall across the UK, the starkest framing of our workforce crisis comes from last winter. My friend, a senior A&E doctor, called me one night close to tears. His shift, like so many that January, had required him to scrutinise the patients trapped on the trolleys lining the corridors, trying to deduce who, in the morass of frailty and suffering, was closest to dying. With just one bed free in resus, only the sickest patient would receive the intensive care they needed. Playing God – knowing full well some of the other patients might die on their trolleys – nearly drove my friend to quit medicine. So forgive me, prime minister, if I don’t applaud your gorgeous new hospitals – all 40, six or however many there really are of them. But who exactly, in the absence of a comprehensive workforce plan, is going to staff them? Stethoscoped unicorns? • Rachel Clarke is a palliative care doctor and author of Your Life in My Hands 