I share the prime minister’s view that the US is wrong to maintain diplomatic immunity for Anne Sacoolas, the diplomat’s wife alleged to have been involved in the collision that killed 19-year-old motorcyclist Harry Dunn (PM could appeal to Trump over death crash, 8 October). She should return from the US and cooperate with the police investigation into his death. Dunn’s family and the principles of justice as they are understood on both sides of the Atlantic demand no less. Sadly, however, I fear that Boris Johnson’s appeal to President Trump may raise false hopes. The last time the US assented to a British prime minister’s request to waive diplomatic immunity was in May 1940 in the case of Tyler Kent, a cipher clerk in the US embassy in London. Kent was a vigorous supporter of US isolationism and a close associate of the notorious, pro-German, antisemitic Right Club. In his determination to keep America out of the war, he stole and leaked sensitive diplomatic cables which he believed would reach Hitler’s Berlin. It is a high bar and, though I would love to be wrong, I hold out little hope that Trump will do for Boris Johnson what Franklin Roosevelt did for Winston Churchill. The US certainly could extradite Mrs Sacoolas. That remains as true as it was in 1940. Regrettably, the characters of today’s US president and British prime minister are markedly different. Tim LuckhurstPrincipal-elect, South College, Durham • Boris Johnson appealing to his mate Donald Trump to authorise the return of Anne Sacoolas to the UK will certainly be a test of the so-called “special relationship”. There is a long history of American personnel serving on US bases, charged with a serious crime and using every means possible to avoid being brought to court. I have several examples myself involving long struggles. Dark forces are usually involved. The wider issues are about the US visiting forces and their agencies who lack any credible oversight and accountability. They are out of the control of the UK government and, despite the myth of the “special relationship”, they do what they like, whether lawful or not.Lindis PercyCo-founder, Campaign for the Accountability of American Bases • Boris Johnson offers to personally speak to Donald Trump regarding Anne Sacoolas’s diplomatic status. Is this wise given that the last time Johnson was involved in such “diplomacy” it was an absolute disaster for Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe (Captive breaks down as she pleads for release from Iran jail, 8 October)?Gary BennettExeter • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition