At one point in his touring show, Lenny Henry recalls a Tiswas sketch he took part in that riffed on the once popular TV show This Is Your Life. Its host Eamonn Andrews may be long dead but his spirit lives on in the fashion for tours like Henry’s: staged autobiographies, liberally illustrated with clips and celebrity anecdotes from his illustrious career. Henry’s offering – to promote his memoir Who Am I, Again? – typifies what’s good, and what’s insufferable, about the genre. It offers perspective on the man and his remarkable career, inspiring affection and respect. But by the end, after an inauthentic second-act Q&A, I found it off-puttingly cosy and self-admiring. Others may differ but, for me, employing someone to interview you on stage – to ask toadying (and obviously scripted) questions about your recent PhD, acting success and charity work – is unbecoming. Particularly for a comedian, from whom we’re entitled to demand something more subversive or self-ironic than this. It’s not that the results aren’t passably entertaining, but no more so than a TV chat show, as Henry’s pal Jon Canter tees up one clubbable big-name anecdote after another, or asks just the right question to prompt Henry’s rubbish rap about the new black family on Coronation Street. The show begins as Henry bounds on stage to announce “I’m 61!” – the age, he says, when people want to tell their life story. It’s a little disingenuous, given that several previous shows covered the same material (on his strict mum; on his childhood torn between Dudley and Jamaica) as this one. But fair enough: he tells the stories well, replete with slides and readings from his book. He has the audience mimic his mum’s “Jamaican laugh”. He tells a horror story about setting his childhood home on fire and a cheerful one about the friendly flasher in his local park. His mother dominates proceedings as she did Lenny’s youth, even if the tales of her authoritarian parenting seem familiar. Henry acknowledges as much, then hits us with a story that’s his alone, about revelations on the other side of his family, and a feeling that he “fell between two dads”. Racism features, too, in the story of a friendship crudely sundered with a white boy next door. The memoir runs from 1958 to 1980, or “birth to Tiswas”, Henry tells us. So it is disappointing that the narrative ends just as he was finding success – beautiful and fresh-faced at only 16 – on TV’s New Faces talent show. The footage of his act – both boy and era a weird mix of innocent and compromised – is mesmerising. Then the story abruptly stops, substituted for a Q&A hopping across Henry’s five-decade career. The focus of the first act is squandered, although the conversation does prompt interesting remarks from Henry about the overlap between “h’integration” (as urged by his mum) and mimicry, the skill with which he made his name. The show could use more of these deeper, harder-won reflections on Henry’s bifurcated sense of self as a pioneering black entertainer of mainstream audiences. Instead, we get backstage gossip about Dustin Hoffman, and Henry’s loving Tommy Cooper tribute act. He seems less at ease with himself in this second act, as if he senses the format is phoney. I left liking the man but wishing he’d created a more coherent, less self-congratulatory show. • Touring until 20 November. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.