Octavia Hill championed the provision of open space for children to play, and instilled in her “fellow workers” the need to treat those whom they helped with respect, understanding and dignity. Anyone who wishes to learn more might visit the excellent Octavia Hill’s Birthplace House in Wisbech. The Octavia housing association has inherited Hill’s name. How sad that it has been found lacking in the contracts it has agreed for “affordable housing” tenants (Former residents of Grenfell among social tenants barred from communal gardens, 28 September).Elizabeth StazickerMepal, Cambridgeshire • You report (2 October) that Banksy has opened a store called Gross Domestic Product as part of a dispute over the trademark on his own name. He may or may not be aware that I was the founder and lead singer of a band called Gross Domestic Product (or GDP), which recorded a number of albums between 1987 and 1995, most of which can still be “enjoyed” on YouTube. We were both gross and domestic but, sSadly, we did not think of applying for a trademark.Dr Nick SmithOxford • Cath Potter would like to see Britain put on exhibitions about our European neighbours (Letters, 3 October). The British Museum put on a major exhibition, Germany: Memories of a Nation, between October 2014 and January 2015, which was visited by Angela Merkel herself. Later in 2015, the BM director, Neil MacGregor, moved on – to the Humboldt museum in Berlin. Schade, nicht wahr?Paul TattamChinley, Derbyshire • Oh, Guardian readers, how I love you all. Amid political chaos and meltdown, we are having a discussion on what to call the evening meal (Letters, 3 October). Cheers me up no end. (It’s tea, by the way.)Margaret BallEnfield, London • Supper can only be consumed at bedtime after one has changed into pyjamas, dressing gown and slippers. Ian Churchill Bramhope, Leeds • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition