There’s more to life than money. Or to be more specific, your money, along with your job and any public services you may be unlucky enough to rely on. That was the gist of Sajid Javid’s extraordinarily ill-judged letter to the Treasury select committee, in which he grandly declined to provide it with a proper analysis of how Boris Johnson’s last-minute Brexit deal will affect the economy. There is more to delivering Brexit than “spreadsheets or impact assessments”, said the man whose actual job is making such assessments so the rest of us know where our money’s going, because really this is about securing voters’ trust in politicians. What happens to trust if the economy craters because MPs were intimidated into blindly backing Brexit without understanding the consequences? Well, let’s hope we’re not about to find out. When MPs vote, they will have been studying the outline of the deal for under a week, and the specifics for 24 hours Of all the shabby games played over Brexit, this is one of the shabbiest – so much so that when I saw the letter, I wondered briefly whether Johnson even wants this deal to succeed or if, once again, he just wants leave voters to believe he really tried. For it drives a coach and horses through the utterly basic political convention that the public is entitled to know when elected politicians are planning something that puts them at risk, a right to know that increases proportionately to the potential damage. Thanks to Downing Street’s refusal to show its working, we cannot know exactly how much this deal would damage jobs, living standards or the public services that our tax revenues fund in the short or long term. But one analysis by the thinktank UK in a Changing Europe suggests GDP could grow by up to 7% less than it would otherwise have done over the next decade, with the public finances taking a hit of up to £49bn. Either the government simply hasn’t had time to do the modelling, opting for political reasons to strike whatever deal it can in the time available while crossing its fingers, in which case the negligence is breathtaking. Or it has done at least some rough calculations and fears the reaction should they become public – which is arguably worse. Either way, it beggars belief that MPs should be asked to close their eyes and jump on something this complex and permanent, when even policies that look like statements of the bleeding obvious invariably reveal unforeseen consequences once prodded by civil servants. The most shocking thing isn’t the lack of time for debate but the deliberate lack of information. Johnson is trying to ram through something that will shape British lives for a generation, without having the decency to explain what it means. If that sounds familiar, it’s what happened in the referendum too. The government’s argument that, after three years (and 500 hours of parliamentary debate) on Brexit, MPs should just crack on with it, is as cynically misleading as it is superficially attractive to an exhausted public. Johnson compares the process to climbing Everest, as if having voted for Brexit the UK knew exactly where it was heading, and just needed the grit to reach the summit. But here’s a more realistic analogy. Imagine a friend has spent months meticulously planning her wedding, only to discover something the night before that suggests her fiance isn’t the person she thought she knew. She asks straight out if the rumours are true, but all he will say is that it’s too late to cancel the caterers – and besides, the guests are really looking forward to it. Would you advise her to get married regardless, or hold out for a straight answer? And what if her fiance, like the prime minister, has a reputation for fibbing in a tight corner? Brexit certainly feels as if it’s gone on for ever. But when MPs vote, they will have been studying the broad outline of this deal for less than a week, and the specifics of it for barely 24 hours. Even the cabinet doesn’t seem to understand the detail yet, judging by the Brexit secretary Steve Barclay’s somewhat convoluted response to the former Treasury adviser Stewart Wood’s questions about what it means for Northern Irish trade with mainland Britain. Confusion will only grow as different camps, who seem to have been spun different accounts from Downing Street, start comparing notes. Tory Brexiteers’ boasts that this bill could still lead to a no-deal Brexit if trade talks aren’t successfully concluded during the transition period have already prompted Conservative rebels to try to close that loophole, seeking greater parliamentary control of the process. The breakneck timetable is barely long enough to identify the biggest questions posed by this deal, let alone the myriad smaller ones. But what is really shocking about Javid’s letter is the bald admission that the government isn’t even seriously trying to answer them; that behind all that talk about the will of the people lies a fundamental reluctance to be straight with the people about what lies ahead. If that doesn’t ring alarm bells, it’s hard to know what will. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist