Jürgen Klopp praised Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain for two “sensational” goals against Genk but admitted he was less than impressed with Liverpool’s overall performance in Belgium. The Liverpool midfielder scored his first goals for the club since April 2018 as the European champions strengthened their position in Group E with their first away win in the group stage in two years. Oxlade-Chamberlain’s second, a chip with the outside of his foot, was exquisite while Sadio Mané and Mohamed Salah also scored what their manager described as a collection of “beautiful” goals. Liverpool’s overall display, however, did not attract the same glowing tributes. Klopp said: “It was a great moment for him but I would say Ox with his performance was exactly the same as the performance of the team – the goals were great but all the rest could have been better. That’s how it is, but it’s no problem. The goals were sensational and very important forus. Wonderful. On Sunday, Adam [Lallana] scored the goal and now Ox has scored two goals. It’s really nice, a great story.” The Liverpool manager criticised his team’s open first-half display in particular. “We looked to find the gaps and pass the ball through,” he said. “That was the plan and it worked OK for the first 10-15 minutes but then not anymore because we lost completely unexpected balls we were not ready for, which in the formation was not possible. . Sometimes we took in the wrong moments a risk, passing a one-two in a very tight situation makes not too much sense. They got a bit of momentum which after our start was completely unnecessary. But all our goals were unbelievably beautiful and the second was a proper knock for Genk it looked like.” Klopp said he did not see a banner that was removed from the Liverpool section before kick-off for depicting Divock Origi with a large penis. Liverpool condemned the banner as “highly offensive and inappropriate” and pledged to act against whoever brought it into the away section. Uefa may take action against the club given the banner’s obvious racial implications. A Liverpool spokesperson said: “The banner is highly offensive and inappropriate. We condemn its use at the game tonight and sought to have it removed as soon as we became aware. We will look to identify those responsible for bringing it into the stadium and act accordingly.”