The Tesco chief executive, Dave Lewis, has announced his surprise departure after five years at the helm of the UK’s biggest retailer. The former Unilever executive said he had completed the turnaround plan he set in train following the company’s 2014 accounting scandal and would leave the company in a “position of strength”. He will be succeeded next summer by Ken Murphy, a Boots lifer who most recently was the chief commercial officer of its American parent Walgreens Boots Alliance. “My decision to step down as group chief executive is a personal one,” said Lewis. “I believe the tenure of the chief executive should be a finite one and that now is the right time to pass the baton.” The 54-year-old made it clear that he did not have another job to go to and was “not discussing options with anyone”. “I want to take some proper time out with my family and recharge my batteries,” he said. “You pass this way only once.” The Tesco chairman, John Allan, said that it was with regret that he had accepted Lewis’s resignation. “Dave has done an outstanding job in rebuilding Tesco since 2014 and he continues to have unwavering support from the board,” Allan said. Murphy, an Irishman, studied at University College Cork, before going on to qualify as an accountant. Allan described him as a seasoned leader with “deep commercial, marketing and brand experience within retail and wholesale businesses”. The announcement of Lewis’s departure came as Tesco reported a better-than-expected first-half operating profit before one-off items of £1.41bn, a rise of 25.4%. The retailer said it had made a strong start to the year and was well positioned to be highly competitive in a challenging market. Shore Capital analyst Clive Black described Lewis as “the bloke that saved Tesco which should go down as an enormous achievement in British retail history”. He said Lewis’s departure would be a loss to the group leaving Murphy with “big shoes to fill”. Independent retail analyst Nick Bubb said Lewis was able to say he was leaving with his “mission accomplished” but questioned why Tesco had chosen an external candidate to succeed him. “What Dave Lewis will do next is unclear but the bigger question is why Tesco overlooked an array of internal candidates and have gone outside and appointed Ken Murphy from Boots (aka ‘Ken who?’) as the new boss,” said Bubb.