It is sickening to think that Labour “rebels” are prepared to vote to wreck the country’s future – and in doing so hand a general election victory to the most rightwing Tory government in a generation – simply in order to indulge the opinions of their leave-voting constituents, many of whom will not even have been Labour voters (Defiant Labour MP Melanie Onn declares intention to vote for deal, 19 October). As Edmund Burke wisely put it in 1774: “Your representative owes you, not his industry only, but his judgment; and he betrays, instead of serving you, if he sacrifices it to your opinion.” Surely they must see that the need to strive for a progressive and inclusive UK, at the heart of Europe, is more important than the gratification of their consciences? No one is asking them to stop Brexit – merely to pause its headlong progress until a path can be found to ask the electorate whether or not they really want to live in a nation committed to the re-enactment of an imaginary past.Rob SykesOxford • Melanie Onn believes she should “get back to helping … constituents” by voting for the deal. As a Labour party member and one of her constituents I am saddened and angry and believe she is wrong. Owen Jones (Journal, 17 October) and Gordon Brown (Journal, 18 October) gave more than enough reasons for her to vote against the deal. As Keir Starmer told Andrew Marr on BBC1 on Sunday, “You cannot trust this government.” At a time when Labour has the most exciting policies since 1945, she needs to do the right thing and vote against the deal.Martin Pask Grimsby, Lincolnshire • In the Saturday sitting of the House of Commons, it was shocking and horrifying how frequently those in favour of Brexit but not in favour of another referendum invoked the idea of what the people of the UK want. This is sheer hypocrisy. All ministers who have any real interest in the current view of the nation as a whole should obviously back a second referendum. Impressionistic ideas of what “my constituents” might think, or extrapolations from the 2016 referendum, will simply not do. Our name should not be taken in vain, and it is particularly offensive for this to happen allegedly in the name of “democracy”. The most recent indication of what the people want was the petition to revoke article 50.Simon BrodbeckCardiff • According to a report in Sunday’s Observer, a recent Opinium poll shows only 42% of voters want a second referendum while 43% oppose it. So that’s another expression of democratic opinion the remainers will have to disregard.Christopher ClaytonWaverton, Cheshire • Yet again our incompetent prime minister has lost a key vote and now, in an act of breathtaking hypocrisy, is attempting to frustrate the will of parliament by accompanying his unsigned letter to Brussels requesting a Brexit extension with a second letter, signed by him, saying that he believes a delay would be a mistake. This surely constitutes a clear case of contempt of parliament.Dr Chris NewallEaling, London • With his three letters ploy, Boris has just shot himself in the foot, possibly both feet, by proving to the EU leaders that he cannot be trusted with regard to anything he says.Chris BurrellWelwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire • I can’t help but notice that the prime minister, for all his expensive education and patrician manner, has added to our national humiliation by introducing an unnecessary and incorrect apostrophe into the penultimate sentence of the penultimate paragraph of the letter that he signed, where he refers to “our long history as neighbours and friends in this continent our people’s [sic] share”, turning a simple plural into a possessive. I can only hope that the EU leaders will come to the conclusion that this second letter, so illiterately expressed, must be a hoax and dismiss it out of hand.Matthew TaylorHove, East Sussex • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition