The Booker prize winning author John Banville had to tell his friends and family not to “buy the champagne”, after news he had won the Nobel prize in literature proved to be a hoax. The Irish writer had been lying face down on his couch, mid-physiotherapy session, when he received a call from a man purporting to be Mats Malm, the permanent secretary of the Swedish Academy, half an hour before the true winners would be revealed at a ceremony in Stockholm on Thursday. “He asked me if I would prefer the 2018 or 2019 prize and read me the citation he would print about my work,” Banville recalled. “He was very convincing. I rang everybody I could think of to tell them about this good news.” But 40 minutes later Banville received a phone call from his daughter, after she had seen the live announcement, who told him: “It’s not you.” “I realised then that it must have been a hoax. I rang everybody again and said: ‘Don’t buy the champagne, stop throwing your hats in the air.’” At this year’s ceremony, Austrian author Peter Handke was awarded the 2019 literature prize while Polish writer Olga Tokarczuk was crowned 2018 winner. A voicemail left on Banville’s phone shortly after the announcement explained that there had been a last-minute disagreement among decision-makers. But, after scrutinising the message, Banville noticed that voice was “deeper” than that of the real Mats Malm and lacked the same “smooth” grasp of English. He has since shared the message with the Swedish Academy to investigate the incident. Banville believes the hoax was not directed at him personally but was aimed at undermining the academy, which was is dealing with recent scandal and internal divisions. “I suspect it was some disaffected little creep with a grudge. I don’t think I was the target of it. I was just collateral damage,” he said. After the initial disappointment of realising this year’s £741,000 prize would not be his, Banville now sees the funny side of the incident. “I learned quite a few things about myself in the 40 minutes I was supposedly a Nobel prize winner,” he said. “There is some comedy in it and potential material: ‘The man who nearly won the Nobel prize.” The novelist has been the recipient of the 2005 Booker prize, the 1976 James Tait Black memorial prize, the 2011 Franz Kafka prize and the 2013 Austrian State Prize for European Literature among others. The Swedish Academy has been contacted for comment.