First: the important thing. We have a winner of the Not the Booker Prize. Our judges, after diligently reading all the books, and sharing their thoughts and ideas throughout the process, have unanimously decided that the award should go to Supper Club by Lara Williams. This feels like a fantastic choice to me. It’s a superb debut novel from a writer bursting with talent. She has a great deal to say about our common humanity and the world we live in. Plus, this novel is hilariously funny and deeply moving. I’m delighted. Second: the small print. In selecting Supper Club, the judges overruled the public vote and The Unauthorised Biography of Ezra Maas by Daniel James. For the record here’s how the voting played out: The Unauthorised Biography of Ezra Maas: 98Please Read This Leaflet Carefully: 24Skin: 22Flames: 10Spring: 9Supper Club: 5 The judges all saw positive qualities in The Unauthorised Biography of Ezra Maas, but despite its thumping victory in the public vote the novel didn’t speak to them enough. They were also irritated by aspects of its meta-fictional architecture, and when Hilary Shepherd said, “It felt like reading a cartoon”, I think she summed up the general consensus. Our judges have carefully weighed all the books and it’s their right to position them accordingly. I know that some people who voted find this part of the process painful – and if that’s you, I’d like to encourage you to join in. Read all of the books and maybe you can become a judge next year. It’s also worth noting that your vote wasn’t wasted. If only one judge had sided with Maas, it could have won through. It was the second choice for at least one of the judges, so it was close … Third: phew! Ha! Wow. We had some gremlins. If you scan through the comments below this blog you will see that we were unable to broadcast the judging meeting as we have done in the past. Oh well. Richard Lea stepped in and recorded the conversation in the comments as it happened – you can track it there. Fourth: hey! In spite of the last-minute gremlins (and it wouldn’t be the Not the Booker, without a small dose of chaos) it’s felt like a great year. We had a really strong shortlist. All of the books had excellent qualities, the discussions were vibrant and fascinating, and we’ve shone the spotlight on some very talented writers. Fifth: onwards! We may have just completed our eleventh year, but the Not the Booker is still a work-in-progress. Our quest for openness, inclusivity and excellence is bound to produce issues. Part of the point of the whole process is to discuss the wider nature of prize culture, what we value about books and how awards decisions are made. Think of it as warts and all, with extra discussion of the warts. In that spirit, send along constructive criticism and ideas for refinement. The decision to approach the excellent Storyhouse library and Edinburgh’s Golden Hare Books was inspired by a reader’s suggestion, and it worked very well. In fact, it helped us find our winner. So more of that would be greatly appreciated. Sixth: thank you. I’m grateful to our excellent judges, Kate White, Hilary Shepherd and Heather Curran, as well as everyone who took part this year, helped get some fine books on to our shortlist, generated controversy and talked about literature, the thing we love. Seventh: that’s it! It’s been a blast. Congratulations again to Lara Williams, a very worthy winner. A Guardian mug is on its way.