I’m sure I heard Boris talk of scrapping the bill – but now it’s a pause? Maybe that idea has gone under the cardboard bus as well as Boris. I, for one, cannot stand more months of this pissing about. It’s affecting my mental health, and probably [that of] many others in the country. Call a second referendum and scrap this bill. How can any of this possibly be better than where we are now? The government has proposed no financial, economic and wellbeing benefits for leaving the EU in this state. AnotherAlan This may seal Boris’s fate. The EU looks [prepared] to grant the extension now because there will be nothing to stop the vote of no confidence and a GE [general election]. The outcome of that is obviously uncertain, but in this situation, risks have to be taken to try to avert catastrophe. PowerlessAngryVictim Cannot believe that 19 Labour MPs voted for Boris’s deal and didn’t vote for Theresa’s deal, which did legally protect workers. It’s wrong on so many levels. ADH1969 It is noble of Labour to say they respect diversity of opinion and Labour MPs can vote as they like, but what is the voter supposed to think about all this? If you stand for anything and everything, you stand for nothing. And you will get nothing done as a consequence. Labour should at the very least try to agree on the basics – do they support a referendum on the deal, do they support workers’ rights, do they support the environment, do they stand up for job creation and social equality, etc. Once you agree on the principles, it should be easy to vote on the content of the bill. You know what you stand for and you check the bill if it is aligned to that. Alas, Labour is all over the place and hence a complete chaos. As a voter, you would have no idea what you would be getting by voting Labour. curiosity19 I think I now fully appreciate the wisdom of Scotland’s court of session in keeping that sword of Damocles dangling over Boris Johnson’s head. SporadicWit Boris Johnson has backed himself into his own corner with all his ridiculous rhetoric. If he were a proper adult rather than a five-year-old in adult clothes, he would simply allow enough time for proper debate about his deal. Why is that such a problem? He might have to accept a few amendments, but that happens to every government. He has just made error after error since becoming PM. It’s not clever to get rid of 21 [members] of your party. And as for the ERG [European Research Group] complaining about MPs voting against the government – the pot calling the kettle black – we wouldn’t be in this situation if they had voted for Theresa May’s deal. barriecooper Don’t worry about Labour MPs voting against the whip. It was only the second reading. These MPs can now demonstrate that they supported their constituents. If it does progress, judge them on their efforts to make amendments and their votes on the third reading – if it happens. Overall, a good night for Labour, Bonzo [Johnson] delayed his own Brexit bill and [Lisa] Nandy, [Dan] Jarvis et al now have the freedom to support amendments. Suck that one up, [Dominic] Cummings. YorksTyke As someone who has followed this keenly over the past few years, I don’t feel much shame in admitting I’ve found many elements of the past few days confusing. Not so much the procedures, but trying to understand tactics on all sides. I’m convinced a general election will give another hung parliament. In turn, that gives little chance of agreement, a second referendum or revocation. Just more delay. This is rapidly disappearing up its own backside. DrDestruction