More than 200 years ago, the heads of European governments convened in Vienna to decide the future of the continent in the aftermath of the Napoleonic wars. During these negotiations, the British representatives had to remind their counterparts they did not have an unlimited mandate, since any agreement reached was subject to parliamentary scrutiny in London. Indeed, when he was opposed to a certain proposal, Castlereagh argued his parliament would not accept it. Therefore, he insisted, the proposal had to be withdrawn. Little has changed since then. Today, the British prime minister negotiates without a clear mandate, and MPs insist on their right to amend any agreement their government has reached. The result, which is plain for the EU to see, can be described with one word only: chaos. Perhaps two centuries ago, it could be said the British parliament was a beacon of democracy. It set Britain apart from absolutist countries such as Russia and Austria-Hungary. It represented the future. Now, the political process in the UK seems hopelessly outdated. However eloquent the MPs might be, their rhetoric cannot mask a lack of substance or indeed a lack of purpose. Not a single MP seems to be swayed by the force of argument. Perhaps that is because the arguments are not that strong in the first place. Many Europeans will applaud the current renovation of the palace of Westminster. It is a site of great historical significance. It has to be preserved to attract the tourists. They want to catch a glimpse of hereditary peers, asleep in their benches, or bickering MPs, fulminating in their Eton or cockney accents. However, if you want to see a truly working democracy, you should no longer go to London. You had better turn to Brussels. Is that not saying something?Paul RoteringWassenaar, The Netherlands • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition