When I first started to notice birds, I thought birdwatching would be a happy little pastime. I thought it might make me seem a bit quirky and announce me to my people. But it’s none of these things. Birding, actually, is a perfectly good way to ruin a nice walk. This is because, although birds are everywhere, they are total jerks about it. Their favourite thing to do is to come and sit in a tree sort of near you and call loudly for the exact amount of time it takes you to get your binoculars up to your eyes and focused. And, at that moment, what they like best is to fly behind some leaves. They like to do this over and over. Between you and the sun. There was a time in my life when this wouldn’t have bothered me because I simply wouldn’t have been looking. I spent the first three decades of my life not even knowing that I was routinely walking right past birds I had never even seen before. Back then, birds weren’t yet deliberately evading me; they were simply hiding in plain sight from eyes and ears that had been trained by a lifetime of city dwelling to slide over them without noticing. I let birds into my life accidentally when I stopped one day to read an interpretive sign along the Yarra in Ivanhoe. Apparently, on my daily walk, I could hope to see white-faced herons, eastern yellow robins and red-browed firetails. I thought I may as well look out for these creatures seeing as I was there already and, lo and behold … I beheld them. In the bushes, perching on trees next to the track, hopping in the grass and picking their way through the water in stately slow-mo. They had been there all along and I just hadn’t noticed. Now, without being weirdly obsessive about it, I can’t help but keep noticing. And it makes for a really stiff neck sometimes. Sometimes I wonder why I even like birds. They’re pretty and they fly but that’s not it At first, I tried birding with other people. I dragged my husband along on a beginners’ birdwatching walk where a group of people spent a solid 10 minutes trying to point out something called a bronzewing that everyone but me could see. It was a situation that became more awkward the longer it went on. People were standing behind me, their chins near my shoulder, pointing past my ear and giving very precise directions: “There’s a big gum at 12 o’clock … come down in front to the right … there’s a log … about five meters in front … on the ground … can you see it?” “No!” I said every time I was asked some variation of that question. I wanted to pretend to see the bronzewing but I couldn’t lie to these people. I wanted the stupid bird to fly away so I wouldn’t have the pressure of having to see it. None of these things happened. These nice people just continued to be bizarrely patient with me. Finally, in exasperation, I cried out: “Unless it’s a pigeon, I can’t see anything!” There was uproar. This is only funny if you know birds. Because a bronzewing is a kind of pigeon. Who knew? I couldn’t see it because I didn’t know what I was looking for and, even when I was looking right at it, all I could see was “just a pigeon”. So. That was embarrassing. After that, I decided that birdwatching in a group wasn’t for me. The pressure of having to see a large bird waddling around in plain sight was just too much. I couldn’t really help seeing birds when other people were around though and I couldn’t hide the excitement that comes with witnessing a particular species for the first time. Among the ecology crowd I tended to hang with, it was suggested to me that I might be something called a twitcher. But this observation sometimes came with a slightly disapproving tone. “You don’t have a list, do you?” someone once asked me. To ask me if I have a list is like asking somebody who is really well known for having something if they have that thing. “Pffft. NO!” I lied. And a few weeks later, so early in my birding journey, and with so few species “ticked off”, I retired my little blue book to the back of a drawer. I still didn’t know much about birds but I liked them quite a lot. So when a lecturer known for his avian research asked a class I was in: “Is anyone here a birdwatcher?” I proudly raised my hand. “That’s OK,” he said to me with a distinct note of compassion. WTF? He was the bird guy. What was this? For I while, I went with “birdo” to describe my, again, not weirdly obsessive interest in birds. But that moniker, it turns out, raises expectations that you know stuff. More pressure. In an attempt to evade whatever the hell is going on in the politics of birdwatching nomenclature I have coined a new term for myself: “Noticer of birds”. It’s casual enough that I get out of having to distinguish an intermediate egret* from a great egret. Although, if I do manage to tell the difference, I’ll be ticking it off. Sometimes I wonder why I even like birds. They’re pretty and they fly but that’s not it. I think it’s because they do so many things that we think of as important to being human. They build amazing structures – often ingeniously (and without hands). Anyone who has ever seen a bower knows that they create art. They dance. They can talk. They can problem-solve. They care diligently for their offspring. Mostly. They even use fire. No matter what you think of birds, it’s probably true to say that they are more interesting than you realise. At the very least, they are worth noticing. *Possibly not its real name. • Erin Lennox lives in Melbourne. She is doing a PhD on urban birds