Rassie Erasmus has warned England that South Africa will not be taken by surprise in the final here on Saturday after the Springboks held their nerve to defeat Wales and end Warren Gatland’s World Cup dream in a tight, tense semi-final. South Africa have only lost one match this year, to New Zealand on the opening weekend of the World Cup. No team have ever won the tournament having been defeated in the group stage but Erasmus, their head coach, believes they can make history. “We have played England four times in the last 18 months and the score is 2-2,” the South Africa head coach said. “We are accustomed to the way they play and we think we are in with a chance. They are much better than when we last faced them in November, and you could see that in the way they dismantled New Zealand, but I am not sure it will be a final won through an expansive gameplan and wonderful tries. “We know that there are areas of our game we will need to improve on to win, and we have a six-day turnaround. We are used to a team that has a fast running game because we play New Zealand regularly, but we are still at the stage where we need to be able to adapt.” South Africa’s improvement under Erasmus, who took over at the beginning of last year, has been marked and they won the Rugby Championship this year. They won the Test series against England last year, coming from a long way behind in the opening two Tests. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales “We have always had the potential to be a force in world rugby,” Erasmus said. “What the players have done in the last couple of years is take ownership of what it means to be a professional rugby player. There was a stage when it was just about earning a pay cheque, but they now understand they have to work really hard. “The level of mediocrity is going out of our rugby and we are slowly moving to being able to maximise our potential. What was pleasing about the victory over Wales was that the players stuck to their guns and learned from past defeats to them. It was not a spectacle, but we knew it would not be.” South Africa kicked the ball twice for every three times they passed it, refusing to be drawn into attacking from their own half. “The one area we need to improve is our discipline because we gave away too many penalties,” the scrum-half Faf de Klerk said. “If we keep the count down against England and don’t give them too many entries in our 22, it is going to fall in our favour. We appreciate how well they played against New Zealand, but we also know what to expect from them. “We tend to have close games against them and we will be putting in plans to counter their systems. They have smart players and we will need to be smart.” Gatland had hoped his final match in charge of the Wales side after 12 years would be the final, but the head coach has to lift his players for the bronze play-off against New Zealand in Tokyo on Friday. The prop Tomas Francis has been ruled out with a shoulder injury and the wing George North has a hamstring strain. “My first game with Wales was against England and my dream was that it would be my last, but it is not to be,” said Gatland. “Friday will be our last time together so we must make sure that we enjoy ourselves. We knew it would be an arm-wrestle against South Africa and there was not a lot of flowing rugby played, but I am proud of the boys for staying in there. “England were outstanding against New Zealand, but South Africa have the physicality to match them. My last game [in charge of Wales] will not be the final, but it will still be a monumental match because they are the only team I have not beaten, apart from the Lions. It will be a tough game to play, but we will give it the respect it deserves.”