This Forestry England site is an excellent activity centre with tons of things to do. The climbing tower is 12 metres high and each side has a different level of difficulty. There is archery, a zipline and Go Ape too, offering high-wire forest thrills. The Forest of Dean family cycle trail goes through here – its circular nine-mile trail is a beautiful off-road ride for all ages. There is a huge play area with wooden and modern rides, frames, tunnels and bridges. The sculpture trail begins here, as does the Zog trail, (an activity route based on the book by Julia Donaldson and Alex Scheffler). There are barbecue pits and open spaces for football and games and the cafe is brilliant. We stayed at Hidden Valley Yurts and spent a lovely day here this summer.• forestryengland.uk Laura Jenkins This centre in Snowdonia national park is next to the lake Llynnau Mymbyr and is superbly located for places to kayak, climb, cycle and hike. Instructors and excellent facilities make it a great base for getting the most out of the area on one of its multi-day courses. Paddlers can choose from beginner and special skills courses in white-water kayaking, gentle canoeing and sea kayaking. Onsite accommodation is comfortable and the breathtaking view of the Snowdon horseshoe from the Yr Wyddfa bar makes a meal and a pint of beer a great end to an active day.• Courses two to seven days from £200, accommodation from £35pn, pyb.co.uk Annie O’Connor Every week we ask our readers for recommendations from their travels. A selection of tips will be featured online and may appear in print, and the best entry each week (as chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet) wins a £200 voucher from hotels.com. To enter the latest competition visit the readers' tips homepage My family had a great week’s holiday in Newcastle. YMCA Greenhill is set in National Trust-owned land in the foothills of the Mourne mountains. We dropped our kids into the YMCA for the week, where they had the time of their lives doing bouldering, climbing, canoeing, laser tag, etc. This enabled us to explore an area that has so much on its doorstep: Murlough (the first nature reserve in all of Ireland, set up in 1967) with its 6,000-year-old-dune system , multiple forest parks, walks in the spectacular Mournes, mountain-biking and beaches. Newcastle has a good range of accommodation and food options. • Organised groups only, minimum of eight, camping and dormitories available, greenhill-ymca.orgAndrew McAleavey This summer, I spent a day canyoning with a group of friends. We started at G2’s HQ just south of Aviemore, where we picked up wetsuits and helmets then drove to the Bruar canyon, 50 minutes to the south and joined our guides. Here, amid pine forest and the constant sound of rushing water, we discovered the thrills of natural water slides over bare rocks, abseiling through waterfalls and leaping into deep rock pools. I was a bit apprehensive about the trip to be honest but I couldn’t have had a more thrilling time. G2 also offers ziplining, gorge walking, rafting and skiing. • £60pp for five-hour trip, minimum age 13, g2outdoor.co.uk Kimmich I’ve been to the Peak District many times, walking, cycling and fishing. But I’d never been into the Peaks before. Boiler-suited, hard-hatted groups emerging from some roadside hole wet, muddy and happy are a common sight in these parts. I now know why. A caving taster day with local outfit Pure Outdoor was brilliant, with our guide coaxing us to slither, wriggle and squeeze like worms through serpentine passages, while learning about the local geology.SteveP This place in Ellesmere Port has a fantastic newish bouldering wall for all ages and levels and also offers slacklining (similar to tightrope walking) and soft archery. It has a great community feel, everyone is incredibly supportive and kind, and there is a great range of routes for all abilities. There is also the bonus of regular events, like 1980s nights and Halloween parties and competitions. It’s a place where children are welcome and everyone can have fun together. The cafe offers good vegan and vegetarian food.• Day pass £11 for 18+, £9 for 10-17, and further discounts for younger children, boulderhut.com Imogen Sykes Looking for a holiday with a difference? Browse Guardian Holidays to see a range of fantastic trips This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.