Last week the New York Times published the most depressing piece I’ve read in a long time. “The Internet Is Overrun With Images of Child Sexual Abuse,” said the headline. “What Went Wrong?” The article was the outcome of a major investigation by two NYT reporters – Michael Keller and Gabriel Dance – into what they described as “an insatiable criminal underworld that had exploited the flawed and insufficient efforts to contain it”. The reporters also found that (as with hate speech and terrorist propaganda) many tech companies failed to adequately police sexual abuse imagery on their platforms, or failed to cooperate sufficiently with the authorities when they found it; law enforcement agencies tasked with the problem are understaffed and underfunded; and the US justice department, despite being given major responsibility for the problem by Congress, has fallen down on the job. Given the outrage-fatigue that now grips many of us as liberal democracy self-destructs, it would be tempting to just file this disturbing report in the “more downsides of tech” folder and move on. That temptation should be resisted, not just because of the appalling cruelty to children that lies at the heart of this, but also because it raises the question of whether a combination of digital technology and the business models of some tech platforms pose existential threats to the rule of law. Crudely put: are these platforms inadvertently facilitating illegal and inhumane behaviour that neither they nor law enforcement authorities can control? Everybody knows, I guess, that there’s always been child abuse imagery online. That’s because the internet holds up a mirror to human nature. All human life is there, and some of that is ghastly. The Internet Watch Foundation estimates that “there are 100,000 people sitting in the UK right now demanding images of the abuse of children”. What few appreciate is the sheer scale of the imagery and of how it has proliferated in the last two decades. According to the New York Times, in 1998 there were about 3,000 reports of it; 10 years later the number had risen past 100,000; in 2014 it was more than 1 million; and last year there were 18.4m reports, which included more than 45m images and videos flagged as child sexual abuse. The one piece of good news is that these spiralling numbers may reflect better detection by tech companies. Social media platforms are legally required to report images of child abuse only when they discover them – they are not required to look for them, and it may be that they are now looking harder and finding more. So the alarming “spike” in reports might be an indication that companies are doing better – a point that some of their executives made to the NYT reporters. Pornography – including child sexual abuse imagery – is at least as old as the printing press. But smartphone cameras, broadband connectivity, cloud storage and social media have enabled the imagery to proliferate and disseminate at exponential rates. And vast though the volume of child abuse imagery reported by the NYT is, it’s only a drop in the bucket of social media activity. In a talk to Facebook staff recently, the company’s CEO, Mark Zuckerberg, estimated that “100bn pieces of content” flow through its servers every single day. Given that, looking for child abuse imagery makes searching for needles in haystacks relatively straightforward, even with the best of technology and intentions. But finding, flagging and reporting illegal content is just the start of the process needed to deal with those who create, disseminate and consume it. Law enforcement agencies have to be ready – and resourced – to locate, investigate and prosecute the wrongdoers. The NYT report suggests that, in the US at least, public authorities are absolutely swamped and under-equipped for the gargantuan tasks involved. Some agencies said that the only way of coping is by focusing only on the youngest victims. As for the idea that the figure of 18.4m might be a reflection of better detection techniques by social media companies – well, there’s a sting in the tail. One of the NYT reporters, Gabriel Dance, tweeted last week that nearly 12m of the 18.4m reports concerned imagery on Facebook Messenger. The reason Facebook was able to report them was because its computers could see the images. But the company says it is planning to extend encryption to Messenger, which means that illegal imagery will henceforth become invisible to Facebook (as content on its WhatsApp platform already is), and therefore unreportable. This will be good for Facebook, of course, because it can shed responsibility as a snake sheds its skin. But will it be good for society? You only have to ask the question to know the answer. The NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331 Yours sincerely Warning: that block signature at the foot of your emails might be significant. According to a report by the Register tech news site, a UK court has ruled that an email signature can sign a binding contract – and someone is £25,000 worse off as a result! War of words A new report by the Oxford Internet Institute reveals the (increasing) weaponisation of social media by nation states. It’s mostly about Facebook but – interestingly – the use of targeted advertising seems to be falling. Hungry for power Dining with Stalin: Branko Milanović has a fascinating post on his global inequality blog about the dangers of dining with a dictator.