Three people arrested in connection with the investigation into the deaths of 39 people whose bodies were found in the back of a lorry in Essex have been released on bail. They were bailed on Sunday as investigators considered the possibility that the lorry in Grays was part of a convoy carrying more than 100 people, and Vietnamese police took hair and blood samples to get DNA from relatives of people feared to be among the dead. The trio had been questioned on suspicion of manslaughter and conspiracy to traffic people. A 38-year-old man and a 38-year-old woman from Warrington were arrested in Cheshire on Friday, and a 46-year-old man from Northern Ireland was arrested at Stansted on the same day. Essex police said the man and woman from Warrington had been released on bail until 11 November, and the man from Northern Ireland had been bailed until 13 November. The driver of the lorry, Maurice Robinson, 25, was charged on Saturday with 39 counts of manslaughter and conspiracy to traffic people. He will appear at Chelmsford magistrates court on Monday, where he will also face 39 counts of conspiracy to assist unlawful immigration and money laundering. A man wanted in connection with the investigation was arrested at Dublin port on Saturday. Police in Belgium are continuing to search for the driver who delivered the trailer to Zeebrugge, the port it left before arriving in the UK. Families in Vietnam, where most of those who died are believed to have been from, have spoken about their fears for loved ones. Fr Anthony Dang Huu Nam, a Catholic priest in Nghe An province, said he was in contact with the family members of several suspected victims. “According to a few sources that have told me, in this case there were many people, more than 100 were on their way to a new life, but 39 died. A few families confirmed the deaths of their relatives who are the victims of this tragic journey,” he said. Pham Tra My, 26, has not been heard from since she sent a text on Tuesday night saying she was suffocating. “I am really, really sorry, Mum and Dad, my trip to a foreign land has failed,” she wrote. “I am dying, I can’t breathe. I love you very much Mum and Dad. I am sorry, Mother.” Pham is reported to have paid about £30,000 to people-smugglers in order to be brought into the UK. Her father, Pham Van Thin, told Sky News: “We tried to talk her out of it because it would be a very difficult journey for her as a girl. But she said: ‘If I don’t go, the family would stay in a very difficult situation because of the big debt.’ So she took a risk and decided to go, and we had to agree. “We all have been in shock. I cannot explain our pain and devastating feeling. We were all very devastated and sad.”