There were 86 minutes on the clock when Christian Pulisic decided it was time to silence all the noise about his slow start to life since joining Chelsea for £58m. The American winger had oozed menace after replacing Willian midway through the second half and did not look like a player struggling to cope with the unenviable weight of expectation when the opportunity arrived for him to deliver the incision missing from every other creative player on the pitch. It had been a frustrating night for the forwards on both sides. Dusan Tadic and Hakim Ziyech were ineffective for Ajax, who will look back at the moment when Quincy Promes had a goal ruled out by the tightest of VAR offside decisions during the first half, and for long spells it had seemed that Chelsea would rue their lack of care in front of goal. Callum Hudson-Odoi had undermined a bright display with his inability to provide a telling final pass, Tammy Abraham spent the evening crying out for better service and it was difficult not to feel that Frank Lampard’s side would have to settle for a point when Michy Batshuayi, on as a substitute, fluffed his lines late on, blazing over when it seemed easier to score. The match would come to be defined as the moment when Pulisic’s Chelsea career finally burst into life, though. The 21-year-old has not found it easy since arriving from Borussia Dortmund in the summer. He has looked lost at times and his opportunities have been limited in recent weeks. He was left out altogether when Chelsea won in Lille this month and has not started a Premier League game since August. He also struggled during the last international break, failing to last the 90 minutes when the USA lost to Canada. Americans have watched on with concern. However Pulisic is working for a manager who wants every member of his squad to feel valued, to feel that they are part of the family, even when they are watching from the sidelines. This was a champion night for Lampard, who can do no wrong at the moment, and it was hugely satisfying for him to see two of his less-celebrated players click to seal a win which gives Chelsea a wonderful chance of reaching the last 16. Consider this a victory for coaching. Two months ago Lampard criticised Batshuayi’s application, suggesting that the Belgian needed to work harder if he was to have any future at Chelsea. The message has hit home. Batshuayi has worked his way into Lampard’s good books in recent weeks and he did not disappoint when the chance arrived to atone for the earlier miss, firing Pulisic’s low cross in off the bar to stun Ajax, who came into the game top of Group H and the Eredivisie. It was Pulisic who had seized the initiative for Chelsea when they needed a moment of class, running at Ajax on the left before dragging the ball into the area for Batshuayi to beat André Onana with an emphatic finish. With the USA coach, Gregg Berhalter, watching from the stands, Pulisic looked determined to leave a positive impression and this was a fine demonstration of why Chelsea paid so much money to sign him. Stepping into the void left by Eden Hazard’s departure to Real Madrid has been daunting for Pulisic, a quiet and shy character, but there have been encouraging signs in recent weeks. He made Batshuayi’s goal in the 4-1 win over Southampton this month and he did well after coming on in the victory against Newcastle on Saturday, playing an important role in Marcos Alonso’s late winner. Pulisic’s improvement is further demonstration of the progress Chelsea are making under Lampard, whose young side showed tremendous character in defeating one of last season’s Champions League semi-finalists. There were four academy players in the Premier League side’s starting 11 and nobody epitomised their courage more than Fikayo Tomori, who recovered from an early error to deliver an impeccable performance alongside Kurt Zouma in central defence. Admittedly Chelsea rode their luck at times, especially when Edson Álvarez headed against a post, but they have won six games in a row now and Lampard’s youngsters showed plenty of technical prowess. Tomori produced some fine interventions at the back, especially when he halted a winding run from Ziyech with a calm challenge. Mason Mount caught the eye with his clever touches in midfield. Hudson-Odoi’s runs on the left were a constant threat, moreover, even if the 18-year-old’s end-product left much to be desired. There were also fine performances from the old guard, with César Azpilicueta a rock at right-back, but the spotlight would belong to Pulisic. He will hope this is just the start.