They say if you find a job you love, you will never work a day in your life. However, what they don’t tell you is that it works both ways. As someone lucky enough to have their passion as their profession, believe me when I tell you it means you never, ever switch off. At the cinema with my mates, just as I am losing myself in the action, a forest of British birch trees will suddenly appear in the backdrop of what is meant to be a camp of Congolese mercenaries. I’ll go on holiday and find myself fishing mystery leaves out of cocktails to see if I can identify them. I’ll be sat at lunch with non-plant people and if the conversation turns to food, I have the irrepressible compulsion to tell them facts about vegetables. Trust me, it’s a curse. Human eyes are great at distinguishing shades of green because it allows us to tell the toxic from the tasty But every so often this horticultural one-track mind does pay off. Back at university, I was introduced to a man who worked on the technology behind night-vision goggles. Apparently, one of the key reasons these displays are a sort of luminous Wizard of Oz shade of emerald green is that our eyes can detect more hues of green than any other colour, allowing us to see greater detail and garner more visual information from the same display. I began to wonder if that could really be true and, if so, could the very way we see the world be down to plants? So I looked into it and… the answer is yes. Evolutionary anthropologists theorise that human eyes are so great at distinguishing between shades of green because it allows us to more easily tell the toxic from the tasty. Being able to detect a broader range of differences between the key colour of plants confers upon us an advantage that is directly linked to our chances of survival. We are, in a very literal sense, built to be botanists. Given this realisation, I think it’s odd that so much of how we gardeners talk about colour seems predicated on the idea that the one colour we can see most shades of isn’t treated as a colour at all. I think this is a huge shame, for a number of reasons. First, because, in our ever-shrinking plots, using a palette dominated by the huge array of greens can give the illusion of space. This is because it slows how you visually navigate through the design, meaning the more you look, the more you see. Add a flash of fire-engine red to the same scheme and your eye is instantly drawn to it above all else, like visual fast food, causing you to gloss over everything else and move on. This reliance of bolder, brasher colours in garden design can also cause us to miss out on the other wonderful, visual-interest factors that plants provide in shape and texture. Finally, as non-green hues are generally seasonal, it can mean the downside to a hit of exhilarating red, yellow or blue for a few short weeks is months of visual come down. That is unless you have built in a backdrop of varying shades, shapes and textures of green to tide you over for the months between. So this is my plea to gardeners: please stop saying gardens dominated by green lack colour. For they are really the most colourful and, arguably, interesting of all. It all comes down to a matter of perception. Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek