Nicolas Pépé accepts he has had difficulties adapting to life at Arsenal but hopes his dramatic double intervention in Thursday’s 3-2 win over Vitória Guimarães will give him the confidence to thrive in the Premier League. Arsenal were on the brink of slipping to a deserved defeat against the Portuguese side before Pépé, introduced as a substitute in the 75th minute, struck with two brilliant free-kicks. The Ivorian had made a slow start since joining from Lille in the summer and is yet to score from open play, but it felt like an arrival for the club record signing. “Of course [I knew it would be harder],” Pépé said of his first few months in north London. “It is a league totally different to Ligue 1, with a different intensity. For me, I had to adapt quickly because expectations were high. Unfortunately it is not what I did at the beginning but I have always had the manager’s trust and the players have supported. I keep working hard to perform well and adapt to the Premier League.” He admitted scoring goals “is good for the confidence” and reiterated that Unai Emery, who has been acutely aware of the need to get Pépé up to speed, has always backed him. “Even if I hadn’t been decisive for a while, I always had the manager’s trust,” he said. “It is always important to have the manager’s faith.” Pépé spent much of the summer with Ivory Coast, whose Africa Cup of Nations campaign extended to mid-July. One factor for his slow start is likely to be the truncated preparation he was therefore required to undergo for Arsenal’s season. “I am not at my best physically because I didn’t have a proper pre-season like the others,” he said. “I was at the Africa Cup of Nations. I started little by little and the manager knew about it. I am trying to work hard to be stronger physically to perform well.” The key to a successful integration, he believes, is “to have good people around you”, especially with his English skills remaining a work in progress. “I have my family here with me so I could be good mentally, especially when things are not going well,” he said through an interpreter. “I rely a lot on them. For me, it was always going to be difficult to come here in the unknown, with a different language. So have my family with me is important.”