As the world’s premier galleries and exhibitors packed away their stalls at the end of this year’s Frieze art fair in London, the big takeaway for many experts was simple: painting is definitely not dead. New paintings by Kerry James Marshall, Oscar Murillo and Mark Bradford all sold for large sums; while Donna Huanca’s oceanic canvases and Sterling Ruby’s bright-hued paintings at the Gagosian gallery, created two of Frieze’s most talked about installations. Younger artists also embraced the format: the British-Nigerian artist Joy Labinjo was one of the new stars of this year’s event with her figurative paintings selling within two hours of the fair’s preview opening. The dominance of painting at this year’s Frieze shows the form is far from a spent force, according to experts who tell the Guardian that its return to prominence is influenced by a more cautious art market. “It’s a safer option for selling and buying,” says Jose Da Silva, who covered Frieze 2019 for The Art Newspaper. “Galleries are thinking ‘safety first’. This year it was back to being a shop window selling their wares, before there was more of a curatorial feel that was a bit more risky.” Da Silva says there was a lot more video and installation art at Frieze only three years ago, but in 2019 a lot had been replaced with painting and other “handmade” formats, such as textiles and ceramics. “They’re easier to transport, easier to store, you don’t have to plug it in, or get people to perform it if it’s a performance piece.” For buyers paintings traditionally offer less risk, and that – at a time of uncertainty over the Brexit economy – could help bolster interest in work by artists such as Kerry James Marshall, whose new painting Car Girl 2 sold during Frieze for $3.8m (£3.1m) to an American museum. James Green, a director at David Zwirner – the gallery that represents Marshall – says the faith that buyers put into painting helped Frieze to pass the first “real test” for the London art market with Brexit looming. Charlotte Burns, an art market analyst and the executive editor of the In Other Words podcast, says Frieze was going through a “cash and carry moment” – meaning that collectors are interested in paying cash and walking out of the fair with “safe bets”. “It’s not the time for expensive and ambitious and risky installations, but for small or medium scale painting,” she says. Paintings are not recession proof, she adds, “because nothing is, but they are more commodifiable”. Away from the markets and Frieze, many exhibitions are once again focusing wholly on the traditional medium. “Painting is neither dead nor headed in a single direction right now,” says Martin Herbert, who has curated Hayward Touring’s Slow Painting – its first survey show of British painting in nearly 30 years. Allison Katz, Simon Ling, Yelena Popova, Michael Armitage and the Turner Prize winner Lubaina Himid are all part of the exhibition, which opens on 24 October at the Leeds Art Gallery. Herbert believes painting has “been on an upswing” in the past decade, with artists including Lynette Yiadom-Boakye, Anselm Kiefer and Lisa Brice all finding success using the medium. He puts its popularity down to – in part – people wanting to disconnect from the high-paced online world. “I can see why viewers would want to connect with something that actively and pleasurably focuses the mind,” he says. “It’s very much the opposite of scrolling through social media.” Herbert says that if there is a move towards more traditional forms of painting it could be a reaction to another trend: art based on and inspired by the internet. “There was, a few years ago, a wave of art responding to the internet, and the art world is quite reactive. If there’s a renewed interest in painting, which I hope there is, it may be partly to do with its physicality.” Benjamin Senior, one of the artists featured in Slow Painting, says that traditional painting – especially figurative painting – has “had a boost in the last five years” as artists and crowds want to see something that is more personal. “At the moment we live in a time when people want to see things from someone else’s viewpoint – figurative painting allows that,” he says. “I think the two things join together: the market appeal is there because it’s a safe bet. From a non-market point of view it’s still incredibly appealing because we want to be part of an artist’s story.”