There’s nothing wrong with a game making you work hard before it yields rewards, but Ghost Recon Breakpoint takes that principle so far that, in its early stages at least, playing it is a chore. The latest iteration of Ubisoft’s future-soldier open-world shooter has plenty of good points, but those are marred by basic elements that so broken that the game feels like a backward step from Ghost Recon: Wildlands (2017). Two factors create the worst possible first impression: a glacially slow start to the main story and a refusal to highlight the importance of the key in-game weapons and gear systems, which have been more or less cribbed from Destiny 2. Once you learn to ignore the gun stats and instead merely upgrade and equip the ones that have a higher gear level, you might start enjoying Breakpoint. Until then, its early missions seem impossible. Ghost Recon Breakpoint’s storyline eventually perks up, though, and the way in which it cleverly splits is pleasingly nonlinear. You play Nomad, a Ghost from the US military helicoptered in, with a squad of colleagues, to an archipelago called Auroa, owned by tech entrepreneur Jace Skell. A US cargo ship anchored off the island has been bombed, so the Ghosts are tasked with finding out what happened. Nomad discovers that Auroa is in the grip of a dictatorship enacted by a private military company called Sentinel. Hooking up with a bunch of ex-Skell employees and indigenous Auroans, Nomad sets about disrupting Sentinel’s drone defence systems sufficiently to get a boat off the archipelago and return with a military force. Studded with flashbacks and double-dealing, the story unfolds like a well-executed spec-ops mission. But basic aspects of the game obstruct whatever fun there is to be had. Chief among those is the cover system, a vital element of any third-person shooter. (Breakpoint only drops into first-person view when you aim.) It automatically tries to snap you to any cover in the vicinity but is hopelessly erratic, often giving enemies the chance to spot you and raise the alarm. Plus, whenever you die, Breakpoint respawns you in seemingly random positions, so often you must hike for miles before having a chance to resume what you had been attempting to do. And while the giant map’s terrain is impressive, Nomad’s traversal of it is farcically clunky; at the bottom of every cliff you encounter, for instance, you may wish the game included a grappling hook. The feeling that you must overcome the game’s basic mechanics to complete missions is a shame, because Breakpoint isn’t all bad. There is a handy network of bivouacs around the map to fast-travel to and in which Nomad can apply temporary buffs, craft, change class and, crucially, spawn a helicopter. There is also a massive amount to do, with a welter of side quests, and the story missions are pleasantly varied and often require tactical about-turns. Ghost Recon’s gadgets are present and correct, including its signature drone for marking enemies, although the ability to auto-eliminate up to three marked enemies has been devolved to specialist sync-shot drones. As ever in a Ghost Recon game, you can drop into or out of co-operative play; if you assemble up to four squad-mates, you’ll find it easier and much more enjoyable. Breakpoint’s Ghost War online mode is also not bad. It pitches two teams of four Ghosts against each other, with clever equipment balancing and several nods to battle royale gameplay. It does get repetitive after a while, but Ubisoft has big post-launch expansion plans. Which is to presume that anyone feels inclined to carry on playing it for a prolonged period. Die-hard Ghost Recon fans will quickly work out how to overcome its more egregious aspects, but Breakpoint’s glaring flaws render play strangely joyless – in marked contrast to the exuberant mayhem of recent releases such as Borderlands 3. With its vast array of gear to collect, use for a bit, then dismantle, plus its gargantuan game world, Ubisoft may have been aiming to set Breakpoint up to be played for years after launch. Instead, it seems as if it has opted for quantity over quality.