What, as Falstaff might say, a lot o’ ’pother. The Royal Shakespeare Company made waves last week by announcing that it would no longer take sponsorship from BP – ending a controversy that has dragged on longer than the most agonised production of Hamlet. Three years ago, Tate became the first major arts organisation to distance itself from the energy giant, leading to calls for others to clean up their act. Activists mounted protests and stage invasions. In the summer, Mark Rylance disassociated himself from the RSC, claiming that, if the Bard had any say in the matter, he would turn his back on dirty money too. Last week, the company finally caved. Applause all round? Not exactly. Writing in the Times, Rylance’s fellow Shakespearean Simon Callow has delicately pointed out that the Bard’s own hands weren’t exactly clean. Not only did the playwright and his colleagues take money from the dictatorial regime of King James I, they contentedly played at court for the monarch and his cronies, few of whom were fussy about human rights. Shakespeare’s troupe even renamed itself in honour of the new monarch, becoming the King’s Men almost immediately after James took power in 1603. Shakespeare was hardly a model of corporate social responsibility; he was a canny operator with an instinct for what would fly – whether to get bums on seats (he earned a share of the profits in his theatres), or by cosying up to powerful folk. Early in his career he managed to offend the influential Oldcastle family with a reference in one of his plays. Rather than risk annoying them further, he rushed through a rewrite. Other playwrights at the time landed in prison, or with their noses slit. Much later, Shakespeare was one of the landowners implicated in plans to throw poor farmers off common fields in Stratford-upon-Avon. He also had a zest for suing people, especially if his own money was involved. No wonder a Smithsonian article published a few years back is headlined “William Shakespeare, Gangster”. But Shakespeare was also sharp enough to have things both ways. One of the plays he wrote for James I, Macbeth, notionally flatters his new boss’s Scottish lineage – but the story of a blood-crazed Scot who murders his way to the throne is hardly the most flattering of mirrors. And then there is King Lear, first performed at court on Boxing Day 1606: the heartwarming yarn of a monarch who falls out with his family and advisers, then loses his wits and wanders naked in the wilderness. Merry Christmas, your maj! Did the present-day RSC have the nerve to speak truth to its paymasters quite so brazenly, rather than just walking away? Apparently not.