Set in an unspecified future in which humankind has begun to colonise other planets, The Outer Worlds is easy to describe but in no way derivative. In essence, as a single-player, first-person action-RPG, it’s Fallout in space. There is a steampunk vibe, as well as art direction that harks back to 1950s sci-fi comics such as Dan Dare and The Eagle. But the look, feel and game world are distinctive and fully realised, and it addresses modern concerns, such as the disasters that happen when mega-corporations assume the role of governments. In the star system of Halcyon, the furthest colony from Earth, a giant ship called the Hope, packed with hundreds of thousands of colonists in suspended animation, has been abandoned in space for inexplicable bureaucratic reasons. Phineas Welles, a sort of dissident mad-scientist adventurer, locates it and wakes up one person on board: your character. In classic RPG fashion, you can decide which gender you want to be and allocate a bunch of skill points, before Welles whisks you off to a nearby planet where he has freelancer Captain Hawthorne standing by with a ship to help you. Unfortunately, Hawthorne proves not to be the brightest star in the galaxy and is crushed by your pod when it lands on his beacon. So you must work your way to his ship by performing helpful missions for the locals, before contacting Welles to find out what to do next. What ensues is a delightful sci-fi romp with razor-sharp writing, lashings of humour and immaculately observed characters that put most game franchises to shame. The gameplay is well crafted, too. Although its shooting engine – which provides an assortment of ever more exotic weaponry and features a time-slowing mechanic – does feel like Fallout, albeit simplified and honed, it is augmented by modding, skill and perk systems that avoid the baffling arcaneness that can afflict similarly ambitious RPGs. It’s not all just about shooting: you can employ stealth, often have to partake in mild puzzle-solving, and dialogue with other characters emerges as a key element. As you progress, you accumulate a band of assistants whose equipment and fighting styles you can influence, each of whom has some drama going on in which you can get involved, triggering stories that feel like mini-soap operas. Each of the planets in Halcyon is run by a different corporation – one churning out canned food, for example, and another meds – and you begin to encounter groups who have escaped the corporate yoke. All the planets, meanwhile, have a problem with aggressive outlaws and dangerous wildlife. Your overarching mission is to subvert the Board, which controls the various corporations and has clearly been running Halcyon into the ground, before reanimating the settlers on the Hope in the expectation that they will run Halcyon in a less venal, money-grabbing and authoritarian manner. Apart from the fabulous art and attention to detail in the myriad compelling missions (even the quests that stray into fetch-and-carry territory prove fun), what really marks out The Outer Worlds as a special experience is the way in which, right from the start, it somehow feels cosy, inviting and, despite its stylised air, curiously plausible. Its characters are so well-written that it’s easy to become emotionally involved with them, and the game plays on that by confronting you with occasional dilemmas. It’s huge and sprawling, with enough content to keep you immersed for weeks or even months, but it is also something of a holy grail for action-RPGs: although there is a complicated set of systems, with vast amounts of gear, armour and weaponry to loot, it is never complicated to play. The Outer Worlds is vital proof that mid-sized indie teams can take on the big guns at their own game, and leave them looking a little foolish. It provides the most enjoyable dose of escapism I have encountered this year.