For egg substitutes, recipes often call for labour-intensive or unusual ingredients. I tried a flax seed and water paste in brownies, and although they tasted nice, the flax and water ran out and separated. Why? What substitutes can you buy from standard shops?Niamh, Lewes, East Sussex While eggs can be hard to replace – they give us structure, moisture and the ability to bind ingredients – you can get pretty darn close, Niamh. The Great British Bake Off made aquafaba, AKA chickpea water, the poster child for egg substitutes when the tent went vegan for a week in 2018. Since then, that water lurking at the bottom of a tin, or after boiling up dried legumes, has been touted as the saviour of vegan cooking; hailed for its ability to be whipped, emulsified and act as a binder in sweet and savoury recipes. Why? In their Aquafaba cookbook, Sebastien Kardinal and Laura VeganPower write that it has the same ratio of water to protein and starch (that’s 90:10) as egg whites, which means meringues, “mayo” and Yorkshire puds are no longer off the vegan table. And any supermarket should stock tins of chickpeas. Stars don’t always live up to their hype, mind, and Bettina Campolucci Bordi, chef and author of 7 Day Vegan Challenge (out January), adds a word of caution: “Aquafaba can be a bit hit-and-miss, so it’s important that you use a whisk to aerate it properly.” While she gives it top marks for making “mayo” or an “omelette”, when it comes to baking, Bordi opts for flax or chia. The key, she says, is to leave the blitzed seed-and-water mix to sit for around 20 minutes, until it becomes gelatinous. However, Bordi prefers sweet potato puree for brownies as it “holds them together and gives it really good moisture”. But if that sounds too much faff, blitzed black or butter beans are worth a go. Katy Beskow, author of Five Ingredient Vegan (out November), says: “To avoid separation, ensure you use flax meal instead of whole flax seeds (two tablespoons) and whisk in two tablespoons of warm water before leaving it to stand for five minutes to thicken.” This, she says, will lead to brownie glory. Feast’s Meera Sodha prefers chia (mix three tablespoons of water and one tablespoon milled chia seeds, then leave to bloom): “I find flax doesn’t bind as strongly or retain moisture as well, which can result in a crumbly cake.” Chef Theo Randall, who offers a plant-based menu at London’s InterContinental, suggests mashed banana for brownies – “about one-third of a banana per egg” – or unsweetened apple or pear puree (if you take this route, Bordi recommends adding a splash of apple cider vinegar). Mashed banana also works well in muffins, says Beskow, while making a vegan “buttermilk” – any plant-based milk mixed with one teaspoon of cider vinegar – will give sponge cakes that classic texture. For savoury dishes, Randall uses slow-cooked vegetables and purees them for emulsifying. However, getting the ratio right may require some trial and error. Bordi favours beans and grains for savoury recipes (millet is top of her list), but silken tofu for whipping up a mousse, for a “scrambled egg”, or binding a quiche filling. Aquafaba also works well in quiches, or as an alternative to egg white in cocktails. It’s a brave new world out there, so it’s time to experiment. Now, I’m off to shake up an aquafaba whisky sour. • Have you got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.com