The final report by Indonesian investigators into the crash of a Boeing 737 Max plane flown by Indonesia’s Lion Air that left 189 people dead has found that problems with Boeing’s design, the airline’s maintenance of the jet and pilot errors contributed to the disaster. The report into the October 2018 crash criticised the US planemaker’s new anti-stall system, MCAS, that automatically pushed the plane’s nose down, leaving pilots fighting for control. The 737 Max’s MCAS system is also at the centre of separate investigations into an Ethiopian Airlines crash in March that killed 159 people. Boeing’s 737 Max planes were grounded worldwide following the crashes. The MCAS should be redesigned to include a backup and all systems that can take over flight control should receive closer scrutiny during certification, according to the final report published by the investigators on Friday. “The investigation considered that the design and certification of this feature was inadequate,” the report said. “The aircraft flight manual and flight crew training did not include information about MCAS.” The first Boeing 737 Max begins commercial operations with Malindo Air. Norwegian Air is also an early adopter of the new model, operating transatlantic flights. The model promises fuel efficiencies attractive to carriers. Lion Air flight JT610 crashes after making a sudden, sharp dive into the Java Sea 13 minutes after departing from Jakarta, Indonesia. All 189 people onboard are killed. That particular plane had been in use for less than three months. The plane's black box recorder reveals that the Lion Air plane had experienced problems with its airspeed indicators on its last four flights. Boeing issues revised instructions on how pilots should react to erroneous readings from “angle of attack” sensors, believed to be a key factor in the Lion Air crash. “In our view, the plane was not airworthy,” is the interim finding of the official investigation into the crash. The Indonesian transport safety agency did not pinpoint a definitive cause of the accident, but said Lion Air had kept putting the plane back into service despite repeatedly failing to fix a problem with the airspeed indicator. Flight ET302 crashes about six minutes after taking off from the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa, killing all 157 people onboard. The captain had reported difficulties, and flight radar data shows the aircraft was climbing erratically with an unstable vertical airspeed. The EU, Canada and the US all ground the Boeing 737 Max. Boeing itself issues a statement saying it “continues to have full confidence in the safety of the 737 Max”, but that “out of an abundance of caution and in order to reassure the flying public” it w recommending the grounding of the entire global fleet of 371 aircraft. The interim report into the Ethiopian Airlines crash finds that the pilots correctly followed Boeing’s emergency instructions, but were still unable to stop the plane’s nose repeatedly pointing down. The jet hit an airspeed of 500 knots (575mph), well above its operational limits, before cockpit data recordings stopped.  Airlines extend their ban on using the Boeing 737 Max after the US aviation regulator said it had identified a new potential risk with the plane. United Airlines becomes the latest carrier to extend its ban on using the Boeing 737 Max after the US aviation regulator said it had identified a new potential risk with the plane. In the wake of Boeing’s troubles, Airbus seems set to overtake it as the world's biggest planemaker. As Boeing reported 239 commercial plane deliveries in the first half of the year, a 37% fall, rival Airbus shipped 389 deliveries, up 28% on the same period last year. Pictures emerge of a Boeing 737 Max due to be delivered to Ryanair with the name 737 Max replaced by 737-8200 on the nose. The report also found that Boeing failed to detect a software error resulting in a warning light not working and failed to provide pilots with information about the flight control system. “The absence of guidance on MCAS […] in the flight manuals and pilot training made it more difficult for flight crews to properly respond to uncommanded MCAS,” said a presentation shown by investigators in Jakarta on Friday. Boeing has already said it plans to remake the system and provide more information about it in pilot manuals. The company still expects the troubled 737 Max jet to return to service by the end of the year. The final report said the first officer onboard was unfamiliar with procedures and had shown issues handling the aircraft during training. The report also found that a critical sensor providing data to an anti-stall system had been miscalibrated by a repair shop in Florida and there were strong indications it had not been tested during installation by Lion Air maintenance staff. Lion Air should have grounded the jet following similar faults on the plane’s previous flight, the report said, adding that 31 pages were missing from the airline’s October maintenance logs. Lion Air did not respond to a request for comment. The Indonesian investigators also made recommendations that regulators, including the US Federal Aviation Administration and its counterpart in Indonesia, improve their oversight over certification and maintenance. The report is one of multiple investigations, including those by US regulators and Congress, faced by Boeing into the crashes of what was previously its most popular plane. The crisis has led Boeing to set aside $4.9bn (£3.8bn) to cover the costs of the groundings. On Wednesday, the company announced it made $20bn in revenues during the third quarter of the year, down by more than a fifth from the previous year. Profits fell by more than 50%. On Friday, Boeing said it had implemented three new software fixes for the MCAS issues that would mean it was not dependent on a single sensor and that would allow a pilot to override it. Boeing has completed a certification test flight with the updates in place. Dennis Muilenburg, Boeing’s chief executive officer, who had the chairmanship removed this month, said: “On behalf of everyone at Boeing, I want to convey our heartfelt condolences to the families and loved ones of those who lost their lives in these accidents. We mourn with Lion Air, and we would like to express our deepest sympathies to the Lion Air family.” “We are addressing [Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee’s] safety recommendations, and taking actions to enhance the safety of the 737 Max to prevent the flight control conditions that occurred in this accident from ever happening again.” Boeing still expects to regain regulatory approval for the 737 Max “in the fourth quarter of 2019”. The company hopes to increase its rate of production of the aircraft – which it cut in the aftermath of the flight bans – from 42 per month to 57 per month by late 2020.