Jeremy Corbyn on Monday night kept the door open to backing a December election as Diane Abbott suggested Labour MPs have nothing to fear from going to the polls this winter. The Labour leader said he will consider Boris Johnson’s fresh proposal of an election on 12 December and scrutinise his new short bill when it is introduced on Tuesday. It came after MPs voted down Johnson’s original plan for a 12 December election through the Fixed-term Parliaments Act, which required the support of two-thirds of MPs. Johnson’s new plan only requires a simple majority to pass and he is hoping to get the support of the Liberal Democrats and SNP, who proposed something similar on Sunday. “We will obviously look [at] and scrutinise that bill and we look forward to a clear, definitive decision that no deal is absolutely off the table and there is no danger of this prime minister not sticking to his word,” Corbyn told the Commons, before adding: “Because he has some form on these matters.” He warned against taking the country out of the EU without any deal whatsoever, “knowing the damage it will do to jobs and industries all across this country”. There was speculation about Labour’s desire to back a December election after Abbott was reported to have said in a fiery meeting of the shadow cabinet that Labour MPs who stand in its way should “go fuck themselves”. This was later denied by the shadow home secretary, who tweeted that what she actually said during the lunchtime meeting in Westminster was: “In the run-up to 2017 election, some Labour MPs were crying in my office and in the tearoom as if it’s a fucking funeral, saying Jeremy should stand down, then they all got re-elected with increased majorities.” Her view that MPs have nothing to fear from an election in December is believed to be causing rifts within the shadow cabinet, with some expressing caution at “giving in to something that Johnson wants”, a source said. “There’s a feeling of ‘do we really want to be dancing to Johnson’s tune?’” they said. While Corbyn, the party chairman, Ian Lavery, acting shadow international development secretary, Dan Carden, and shadow secretary of state for employment rights, Laura Pidcock, are among those believed to be pushing for an election alongside Abbott, thereis still a strong faction within the shadow cabinet who want to explore a second referendum first. The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, and shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry, are all in favour of a “people’s vote”, although there is said to be an increasing feeling among that camp that an election is inevitable. “Everyone comes at this from their own perspective,” the source said. “Angela Rayner [shadow education secretary] will have a view about an election and what it means for the north, Lesley Laird [shadow secretary of state for Scotland] will have a different view on what it means for Scotland. “People approach this slightly from the perspective of where they are from. “There are definitely those champing at the bit for an election, whereas there are those who know one is coming but that December is a very difficult time to have an election.” Scores of Labour backbench MPs have deep concerns about a winter election because of the difficulty of campaigning on dark evenings, what is perceived as Labour’s unclear strategy on Brexit and the party trailing the Tories in the polls. After Monday night’s vote, the shadow transport secretary, Andy McDonald, said the proposed 12 December date would “disenfranchise” voters including students and cause “immense” difficulties getting to the polls. Asked if Labour would rule out a winter general election, he told Sky News: “I think it’s very unwise to be having a general election in the run-up to Christmas. “If it comes, it comes. We will get on with it and we will take our proposals to the people. I doubt the wisdom of holding it at this time of year, it’s not a wise choice.” A Labour source said Abbott had used far more passionate language than others in the meeting but that there was “no kick-back” against her comments on the election from the leadership.