Rugby league breaks new ground this weekend as the inaugural World Cup Nines takes place in Sydney. The tournament brings together 16 teams – 12 men’s sides and four women’s sides – and all 28 games will be broadcast live in the UK. NRL and Super League players such as Josh Addo-Carr, Daley Cherry-Evans, Sam Tomkins, George Williams and Shaun Johnson will be playing. And so will the much-travelled Taioalo “Junior” Vaivai. How excited are you to be playing for the USA on a such a big stage?“I’m just looking forward to playing against some of the best players in the world. Being in the same pool as Australia, New Zealand and Papua New Guinea is going to be really tough. But it’s also good for the team. It gives us an idea of where we’re at with our game, individually and as a nation. I’m looking forward to seeing our athletic boys showcase their talent when there’s a lot of space.” You were born in New Zealand and brought up in Australia. How did you end up playing for the US? “My mum’s mum was born in American Samoa so, fortunately, I qualify. Playing for USA has blessed me with the opportunity to play in the Super League and now in France with Toulouse Olympique. Toulouse are trying to get into the Super League and I’m grateful to be a part of the project.” The US squad is similar to the one that struggled at the last Rugby League World Cup in 2017 – a mix of overseas pros and domestic amateurs.“The last World Cup was pretty tough. I love that they’re trying to grow the game in the States. I’m all for it and I’ll do my bit to help. There’s big potential out there, a lot of athletes, and I hope it goes well. Unfortunately we lost the qualifier [against Jamaica for a place at the next Rugby League World Cup in 2021] last year but we’ve got another chance against the Cook Islands in November.” That qualifier is in Florida. Will you be meeting up with your cousin, Dwayne Johnson?“Yeah, I should be seeing him. His mum is my mum’s sister – Aunt Ata. We always try to catch up when we’re both in the same country.” You’ve said that Dwayne had a major influence your career?“I left the game in 2013 because of injuries and hated it. I was deciding whether to hang the boots up. To be honest, Dwayne just said to me to follow what I am passionate about. He said: ‘You know what, if you are really passionate about rugby league, give it one more shot.’ So I did and he was right. Here I am!” Was good to catch up and to spend some quality time with the cousin @therock it was very inspiring to hear some of his experiences. He's a great role model and is a very HUMBLE man #aiga #miami #verybigarms #veryhumbleman A post shared by  Junior Vaivai (@junior.vaivai) on Nov 30, 2015 at 4:08pm PST You broke through at South Sydney and played NRL for Penrith. Then what happened?“I tore my ACL three times. If you’re familiar with the ACL rehab, you can imagine what doing it three times did to me. I didn’t know what to do. I had a kid, so I was screwed. About three years later I just wanted to play locally. I went out to Wests Devils in the Illawarra comp and I got to enjoy my game again. They really helped me and pushed me to chase the USA team and get a crack in the World Cup.” And your performances at the 2017 World Cup led to a Super League offer from Hull KR ...“They did. Christmas Eve 2017, I got the phone call from Tim Sheens.” What a present!“Yeah, but I was ready to get stuck into my bacon and eggs, which I’d spent all morning cooking. Bacons, eggs, sausages, leftover chicken, taro – everything you could ever think of, an English-slash-Samoan breakfast! I was just about to take my first bite and my phone rings and I was like: ‘What? Not now!’ He said he needed a left centre. I wasn’t really paying attention. I was just ‘alright mate, no worries, speak to you soon,’ and hung up so I could start my breakfast. Then my brother said: ‘Did you say that was Tim Sheens? The Tim Sheens?’ I hadn’t realised who it was! I wasn’t rude, I was just focussed on my bacon and eggs and rushed the conversation because I was hungry! So I called back to apologise and explain. Luckily he didn’t take offence.” You did well under Sheens, but things went downhill when Tony Smith took over.“Tim was a very good coach who helped my game so much. I’m lucky to be able to call him a friend now, too. Anyone lucky enough to be coached by him would say that. Under Tony Smith I was out of favour, and that’s OK. I was enjoying my time [on loan] at York. The coach there [James Ford] is great and so are the boys.” Toulouse, Hull KR and York could all have ended up in the Championship in 2020. How did you decide to move to Toulouse?“It was a big decision and we had to make it pretty quick. It was near the transfer deadline so there was a lot of movement. I had a look at Toulouse’s roster and thought they had a good chance of going up. I phoned a few people who have been there in the past for some advice, then I was happy to accept their offer. I’m confident with the talent and the coaches we have. I can help us get up into Super League.” You’ve played all over the world. Do you have a go-anywhere mindset now?“Definitely – while I’m still able to play! I’m not getting any younger [Vaivai turns 30 in January]. I’m coming towards the end of my career. Rugby league has given me so many opportunities. Earlier in my career I took it for granted.” Are you enjoying Toulouse?“Yes, but the language barrier can be hard at times. Toulouse have been very welcoming and look after us. My son has just started in school there. He’s nine, my daughter just turned two. I’m grateful that my kids and partner get to experience this with me. Not many people can say they’ve had the experience of living in France.” What else did you do when you played part-time in Australia?“I was a personal trainer. I have a passion for helping people with mental health problems or low self-esteem. There’s a lot of people too concerned about other people’s opinions about them. A friend and I created The Wake-up Call, where you train for four weeks then go over to Fiji to do different activities. We go to less fortunate areas. When people see life over there – and how happy people are even though they have next to nothing – a lot of them grow an appreciation of what they have.” What drove you to do that?“I like to use my platform to encourage people, especially young people. At school you have your troubled ones who want to be the class clown. There’s always a reason behind it but, unfortunately, we don’t get to pick the cards we are dealt in life. It’s how we play those cards that will decide our outcome. A lot of people are dealt some tough cards and decide to take the easy way. There is no easy way in this life. I encourage kids to stay in school and enjoy it. The real world of paying bills and mortgages is hard and mundane. So enjoy school, find something you’re passionate about and chase your dreams.” Do you think you’ll go back to that after rugby?“Yes. I want to open a gym where 16 to 18 years olds can train for free – however their homework has to be done first. My vision is that there will be a school room where they can do their homework. I’m not the smartest dude but I know when someone’s doing their homework or not! The only time I went to school was when rugby league was on. But I’m able to give back to the young community now.” You had some troubled times as a young man…“As I look back, I’m grateful for my downs – when things went very wrong in my life – because that has moulded me into the person I am today. If things don’t happen in your life, you’ll never learn and will really need help to figure out what you need in life. I hear people say: ‘I’m young, I’ve got time.’ But time goes very, very quickly. Time is precious. What you do with it is very important.” Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook