John Humphrys is the first to admit he doesn’t deal well with authority. He inherited it from his father, who refused to use the service entrance at the grand houses where he worked as a French polisher and, as a child, once watched his aunt get a humiliating dressing-down from the vicar for missing church. Humphrys had his own brush with condescending authority figures when he was in hospital with a cyst on his spine at 13, and an “arrogant posh bastard consultant” told his retinue of trainees it was because he didn’t wash regularly. “I don’t like being defined or told what to do, whoever is in charge,” he notes, a stance that has proved useful for grilling politicians (he has interviewed eight prime ministers), though it has also landed him in hot water. His memoir mixes engaging snapshots of his early career and analysis of the evolution of broadcasting with diatribes and petty score-settling. The early chapters tell of his passage from teen lackey on the Penarth Times in Wales, where his main task was standing outside the local church taking the names of those attending weddings and funerals, to being the first journalist on the scene at the Aberfan disaster, near Merthyr Tydfil, in which 116 children and 28 adults died after a colliery tip collapsed. Later he became a BBC foreign correspondent, reporting on the 1971 war in Pakistan, the military coup in Chile in 1973, and the Rhodesian bush war, which culminated in the election of Robert Mugabe in 1980 and where, for his own safety, Humphrys was encouraged to buy a submachine gun and put it on expenses. In Rhodesia, for his own safety, Humphrys was encouraged to buy a submachine gun and put it on expenses After a stint back home as a newsreader, he took a job on Radio 4’s flagship news programme, Today, and stayed for 32 years (he retired last month). Humphrys quickly became the bête noire of senior politicians and anyone else who found themselves at the sharp end of his combative interviewing style. Tracey Emin called him “the rudest man in Britain”, while Jonathan Aitken accused him of “poisoning the well of democratic debate”. Following a ferocious grilling of the social security secretary Harriet Harman over cuts to single parent benefits in 1997, the Labour communications director David Hill threatened to boycott the programme over “the John Humphrys problem”. He riled listeners, too, as evidenced by a letter from a man who longed for the day “when Mother Nature finally takes the old codger out”. Humphrys takes such missives with good humour, though nonetheless offers a robust defence of his methods. “I cannot deny that I enjoy arguing,” he writes. “Nor would I deny that I approach people in power – all of them – with a pretty strong dose of scepticism.” There are moments, too, where he admits to making errors. He was, he says, unnecessarily rude to John Hume, the leader of the Social Democratic and Labour party in Northern Ireland, in the late 1980s, and misjudged Thatcher, whom he tried and failed to rattle in his first interview with her, asking a question about her faith. But on others he stubbornly doubles down. By far the most unedifying moment in A Day Like Today is his recollection of the Carrie Gracie row regarding equal pay at the BBC, and the leaked conversation between Humphrys and the corporation’s North America editor Jon Sopel in which the pair joked about taking a pay cut. Humphrys dismisses it as “a bit of banter” and puts the boot into Eddie Mair, who he believes stitched him up with his coverage of the story on the Radio 4 show PM. Noting furiously that “I had apparently joined the ranks of the world’s great misogynists”, Humphrys goes on to list the supposedly good deeds he has done for women. They include pronouncing publicly that the next director general of the BBC should be female and, ludicrously, the time when he was photographed with a group of Today women to mark the programme’s 60th birthday. He calls these “inconvenient truths to my accusers”. There are, though, inconvenient truths regarding his on-air pronouncements that he himself overlooks, such as his lament, following allegations of sexual impropriety and abuse in Westminster, that MPs might no longer be able to date their assistants, and his recent suggestion that women are better at taking care of children than men. Elsewhere, along with expressing irritation at media studies degrees, social media, vox pops and political branding, Humphrys is damning about BBC management and exasperated by what he views as the corporation’s “institutional liberal bias” and “groupthink mentality”. While he makes apt points about the role of the BBC in public life, his old-man-yells-at-cloud shtick gets wearying. Tetchiness and irascibility are all part of the Humphrys package, of course, and taking the powerful to task, whether prime ministers or his former employers, is in his blood. Still, one is left with a sense of the author having not so much set the record straight as confirmed the suspicion that he is increasingly out of touch. • A Day Like Today is published by William Collins (£20). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.