The American artist Kara Walker brings a bold, poetic energy to the clunky art-garage of the Turbine Hall for the annual Hyundai-sponsored installation. She presents just two pieces: a towering, faux-Victorian fountain and a smaller sculpture shaped like an oyster. Both are immediately charming, yet they tell a sorrowful story about slavery, colonisation and “merchant trade” (to use a euphemism that Henry Tate’s sugar company might itself have preferred). The elegant tiers, sweeping ovals and prettily pattering water of the huge fountain make for a fine pastiche of Victorian memorials. Public monuments were built by the victors of history to celebrate their feats, legitimise their abuses, exult in their spoils and anchor their power. Walker’s monumental rebuke rises up palely: white supremacy built on black degradation. She makes visible the black women, children and men who were exploited and erased, and does so in a sardonic reclamation of the perpetrators’ own visual language. The human figures that decorate her fountain are emaciated and bedraggled, abandoned, thrashing in misery, contorted and abject. Others are swollen with greed and pride, dressed in ill-fitting nautical costumes or a caricatured ensemble of imagined African “national dress”. All caper round the fountain in a horrifying, mocking death dance. The fountain’s greyish-white surface is like a decayed plaster of Paris mantelpiece ornament or a gone-off wedding cake: the rot after the celebration. It frustrates me that a woman artist of colour is expected to continually “tackle” racism and misogyny Visitors with even a passing familiarity with art history and visual culture will recognise the classical and folkloric allusions to discarded, damned creatures drowning and starving; slave-driving captains of industry puffed up to a cartoonish degree; Britannia’s multi-sailed merchant ships; natural bounty being scooped up by intrepid exploiters; and the fetishised rendering of black women as “Mother Africa” figures, bountiful of hip and lip and bosom and rump. At the top of the fountain a woman rises up triumphantly – except her clothes are ripped off, her breasts bared and her throat slit, spurting water like blood to fill up the fountain. One of the other sculpted forms around the fountains is a tree with a noose dangling from one branch. The lynching tree itself is splayed and flayed like a human body struck by lightning, a martyred and violated form with an unmistakably vaginal cleft. Walker integrates the stories of black suffering, female suffering and high art history itself, for the woman/tree also resembles a creature of myth, a punished victim turned to stone by a curse. The text printed on the wall in wild west “wanted” poster font calls for our attention like a circus ringmaster: the two works, it says mockingly, are presented as a “gift and talisman… an allegorical wonder”, a story of “Afrique and Albion”. The register unites pioneer pomp with music hall theatricality. It demonstrates Walker’s feel for mass culture and kitschy allure, carnivalesque anarchy, funhouse horror and postmodern irreverence. The sharks that slump out of the fountain remind us of the perils of voyages by sea, mix images of blood and water, make reference to Damien Hirst’s work from the 90s and have the schlocky stiffness of Jaws, all at once. The Turbine Hall is a tough space and the fountain is plonked at the end. The other, much smaller piece, is awkwardly parked higher up the slope. It’s shaped like an oyster, greeting you like an amuse-bouche before the rich feast of allusions that is the fountain. The oyster is sensitively moulded, rising like a protective hood. In the nub where a pearl should be is a child’s soft face, pouring tears that dribble down its cheeks. Looking at this piece at a time when headlines abound of police officers killing unarmed young black citizens, one feels sorrowful and protective. There is a heartbreaking vulnerability to the face, with its beseeching eyes, delicately waved hair and the childlike gap between the teeth. The child, like the pearl, should be treasured and protected; but the lived experience of racism, like the pearl, develops over time through a slow, dark accretion and a hardening realisation. As the first black woman to headline at the Turbine Hall, Kara Walker is of course to be celebrated. But it frustrates me as both a critic and an artist (making films and stills, mainly) that a woman artist of colour is expected to continually “tackle” racism and misogyny, diversity and inclusion, slavery, colonialism, oppression and the suffering self. Nonetheless, Walker’s sophisticated work here is both thought-provoking and entertaining. The themes of refuge denied, forced movement, confinement, cruel disdain, peril and death at sea are just as relevant now as centuries before. Past, present and future, English and American, African and European stories elide into one. The works are not monuments to history but a warning for a frightening world in which we are failing to learn the lessons of the past or stop its repetition. • Kara Walker: Fons Americanus is at the Turbine Hall, Tate Modern, London, until 5 April 2020