‘Have you ever been to Disneyland?” Rob Beckett asks, buzzing with the energy of a small child as he bounds into a bar near the Guardian. “I’ve just come back from the one in Paris. My girls’ faces when they saw Daffy Duck ... it was magical!” Talking over chips and mayonnaise, Beckett is as wholesome and family-oriented in person as he is in his act. “I lead quite a boring life really,” he assures me in his chipper, estuary voice. “I go to work, come home, look after my kids and go Nando’s. It’s not like, ‘Oh my god, remember that crazy time I grew up in a brothel!?’”Beckett is, of course, downplaying his own appeal in a way that only primetime TV personalities can. Now 33, he only landed his first TV gig in 2012, having started comedy three years before that, but now he rarely seems to be off screens, a pre-watershed geezer who can also slip into the post-9pm slots with ease. You can find him doing his thing on 8 Out of 10 Cats, where he trades barbs with host Jimmy Carr, often based around Beckett’s distinctive teeth. He’s also a fixture of Celebs Go Dating, on which he provides a “harsh, pisstake-y” voiceover that knowingly prods contestants such as Blue’s Lee Ryan. He also does Saturday night extravaganzas like the Beeb’s recently cancelled All Together Now, which he compered alongside Geri Horner. With his Brylcreemed blond hair and those trademark gnashers – larger than average, though smaller in real life – he has an air of relatability. It’s a winning combination, which has seen him swiftly join the ranks of Michael McIntyre, Jon Richardson and Jack Whitehall as one of those TV comics-cum-hosts we seem to see more often than our own families.Although he sounds as if he could have been genetically engineered by TV commissioners, Beckett is quite real. He doesn’t mix too much with the celeb crowd – though he has, he says proudly, become pals with Martine McCutcheon, who lives close to him. He’s still based in London, near to the suburb, Mottingham, where he and his four brothers grew up. His is a big, happy, working-class family, providing Beckett with much of his early material – including a bit about how he much preferred eating dinner off his lap and watching You’ve Been Framed at his folks’ house to talking politics in his girlfriend’s family’s conservatory. He studied tourism management at Canterbury Christ Church University (“it was the Blair years, everyone went”) before moving back home, working in a pub, flogging bags of compost alongside one of his brothers at Columbia Road flower market in London, and eventually temping in an office. Inspired by a range of comics from Peter Kay to Eddie Murphy, Beckett tentatively ventured to open mic nights and competitions in London, and was soon gigging five nights a week. “It was just a hobby that got out of hand, basically,” he explains. Before shows, he says, he would “go and get the £1 sushi from Tesco and sleep on the toilet floor at the office I worked at”.Despite a gruelling time at the Amused Moose Laugh Off competition in Adelaide in 2010 – evading tram fares and playing to empty rooms – Beckett was now serious about pursuing comedy. He headed for the bright lights of the Edinburgh festival on his return, performing a show, Summer Holiday, which focused mostly on his family and his girlfriend, now wife, Louise. While he gained acclaim (one review said his show “meanders between the brazen and the subtle”), unlike most new-ish comics, he wasn’t destined to spend the next few years traipsing up and down the M1. Instead, the bigwigs called, and he was soon back in Australia, presenting the I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here companion show, Extra Camp, alongside seasoned reality TV hosts Joe Swash and Laura Whitmore. I'm a Celeb is the hardest job on telly for a newbie – you're in a jungle working nights Does he ever wish his ascent had been less rapid? “Sort of,” he says tentatively. “But I’ve not met anyone who’s said they really enjoyed it taking longer to get to that point. Maybe it wouldn’t have been so stressful and full-on, but it’s never the perfect time to do anything.” Besides, I’m a Celeb wasn’t the kind of thing he could bluff. “It’s the hardest job in telly as a newbie,” he says. “You’re writing standup every night on your own and presenting live TV. It’s like a really tough apprenticeship in front of two million people.” Plus, he adds with a laugh and a panicked look, “you’re in a jungle working nights”.It was a huge opportunity for Beckett, but also one that opened his eyes to the reality of online trolling. The team on the show, he says, “looked after us really well. But it was when Twitter was taking off, and the abuse I’d get … I was getting 1,000 followers every night and hundreds of messages. I’d read every one of them, like, ‘You’re shit’, ‘You’re fat’, ‘You’re unfunny’. I was in a really bad way after that.” It was at this point that Beckett sought NHS counselling, as well as getting into meditation and mindfulness. “I’m so glad I did that early doors because it gave me coping strategies. Even now, if you do get chucked on telly, the first couple of years, everyone goes at you until they just get used to seeing you. It’s not healthy to read such extreme opinions of yourself – it’s not like you’re a brand like Coca-Cola or McDonald’s because it’s so personal.” Ironically, his impressive new gig had taken away one of his best defences. As a standup, he would open his early sets by reeling off lists of “lookalikes”, among them the Honey Monster, Princess Diana and Pat Butcher, to get ahead of the heckles. “People think Twitter’s the problem but it’s not, it’s people. When I was doing standup, I couldn’t get through a set without someone going, ‘You look like someone,’ or ‘Hello teeth!’ and being heckled. So I used to address it at the top.”While performing live has its own challenges, Beckett is keen to stress how much he’s looking forward to his upcoming tour, Wallop, which focuses more on his own family and fatherhood. “I can’t imagine a time I don’t want to do standup,” he says. “It sounds quite mad, but once I’ve got a show up and running, walking out on stage is the easiest part of my day. All I’ve got to do is talk until they laugh and then I stop, let them laugh and talk. It’s a bit like meditation really.” He started out as a working-class comic, now he is just a comic. Would he still make jokes about, say, the “chavvy” way his family ate dinner watching dogs fall in puddles on TV? “In my new show, I say I’m related to some absolute scum,” he says with a laugh. “But everyone is in a way, int they? I don’t think I’ve ever directly called my family chavvy but sometimes you use a word that an audience will know or understand. And I can be quite chavvy – but then I don’t necessarily see it as that big of a negative.” In any case, Beckett is keen to emphasise how important his parents have been to him, as both a source of material and of support, especially in the middle-class world of comedy. When he was sleeping on that toilet floor, it was his dad – a black-cab driver – who would give him a lift home. “I didn’t have the connections or the money, but I had the ultimate backing of my parents,” he says. “That was worth so much more than, ‘Here’s a phone number’ or ‘You can stay at someone’s flat in Edinburgh’.” It’s clear he adores his parents; in 2017 he made a sweet – if not rapturously received – pilot called Static, in which Alison Steadman and Phil Davis played characters based on his mum and dad, while Beckett played an exaggerated version of himself. When he’s got more time, he says, the sitcom is something he’s keen to return to. He speaks excitedly about the importance of working-class narratives getting on TV, from The Royle Family and Phoenix Nights to newer offerings such as People Just Do Nothing, Tez Ilyas’s late night chat show The Tez O’Clock Show and Joe Gilgun’s comedy Brassic.That will have to wait, though. Right now, Beckett is busy with the tour and other TV commitments, the latest of which – a show gently ribbing celebrities’ online mess-ups, Savage Socials – has just begun on E4. He’s itching to get back on stage he says, with a show that offers an escape from a seemingly apocalyptic world. “There’s no politics – it’s literally me being funny for an hour and a half. It’s a distraction rather than an answer to your worries.” He polishes off the chips before continuing. “Really,” he says. “I just want to take your mind off things – you’ll go home and go, that was fun weren’t it?” While some might roll their eyes at such earnestness Rob Beckett – more likely to be at Nando’s than Nobu – knows his crowd. “I know how hard it is to get a babysitter, get dressed and go out again after work. I’m like, right, I owe you lot a good show.” Rob Beckett’s tour starts at Brighton Concert Hall on 10 October. Rob Beckett’s Savage Socials is on E4 on Sundays.