Australia got its 2019 World Cup campaign back on track with a 45-10 victory over Uruguay, but the match was again overshadowed by controversial refereeing decisions. The Wallabies had two players yellow-carded in the first 28 minutes as the intense crackdown on high tackles at this tournament continues unabated. Australia coach Michael Cheika admitted after the 29-25 defeat to Wales he was “embarrassed” and didn’t understand what the rules around contact were anymore. This match would only have left him feeling even more confused. After the Wales loss, the Wallabies had to register a win to stay in the hunt for a quarter-final berth. And they did just that in Oita, the bonus point victory putting them momentarily on top of Pool D, while resplendent in their green-dominated Indigenous jersey. Tevita Kuridrani and Dane Haylett-Petty finished with two tries each and Christian Lealiifano landed five of his seven shots at goal. Australia made 12 changes to the starting XV that appeared against Wales with 19-year-old winger Jordan Petaia making his debut. Four years ago the Wallabies and Uruguay met in Birmingham and the Australians finished 65-3 winners, running in 11 tries at the home of Aston Villa. It was not as one-sided this time, owing to the improvement between World Cups made by the tiny South American country and at times the sloppiness of their opponents. It took the Wallabies just five minutes to trouble the scorers. A kick caused havoc near the Uruguayan try-line and the ball was simply shifted to the right for Haylett-Petty to dive over untouched. Felipe Berchese added a penalty goal for Uruguay eight minutes later, after Michael Hooper was penalised for a high tackle. Australia was lumped with another contentious refereeing call soon after when Adam Coleman was marched for a hit on Manuel Ardao. Coleman’s contact was with the shoulder first, however with the video referee’s intervention a constant theme during this tournament the lock was carded, much to the disbelief of the Wallabies. In the 18th minute Hooper was held up over the try-line as Australia struggled to break down the committed Uruguayan defence. Petaia got over the line six minutes later as the continual pressure paid off. The Wallabies’ tackling came under the microscope once more in the 26th minute when Kurtley Beale was penalised and then Lukhan Salakaia-Loto was yellow carded for a high shot. Despite only having 14 players on the field, the Australians grabbed their third try via Kuridrani after a sweeping backline play ended with Petaia putting him in space. Uruguay almost hit back right before half-time with a sniping run from Tomas Inciarte. The centre touched down after he was released by a brilliant offload from Manuel Diana, but to Australia’s relief the try was denied by the TMO for a player offside in the build up. The Wallabies gave away nine penalties in the first half but in the second half their discipline and execution improved. Adam Ashley-Cooper and Taniela Tupou came on after the break, with Allan Alaalatoa and Petaia replaced. Tupou made an instant impact with some bulldozing carries as the Uruguayans tired. In the 45th minute the impressive Kuridrani collected his second try of the match when he broke through off Lealiifano’s pass. Seven minutes later substitute Will Genia touched down from Jack Dempsey’s offload. Kuridrani was denied a hat-trick when he was held up over the try-line, but James Slipper barged over straight after for his maiden Test try. With Australia stepping up a gear and exerting their dominance, Haylett-Petty notched his second of the afternoon from Genia’s well-timed grubber kick. Three-minutes from full-time Uruguay were finally rewarded for their endeavour when Diana crossed for a try from short range.