Parts of central Paris were sealed off on Thursday after an employee at the city’s police headquarters stabbed and killed four colleagues before being shot dead. The man, who worked in the technology department, reportedly stabbed a colleague in his office with a ceramic knife before turning it on others, with the last attacked in the courtyard outside the historic building near Notre Dame Cathedral. The victims were three men and one woman, and included three police officers and one police administrator. Officials did not say anything about the motive for the attack and they said they were still trying to discover if there was a terrorism link. Confirming the deaths, the interior minister, Christophe Castaner, said from the scene: “He worked with these colleagues and had never shown any behavioural difficulties or anything to raise an alarm.” “Our thoughts are with their families and of those who were injured ... the news regarding the injured is reassuring. “The inquiry has started. I am thinking of the police here and around France. Everyone is shocked and profoundly hurt by what has happened here.” The French president, Emmanuel Macron, and the prime minister, Édouard Philippe, both visited the scene. The man, aged 45, had worked in the technology department since 2003. Public prosecutor, Rémy Heitz said an investigation had been opened into “murder and attempted murder of public agents” and that anti-terrorist investigators were evaluating what had happened, for any terrorist links. “Searches are currently taking place at the suspect’s home and other investigations will be taking place in the next few hours.” The attackers wife had been brought into police custody but not charged, the Paris prosecutor’s office said. Loic Travers, a union official, said he was unaware of any problems that could have pushed the “ordinary administrator” to kill his colleagues. “The four victims were police officers. There is a chaotic atmosphere in the prefecture … obviously it’s shocking. The colleagues who saw what happened will be marked by this for the rest of their careers.” Emery Siamandi, a prefecture employee, said: “I was on the stairs when I heard shots and thought it was not normal. After I saw three police officers crying and other colleagues crying. At first I thought a police officer had killed himself; afterwards I learned someone had killed the officers. The officer who killed the man was crying.” The attack came a day after thousands of officers marched in Paris to protest against low wages, long hours and an increasing suicide rate in their ranks. French media quoted police union officials suggesting the motive may have been personal. The anti-terrorist brigade has not been brought in to investigate, suggesting the authorities do not consider the attack is linked to terrorism. French police have been targeted by extremists several times in recent years. In 2017, a gunman opened fire on the Champs-Élysées in central Paris, killing one officer before he was shot dead. In 2016, an attack inspired by Islamic State killed a police officer and his partner, an administrator, in front of their child at their home outside Paris.