Formula One drivers believe qualifying for the Japanese Grand Prix cannot take place on Saturday if the Suzuka circuit is hit by Typhoon Hagibis. The FIA and F1, however, will not make a decision on any postponement until Friday. Lewis Hamilton and others have backed their position after Saturday’s Rugby World Cup matches, England v France and New Zealand v Italy, were cancelled well in advance of the expected deluge. The super typhoon is expected to be approximately 200km wide when it reaches Japan and is predicted to hit Suzuka with winds of up to 160mph and bring exceptionally heavy rain. Drivers were unequivocal that they could not take to the track under such conditions but confident that the right decision will be made about whether and when to hold qualifying. “I think it’s pretty clear if the typhoon is going to come here there’s no way we can drive,” said Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc. “But off my previous experience – and I’ve only done one year and a half in F1 – they’ve always been quite safe with the conditions.” Romain Grosjean, director of the Grand Prix Drivers’ Association, echoed Leclerc’s opinion. “There’s supposed to be gusts of wind at 120kmh on Saturday and if that is the case I don’t think it’s safe to be on track or in the grandstands or anywhere,” he said. “I don’t think there’s any point in discussing it. I believe they are going to take the best decision.” Safety will be of paramount importance. Five years ago at this race the accident which ultimately led to Jules Bianchi’s death occurred during very wet conditions inflicted by Typhoon Phanfone. Qualifying has been postponed until Sunday morning twice before, moreover, in 2004 and 2010. Contingency plans are already in place to do so again. “They are doing the utmost they can,” Hamilton said. “I am sure they are preparing, are aware that it is coming, and have procedures in place. “It is cool when the format changes. You have to enter into two different mindsets, and two different rhythms. It is a different challenge so I like that.” The FIA and F1 are hopeful, however, that the typhoon may yet not make an impact on Suzuka. They are holding meetings with the circuit and local authorities and will await developments before changing the weekend’s timetable. Their stance is backed by Sebastian Vettel: “I don’t think anybody wants to put lives in danger. There is a forecast, but how many times has a forecast changed?” he said. “We will see what happens as the weekend goes on. It makes sense that when we have more evidence tomorrow night to put together a proposal or an action for qualifying then.”