Most sports fans can remember a moment of high emotion, disappointment or despair when they asked themselves a few questions. Is it really worth it? Why do I bother? Could a brief, giddy high at some unknown point in the future ever be worth the miserable depths of the low that I’m feeling right now? If your sport is racing, then a horse such as Enable has the answers. Enable is not the best racehorse of the past 10 years. That honour falls, beyond any doubt, to Frankel, and will continue to do so, in all likelihood, for decades to come. Enable is not the best horse to carry the pink, green and white colours of Prince Khalid Abdullah. That’s Frankel, too, with Dancing Brave not far behind. This time last year, officially at least, Enable was not even the best horse in John Gosden’s stable. Cracksman and Roaring Lion finished the year with a higher mark in the international ratings. But that, in a sense, is part of her appeal. Frankel’s dominance in his final season at the track was so complete that he started at 1-20 for one of his five starts and 1-10 for two more. There was astonishment and awe when he went to the track, but very little nervous anticipation. Not so at Longchamp on Sunday afternoon, when Enable will attempt to become the first horse to win the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe three times. If Enable succeeds, she will retire to the paddocks with a career record of 14 wins from 15 starts, close to Frankel’s perfect 14 from 14. In terms of prize money earnings, however, she has already banked three times as much as Frankel and a third Arc success would take her career total close to £12m. Why? Because while Frankel never left England, Enable has gone on her travels, rarely returning to the same track twice. Even her first two Arcs were won at different tracks, as the 2017 race was held at Chantilly. When she won the King George at Ascot in July, it was the first time that she had won anywhere twice – 13 races and 12 wins into her career. She has won Group One events in Britain, Ireland, France and the United States, where she became the first Arc winner to follow up at the Breeders’ Cup meeting the same year, with a typically brave defeat of Magical last November. It is an important aspect of what makes Enable so special. She does not have the astonishing, impregnable talent of a freak such as Frankel, but her constitution, attitude, courage and no-nonsense unflappability more than make up for it. Time after time, she turns up and does her stuff, and by less than a length in four of her past five starts. She has needed a little luck along the way, most memorably when she held on by a nose from Sea Of Class in last year’s Arc after the runner-up was forced to come wide and late from an outside draw. But that only adds to the drama and the vivid memories of what is already one of the great Flat racing careers. From a fan’s point of view, Enable has the perfect jockey in Frankie Dettori, who has already equalled his best year at the highest level with 16 Group One successes and will ensure that 2019 exceeds even his glory days with the Godolphin operation if Enable takes the total to 17 on Sunday. Dettori was clearly emotional after Enable’s win in the Yorkshire Oaks in August. “Everything,” he said, when asked what makes her special, while earlier this week, he went further in an interview for Sky Sports Racing. “Golden Horn was special, Dubai Millennium was special,” Dettori said, “but they didn’t get to stay with me for that long. “She’s been with me basically nonstop for three years and it’s grown. I love horses, it’s my job, but she’s extra special because she’s taken me to places emotionally where no other horse has. That’s why I love her that much, for those kind of reasons.” Some have even suggested that a historic third victory for Enable would be an ideal moment for Dettori, who will be 49 in December, to call time on his extraordinary career. It seems unlikely, with so many Group One races still to be won, this year and next, but before there is any talk of the future, Dettori needs to get Enable over the line. While she seems certain to set off an odds-on chance, what seems sure to be her final race promises to be the toughest of all. The same task proved too much for Treve, who was fourth behind Dettori and the three-year-old Golden Horn, an opponent Treve had never faced before, when she tried for her third win in the 2015 Arc. Enable will be taking on not one but two top-class three-year-olds in Sottsass and Japan, while the lightly raced four-year-old Ghaiyyath, who has one fewer start to his name than Japan, is another live threat. But then, as Criquette Head-Maarek, Treve’s trainer, pointed out this week, Enable has “done things that Treve never did. She has travelled all over the world. She won the Breeders’ Cup in America after the Arc last year and that was something no one had done before. Then she has won the King George twice. “For me, she is the best horse I have seen in years and years.”