Metro Bank’s founder has resigned as chairman with immediate effect weeks before he was expected to step down from the role, leaving his successor to handle a regulatory investigation into an accounting error. The high street challenger said Vernon Hill, who founded the bank in 2010, would step down as chairman on Wednesday but stay on as a non-executive director until 31 December. He has been granted an honorary position of emeritus chairman “to recognise Vernon’s extraordinary contribution to Metro Bank”, the lender said in a regulatory announcement. Sir Michael Snyder, a member of the board, will serve as interim chairman until a replacement is found. The announcement was made before the publication of the bank’s third-quarter results on Wednesday afternoon. Metro Bank shares were up nearly 2% after the announcement at 196p. Little more than 18 months ago they were changing hands at more than £40. It marks the latest change to Hill’s tenure as chairman after a turbulent period for the bank, which is still awaiting the outcome of an investigation by City regulators after it misclassified £900m of loans as less risky than they actually were. Metro Bank originally announced in July that Hill would step down as chairman but stay on the board as a non-executive director and president. However, at the start of this month, the plan had changed, with Metro saying Hill would step down from the board entirely by the end of the year. The bank is trying to repair its reputation after a string of controversies, including the payment of £25m in fees to an architecture firm owned by Hill’s wife, Shirley. John Cronin, a financial analyst at the stockbroker Goodbody, said: “While we don’t know what is behind the early departure, we have heard the murmurs around regulatory discontent in the context of Hill remaining on the board. Of course, Hill may have simply just had enough.” Snyder said: “The board thanks Vernon for his vision, which inspired and created Metro Bank 10 years ago. He leaves a lasting legacy of creating fans through exceptional customer service, and has revolutionised British banking.” Hill said he wished Metro Bank customers, shareholders and colleagues “every success for the next stage of the journey. As always, the best is yet to come.”