Last month, we came together with colleagues across the house to find a middle ground between the extremes of no deal and a second referendum. Our mission was to give a voice to the silent majority – both in parliament and across the country – a voice to those who respect the result of the referendum, and who want us to leave with a deal and move on. When our constituents tell us they are fed up of politics, and tired of Brexit, we can understand where they are coming from. They tell us we are focused on the wrong things, our priorities are all wrong, and that the issues they care about have been cast aside by the Brexit distraction. Switching on the news, it’s easy to think that MPs spend all their time fighting and disagreeing with each other. But quietly, in the background, many of us have clung to the things that unite us – the things that will matter long after Brexit has been resolved. That’s why we have decided to write together the day before this historic sitting – not just as a proof that MPs of different stripes can work together, but to implore our colleagues to use this unique chance to help us move on, and get back to helping our constituents. A no-deal Brexit will risk their prosperity, and a second referendum will only deepen the schism of the past three years. Pride needs to be swallowed on both sides, and clear heads must prevail. The risk of letting this final shot at a deal slip through our fingers is too great. Our collective hope rests on brave Labour MPs, and indeed others, who can see that. We consider ourselves to be normal women, working hard for our constituencies. We can’t stand the shouting and the division, and want to return to a politics that remembers the things we have in common with one another. A parliament that extends a hand to the workers, that builds shelter for the homeless, that does more than ever for our environment, and lets our kids grow up on safe streets. Far from being ashamed of relying on one another, as MPs from opposite sides we recognise that it is imperative we move on, together. It’s the only way we can rebuild our politics, and unite the country. We hope all MPs will come together on Saturday for the good of their constituents, and vote for a deal. Melanie Onn is the Labour MP for Great GrimsbyVictoria Prentis, is the Tory MP for Banbury and North Oxfordshire