In the end the final blow came not with a bang and not with a whimper – but with a vote in the council chamber. Six years on from the creation of the compulsory purchase order that would have threatened Millwall’s future in south-east London the conditional sale agreement on the club’s land at the Den has been formally cancelled. Shortly after 7pm on Thursday night news emerged from Lewisham council that the mayor and cabinet had voted to expunge the order. The decision follows three years of a fraught, occasional vicious public battle played out across newspapers and social media. The CPO had been halted in January 2017 by the previous Labour mayor Steve Bullock after mounting public pressure . At its height the public campaign saw questions asked by MPs, a QC-led public inquiry and a Millwall fan dressed as Bananaman regaling the crowds at the League One Wembley playoff final: a reference to Bullock being dubbed “Mayor Bananaman” by fans after it had emerged a related charitable trust he sat on shared its off-the-shelf address with the banana-chomping superhero. Damien Egan, Bullock’s replacement as mayor, has been the driver behind a remarkable new spirit of co-operation between council, club and the developer, Renewal. Plans have been altered, concessions granted and a scheme devised that no longer threatens Millwall’s home. Instead Renewal will develop its own land separately, while Millwall have been able to advance their own regeneration plans. The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, has also played a hand, with flexibility over housing density making the plans work. In a statement Egan said: “I am delighted we have all agreed a way forward to allow much needed development on this site. It will bring jobs, housing and a new train station to an area currently under-resourced. Over the past year, positive and constructive talks have been taking place between the council, Renewal and Millwall to agree a way forward.” The Association of Millwall Supporters, a main player in the battle to save the Den, also welcomed the decision. “This is an incredible victory not only for all Millwall fans but also for the local community too. In an era where money rules football, this a victory for the ordinary fan. “The CPOs would have forced the club to relocate away from the area entirely, an event that would have ripped the Millwall heartbeat away from the Bermondsey area. But instead the fans fought back with fantastic support from our friends in the media, within the Lewisham council chamber, trade unions and across the political divide. “Millwall FC now has a real opportunity to secure its future financial position, we call upon the club not to let this chance slide. We would also like to thank the new mayor, Damien Egan, for his efforts in bringing this conflict to a close.”