The thudding sound from the away dressing room said it all, with Mumford & Sons ‘I Will Wait’ a very apt song choice given Stoke City had just toasted their first league win of the season at the 11th time of asking. A subtle wink from Nathan Jones, who was resigned to losing his job in midweek after an eighth league defeat, towards the directors’ box – where the chairman, Peter Coates, his son, John, the vice-chairman, and Tony Scholes, the chief executive – spoke volumes. As a conga of delirious supporters charged down from the top tier to the bottom to celebrate their side’s first league win for 182 days, Jones punched the air and pointed to the directors’ box. It was an unlikely climax given the Stoke goalkeeper, Adam Federici, was fishing the ball out of his net after 53 seconds. Stoke were slumped inside their own half but restored parity when one former Swansea midfielder inadvertently teed up another, with Joe Allen wriggling through and forcing a save out of Freddie Woodman before Sam Clucas smashed home the rebound. Jones moved like a rodeo rider on the touchline, kicking every ball and cajoling players upfield; he fidgeted his way through a scrappy match, biting his nails and pulling at his hair as Lee Gregory spurned two wonderful chances to give Stoke the lead. When Gregory blasted against the side netting, an exasperated Jones theatrically collapsed in his technical area. But he was bouncing with delight when the substitute Scott Hogan pounced after Woodman repelled a powerful Sam Vokes header. A Stoke pile-on ensued in front of an ecstatic away end, while Badou Ndiaye, who was magnificent in midfield, hoisted his manager airborne on the touchline. “He’s a leader, he’s a lion in there, because he goes hunting people down and he comes away with the ball,” Jones said. “He doesn’t say much but his actions say everything you need to know. It’s nice to know that they care because that’s been questioned in the past: ‘Do this group of players care? Do they want to play for the club?’ I think you’re starting to see they do. “There has been a culture of blaming and not really caring but desire and motivation has to come from within, and I think we saw today that it’s started to turn.” As for the DJ behind the dressing-room playlist, Jones allowed himself to smile. “I have no idea,” he said. “Those things are so far down on my list of priorities but it’s lovely to get a win. Everyone is so happy and pleased and it will lift a lot of people at the club, because we’ve united a club. “I’ve done a lot of thinking and soul searching over the last week and I’m a passionate guy, [and] that’s got me the career I’ve had. I’ve had to work my socks off to get where I am because I was never blessed with any ability. I never had four-year contracts where I could chill out, relax and get a cigar out. I had to fight for every part of my career and it’s the same as a manager.” Swansea, who drop to fourth, were off-colour, and surrendered their style more or less from the moment they took the lead through André Ayew, who fired home the rebound after Yan Dhanda waltzed upfield and forced Federici into a save. After a catastrophic start, Stoke had a rare finale to savour. They remain at the bottom of the table but, at last, have a lifeline. “We cannot get carried away and suddenly think it’s like snakes and ladders and we’re going to go all the way up,” said Jones. “It’s just one step.”