On a thin strip of bank alongside the Grand Union Canal in west London, under the shadow of Ernö Goldfinger’s Trellick Tower, is a rather unusual garden: a double row of topiary conifers in front of a plastered wall, which is peppered with bright decorative tiles, crystal doorknobs, busts, plaques and odds and ends from nearby Golborne Road market. Standing to attention in front of the wall is a row of stately figures – kings, queens, military heroes, poets and Roman emperors – like three-feet high chess pieces. And if you glimpse behind the wall, you will see a small, paved back garden filled with more statues. Gerry Dalton in his remarkable garden, July 2019. I first saw the garden from the towpath five years ago; I often cycled past and would always slow down for a better look. Then, last month, I stumbled across it again on Instagram. As part of a personal project, Guardian photographer Jill Mead had tracked down the garden and interviewed and photographed its owner, Gerry Dalton, in July. “I was overwhelmed by it,” Mead says. “He had made all these statues by hand, over several decades, using concrete in a bucket. The council had allowed him to clear the waste ground just outside his own garden, which he had to access using a ladder to climb over the wall.” Dalton’s back garden – reached via his ground-floor flat – is a small courtyard with red-painted brick walls and an island bed with a few shrubs, a yew, a palm tree and a pink osteospermum, or African daisy. An established pine has been grown from seed, from a storm-damaged tree on the farm in Ireland where Dalton grew up. Statues encircle the outer walls, and a gate leads down some steps on to the reclaimed canal bank; he knocked a hole in the garden wall a decade ago. The towpath garden is 60ft long, with its own arboretum of leylandii, junipers and pittosporum. When Dalton moved to the area in the early 80s, the canal bank was wild, covered with old mattresses, bottles and other rubbish; it took him six months to clear and level it off. By the 90s, the statues start to appear; Dalton soon had an account with a local builder’s merchant who delivered sand and cement. He said he got the idea for the statues from museums and watching the trooping the colour at Buckingham Palace. He was a magpie for objects that could be incorporated into his designs, decorating his figures with jewels, toy parts, doorknobs, bric-a-brac, wallpaper samples – recycling materials to colour the rich world of his imagination. Until a few years ago, it was possible to miss the canal bank display: the leylandii and conifers had grown into a tall grove of trees, creating a secret garden. But they were chopped back because they were dying from the thin, harsh soil. In August, a few weeks after meeting Dalton, Mead was contacted by his niece, who had found her number on a slip of paper in his flat, to tell her he had passed away. There is now a campaign (gerryspompeii.com) to save the artworks, preferably in situ – the flat and canal bank are owned by trusts. Charles Saumarez Smith, chief executive of the Royal Academy of Arts, visited recently, calling it “a folk version of the National Portrait Gallery”. When I visited in late September, so did the British artist Richard Wentworth. We walked around, awestruck and giddy. The singer Jarvis Cocker dropped by earlier this month. By the steps down to the canal bank is a statue inscribed “Gerry, The Gardener”, a self-portrait overlooking the water. Dalton’s work is part outsider art, part folk art, and wholly his own. He created an elaborate and visionary sense of place from very little, in terms of both space and material. In this way, he encompasses what is most wonderful about gardening: that even in the smallest of plots, anyone can create their own world if they let their imagination run wild. His work was intricate, puzzling, humorous and utterly joyous. I hope it gets the audience it deserves. Photographer Jill Mead writes: Nothing quite prepares you for the extraordinary interior of Gerard’s flat. Every room is crammed with toddler-height replicas of iconic buildings, homemade from concrete and wood. Windsor Castle takes up half of a back bedroom. Buckingham Palace fills an entire bow window. St Paul’s Cathedral stands next to a brutalist tower block. Thrones, bedchambers and tombs can be found under the removable roofs. Gerry’s bed was in the middle of this magical kingdom. “I made Hampton Court Palace with a hammer, chisel and saw,” Gerry told a friend.