Alice Oswald’s element is water. Her unforgettable Dart (2002) was about a river, and this electrifying new work – a single poem with a frightening undertow that reminds one a little of the mood of Coleridge’s Ancient Mariner – is an encounter with the sea. It is out of this world – and in it. It is mythical and realistic, ancient and modern and was originally commissioned to accompany a series of watercolours by William Tillyer (it has been rewritten to be a more “mobile” version). In a foreword, Oswald relates the contrasting stories from The Odyssey that inspired it. In one, Agamemnon pays a poet to spy on his wife and the poet is then banished to a stony island which allows for the seduction of the wife (Agamemnon is murdered 10 years later). In the other, Odysseus’s return, after a decade away, is luckier – his faithful wife is waiting for him. The poem exists, Oswald maintains in a foreword, in the “murky” region between these outcomes: “Its voice is wind-blown, water-damaged, as if someone set out to sing The Odyssey but was rowed to a stony island and never discovered the poem’s ending.” In Oswald’s hands, the poet on his island is at once trapped and free (is this a fair description of what it is to be a poet?). His thoughts are his escape as he surveys his Mediterranean prison. The poem is, in part, an experiment with scale. No human figure can compete with the sea. Throughout literature, poets have tried to get the upper hand with the sea but Oswald understands no single phrase can hope to possess her subject. In any contest between words and sea, the sea will win no matter how elegant, ingenious, devious (and Oswald can be all of these) the writer. She knows it will keep replenishing itself, each breaking wave potentially a new idea. Her “plough but with no harvest” idea is thrillingly accurate but then she moves on. At times, there is an alarming sense of being subsumed into sea, of time helplessly swallowed whole: Faced with the sea’s vastness, feeling lost is common. And this thought stands alone on a double-page spread: And there is no stopping the sea, like a Canute of punctuation, with a question mark. Oswald is at the top of her form here – note the apparent effortlessness of the writing, the casual economy of a phrase like “breakneck cliffs”. There’s a marvellously comic exactitude at times but it isn’t allowed to undermine the prevailing sobriety. I loved the fond, accurate glimpse of “seals breathing out the sea’s bad breath/snuffle about all afternoon in sleeping bags.” And she writes beautifully about a distrait dawn and then there is the entertaining originality of this image: “and sometimes mist a kind of stupefied rain/slumps over the water like a teenager”. Occasional contemporary references (commuters, subtitles, a briefcase) are lightly judged, the seascape’s anachronistic driftwood. A prevailing sense of danger in Nobody is, if anything, heightened by the Homeric authority with which Oswald writes about fate (“that great failure of the will” – a marvellous phrase). And the last lines of each section thin out to a single word or two, deposited on the shore of the page like a handful of shingle – one poem even ends with “stones”. • Nobody by Alice Oswald is published by Jonathan Cape (£10). To order a copy for £8.80 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99 Image after image it never endsit has the texture of plough but with no harvestbut every so often a flower of light floats pastand one of them slept with her which is a woman’s weaknesswe must keep it she said hidden under eyelidsput lampshades on this eagerness if we meetat the fountain for example washing our clothes or drinkingbut after a while he grew bored of this patiencehe came to her door with necklacesshe had a needle in her hand she looked up sharpand her mind slipped like snow off a leafbut the gods know everything they sent a virusfluttering after the ship and seven days latershe dropped like a dead bird into the bilgefour sailors had to swing her over the side and the waterwith all its claws and eaters closed over herthe splash became a series of dots andunder that sound the green sea turned grey