Pre-lunch at Bottega Caruso, a tiny Campanian kitchen with just six or seven tables and serving southern Italian classics, it struck me that of all the British seaside towns currently being “re-loved”, Margate is looking especially well. It’s not easy to nurture an old town into something prettier while retaining its former quirky charm. Planners have puzzled about Blackpool for decades, while brides-to-be in penis costumes have vomited over it. Suffolk’s coast was re-loved tastefully and with gusto in the mid-2000s, until it became one large, indistinguishable boutique run by a woman from Notting Hill who flogs batik tea towels and spelt flour scones, and opens on just three afternoons a week. Margate’s revamp, however, feels more incremental: one art gallery, one cafe, one reopened theme park at a time, but you can still do a big shop at Morrisons. Harry Ryder and Simona Di Dio opened a small deli selling fresh pasta and Campanian produce in late 2017. In this pretty building, which was once a 19th-century pub called The Crown, they sell passata made by Simona’s family in Foglianise in Benevento, close to Naples, and wine from Sannio, alongside pickles, olive oil, cheese, salumi, ’nduja, chocolate and herbs. In the back of all this, behind the deli counter, there is not strictly “a kitchen” as such, more “some people banging about with pans and doling out ragù Napoletano with homemade pappardelle”. The smallness of the operation makes it all the more wonderful. I eat at enough places with full brigades and £150,000-worth of state-of-the-art, gleaming, stainless-steel wotnot. Nothing coming out of any of those places is as delicious as Bottega Caruso’s verdura e fagioli, which on one level is just a bowl of earthy, stewed greens and pale beans, sort of sludge-coloured and nothing much to look at, but at the same time a deeply flavoured, restorative bowl filled with garlic, cherry tomato and oregano-scented magic that I’ve been pondering for three weeks since eating it. How do I keep the bite, but not too much bite, of the beans without mulching the greens? How do I keep the sweet, piquant hit of the cherry tomato? Did they use fresh chilli, because the heat was present, but also mellow? How does it taste so good? The aubergine parmigiana is a heroically wondrous, dank, chocolate-brownie-shaped square of grilled, pressed aubergine with tomato and basil and mozzarella. “This is where I’ve been going wrong with aubergine for 30 years,” I mumble, wishing I’d ordered at least three slices. “I’ve been building my parmigiana upwards, but now I know it needs to be shallow and flat, so much more of the surface caramelises and goes crisp. But then, how does it not dry out?” All these questions and more are why I should probably take one of their cookery lessons, and I will be going back as soon as I can. Bottega Caruso serves possibly some of the best Italian food in modern Britain, and I say that with some pain, because it has only around 18 seats and, for abhorrently selfish reasons, I don’t want the place to expand. I like eating with one elbow in a bookshelf while feeling genuinely lucky to be getting today’s portion of slippery, homespun troccoli. Right now, it’s all so good and made with sincere affection and served with a warm heart, with the family milling about and working out what they’re going to watch on telly tonight. They serve small, fresh bowls of carefully prepared, perfect anchovies marinated in chilli and garlic. There are glasses of rhubarb-and-liquorice-scented Oscar 697 red vermouth served over ice, and the house pecorino is easily drinkable. They make a squid stew, its tentacles slow-braised with potatoes and peas into a soft, content-making mess. The dish that I can’t quite forget was a plentiful bowl of fat gnocchi bullets, hand-formed that morning and served with fresh courgettes and a pungent, almond-and-cashew pesto. When experts wonder why large Italian chains on the high street have started to get into difficulty, I think it’s because many customers have simply begun to see that they deserve better for their money. A slice of Bottega Caruso’s fresh, boozy tiramisu, by contrast, costs £6.50, and every spoonful of rum-and-espresso-soaked sponge, thick with cream, that you lift to your lips reminds you why independent Italians do it better, especially when they’re Simona, Harry and the gang. As the great philosopher Chas Hodge once said, “You can keep your Costa Brava and all that palaver, going no farther, me, I’d rather have me a day down Margate with all me family.” • Bottega Caruso 2-4 Broad Street, Margate, Kent, 01843 297142. Open lunch Thu-Sun noon-2.45pm, dinner Fri & Sat 6-9pm. About £30-35 a head, plus drinks and service. Food 9/10 Atmosphere 9/10 Service 9/10