The board of WeWork is meeting on Tuesday to consider a rescue plan worth almost $10bn (£7.7bn) from its biggest investor, Japan’s SoftBank, according to reports. The proposal would keep the struggling US office-sharing company afloat and lead to the departure of its controversial chairman and co-founder, Adam Neumann. Neumann is backing the plan because he would receive about $200m in return for giving up the chairmanship and his outsize voting rights, the Financial Times reported. The plan would more than halve his stake to less than 10% of the shares and voting rights. Marcelo Claure, SoftBank’s chief operating officer, would become chairman. The Japanese conglomerate would end up owning 60% to 80% of WeWork under the proposal, which includes $5bn of new debt, as well as injecting $1.5bn in equity and an offer to buy up to $3bn of existing shares. There is a rival funding package from JP Morgan Chase, worth $5bn, which includes $2bn of unsecured debt. The board will have to decide on Tuesday which one to accept. The company risks running out of cash by the end of November. The emergency refinancing proposals come only two months after Neumann prepared to float the company on the US stock market. It had to postpone the planned initial public offering (IPO) last month after failing to drum up enough interest from investors, who questioned its large losses, business model and the way the company is run by Neumann. The company’s valuation had been slashed to $15bn to $20bn, from $47bn at the start of the year, under its IPO plans. It will be cut to about $8bn under the refinancing plan. Neumann holds special voting shares that enable him to dismiss dissident directors, which sparked concern among investors when the company was preparing for its flotation. His voting rights, which initially gave him 20 times the voting power of other shareholders, were cut to three times those of ordinary shares when he stepped down as chief executive last month. Neumann has also taken $700m out of the company through personal loans and stock sales.