There is nowhere to sit and talk in the Soho members’ club, but just as we are heading elsewhere, Amrou Al-Kadhi peels away to greet a member of staff. From their warmth, they appear to know each other well. But when we step outside, Al-Kadhi beams and whispers: “We just swiped right on each other!” Al-Kadhi – who is a screenwriter 60% of the time, a drag queen the rest and uses the pronoun “they” – is very open. Their book Unicorn: The Memoir of a Muslim Drag Queen is published this month. It is full of intimate revelations, all of which echo with the painful “coded silences” that dominated their youth. Al-Kadhi, 29, is British Iraqi, but grew up in Dubai, then Bahrain, before moving to London. They are gay, Muslim, Eton-educated, a twin, a writer, performer: it’s a lot of life for a 29-year-old. “Really?” they say. “I often do feel quite a lot older.” They sound tentatively pleased; I suspect because they are a high achiever, and, in a funny way, this puts them ahead. But then Al-Kadhi says sadly: “I feel I never had a youth, to be honest.” Al-Kadhi was 10 when they realised they were gay, having fantasised about the cartoon Robin Hood, and then Macaulay Culkin in Home Alone. But their parents couldn’t accept the possibility that Al-Kadhi was anything but heterosexual. “Even if you feel gay, just sleep with girls, and you will no longer be gay” was their father’s advice, backed up by anti-homosexual teaching at school that provoked terrifying nightmares. Al-Kadhi still often wakes to find the bedding on the far side of the room. Their book details the various methods, some harrowing, they tried in order to gain short-term relief from the unbearable sense of a divided life: from acting to abusive relationships, chemsex parties, academic perfectionism and a passion for tropical aquariums. There’s also a unicorn tattoo, on Al-Kadhi’s chest, the rump of which they used to rub, for comfort and luck. And then, of course, there was drag. “Whenever I’ve had violence against me, or something really upsetting has happened, the first thing I think is: I need to be in drag, and on stage tonight,” Al-Kadhi says. Getting ready is a kind of meditation. “I’m talking the meticulous drawing of the brow. Trying to get every line right. I love it. So peaceful.” We have finally found somewhere to talk, settling with a coffee in a theatre cafe, and their fingers are tracing careful arches above each eye as they speak. “Gluing eyebrows, putting on foundation. It’s the transportation. Very mindful.” It was at Cambridge University that Al-Kadhi discovered drag, organising events and becoming a “drag mother” to their fellow queens in the university’s first professional drag band. “When I started doing drag, it felt like the ultimate rejection of everything I was taught in the Middle East.” But the variance between the joy of performance and the repercussions from disapproving family in Dubai only heightened the sense of being at odds with themselves. It wasn’t liberating? “It wasn’t! I felt like I was lying. I was trying to live out things that I didn’t actually believe about myself. Everyone was looking to me as this voice of liberation. And I just wasn’t that ... Whenever the drag came off, I would have a nervous breakdown.” Al-Kadhi, who performs as Glamrou, says they experienced their “first set of breakdowns” around this time. But they still scored the highest first in their year, so some portion of life must have remained intact; or, perhaps, the devastation was medicated with an obsession with work. Even now, Al-Kadhi works six days a week, 9am to 9pm. Unicorn was written in six weeks of solid 10-hour days. “As soon as I stop working, I feel quite a lot of sorrow,” they say, toying nervously with the toggle of their hoodie. “If I take a day or two off, I can’t stop crying. The amount of work it takes for a queer person to do well in life is exhausting!” As a young man, whenever Al-Kadhi was caught by their parents watching gay TV shows or films or referring to their homosexuality in texts to friends, their parents would confront them. “My dad actually said to me: ‘You don’t have to keep talking to us about this gay stuff. Talk to us about the weather if you have to. Just don’t bring that up.’” Yet despite this conflict, love runs through this book. Al-Kadhi’s mother, they say, “says I’m the greatest love of her life”. She says that still? Even while Al-Kadhi celebrates their queer identity in drag performances? “She does say that. But she always caveats it: ‘You’re the greatest love of my life – and the person who’s ruined my life.’” Writing the book was partly an attempt to understand this relationship. “A lot of women in the Middle East tend to be the voicepiece of the patriarchy because of the domestic role that they occupy,” Al-Kadhi says. Their mother is presented as someone who will go to any lengths for the right look. She once deployed the services of a welder to effect a last-minute repair to a dress. All this might make a person appear ridiculous. “But I got it – ’cos me too! Clothes mean a lot to me,” Al-Kadhi says. The two recently bonded over their mother’s quest for a tropical-themed hat. “I’m the daughter she never had.” So it is not surprising that, as Glamrou, their favourite outfits are “the ones that remind me of my mum … There’s this emerald, snakeskin-type dress. Whenever I wear it, everyone says: ‘You look like your mum!’ I love wearing that. I also love wearing Islamic abayas.” Their early drag aped white stars such as Lady Gaga and Lana Del Rey, and in this sense clothing once caused a fissure not just between Al-Kadhi and their mother, but between Al-Kadhi and their cultural heritage and even race. Now, however, costume is helping them to narrow the gaps. “I like that feeling of inserting myself in my heritage through being queer,” they say. Religion too is no longer something to be feared. Al-Kadhi uses the pronoun “they” for Allah. “The way that I conceptualise Allah is that they’ve gone from being a source of self-punishment to being a source of self-love.” Al-Kadhi has even left their old drag group, Denim, to pursue solo performance in a show called Glamrou: From Quran to Queen, because “all the other Denims are white … Whenever I tried to explore race within the show it would have to be quite a cursory five minutes.” Striking out on their own has given Al-Kadhi a platform from which to address race – last week they praised Naga Munchetty live on the BBC for speaking out against racism. The memoir acts as a sort of guidebook to this wholesale reassertion of a cohesive identity, culminating in the moment when Al-Kadhi explains that they regard their biological mother as a sort of long-lost drag mother. Have they ever told her this? “Yeah, I have actually said that once. And she just said: ‘Why would you want to be a woman?’ Oddly enough, her position as a woman and my position as a queer person in society brings us really close despite the huge gulf of things we can’t talk about.” Ramy, Al-Kadhi’s twin brother, is the only family member to have watched Al-Kadhi perform. “He’s very proud of me. I think he’s more in awe, to be honest – of how different my life has turned out to everyone I am related to,” Al-Kadhi says. But Ramy has not seen the book; neither have Al-Kadhi’s parents. “Thankfully, they are not stocking it in Dubai any time soon,” Al-Kadhi says. When they told their mother about the memoir, she said: “‘Is there anything I’m not going to like?’ And I said: ‘Well, you don’t like the fact that I do drag, you don’t like the fact that I’m gay, you don’t like the fact that I wear pink socks. So you are not going to like most of this book … I don’t know if I will have a relationship with them after this.” So why do it? “I have had all kinds of therapy, meds, everything,” Al-Kadhi says. “For me, the one thing that really helps is putting it out there and having it resonate with people … I said to my mum: ‘It’s my only coping mechanism.’ It stops me from doing something quite dangerous to myself. I didn’t have a choice. I had to write it.” They are pulling at the top of their hoodie again – nervously, I assume. But Al-Kadhi smiles and says what they are really doing is touching the rump of the unicorn beneath. Unicorn: The Memoir of a Muslim Drag Queen is published by HarperCollins. To buy it for £14.99 (RRP £16.99) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020 3176 3837. P&P charges may apply.