Hola España, guess what? I’m coming back. So says Zlatan Ibrahimovic, in a decidedly cryptic social media post, which means he’s planning a move back to La Liga, or a family holiday to the Costa del Sol. It’s hard to see the 38-year-old re-signing for Barcelona but perhaps he would be tempted by a January move to second-placed Granada? Watch this space. Newcastle could probably do with a bit of the Swede’s razzle dazzle up top, but they may have to settle for the France U21 international Ibrahima Sissoko, who is no relation of the former Toon favourite Moussa. The word on the wire is that Newcastle have met Strasbourg’s £13m valuation and will begin talks over personal terms in the coming days, as Steve Bruce looks to reinforce a midfield currently being held together by the Longstaff brothers. Manchester United have sent their finest to watch the Italian teenager Sandro Tonali, who has been dubbed the “new Pirlo” on account of him playing for Andrea’s first club, Brescia, and the fact that he nearly always stands on the near post at corners. Probably. The 19-year-old midfielder could cost United around £40m. Everton have forgotten that their £22.5m summer signing Jean-Philippe Gbamin is due to return from injury in January because they are already making plans to spend some more dosh on Spartak Moscow’s Alex Kral. The midfielder – who played in the Czech Republic’s victory over England this month – likes a tackle and would cost considerably more than the €12m Spartak paid a couple of months ago. Rumours that Granit Xhaka has already set sail on the good ship, Do One, are premature – Arsenal’s players have reportedly told the Swiss they want him to continue as the club’s captain. However, the Gunners are thinking about about new blood, namely Xhaka’s compatriot Denis Zakaria, who is currently tearing up trees for Xhaka’s former club and the Bundesliga leaders, Borussia Mönchengladbach. The thing is, Liverpool are also keen and PSG had a €30m bid rejected in the summer.