Apart from a few diehard loyalists, I imagine most Labour party members would agree with Jonathan Freedland that Labour is not going to come anywhere close to winning an election as long as Jeremy Corbyn remains leader (The question for Labour: why are you sticking with Corbyn?, Journal, 26 October). The only way by which a new leader could be installed in time to fight the imminent election would be if Corbyn resigned, but there is one very good reason why, at the moment, this is simply not going to happen. That is because Tom Watson would become the caretaker leader and in all likelihood fight the election as the prospective next prime minister. This is something not only the left of the party will not countenance, and his association with the Carl Beech case does not help matters. So the obvious thing is for Corbyn and Watson to resign together, allowing the parliamentary Labour party and national executive committee to agree a short-term leadership team that would serve until after the election, when a formal leadership contest would be held. Until then, a Starmer-McDonnell double bill would brighten the political landscape significantly, though I concede that their middle-aged white maleness is an unfortunate side-effect of having to make such a decision under pressure.Michael WoodgateBristol • On 19 April 2017 Jonathan Freedland wrote that Theresa May’s decision to call a snap election was “about the surest bet any politician could ever place”. In the event, May lost her majority, and Labour obtained the largest increase of poll share since 1945. Freedland called it wrong because he failed to understand that Corbyn had caught the tide of change by demanding an end to austerity politics. Once again, Freedland is returning to his favourite theme, that Corbyn is unelectable. However, his implicit advice that Corbyn be ditched is manifestly unworldly. It would lead to an internal civil war on the eve of a general election. In predicting a heavy Labour defeat, Freedland may also be calling it wrong again. No one can forecast with any certainty what will happen at the next general election, but it may be that Labour’s renewed call for Britain to change direction – through a Green New Deal, a massive public investment in jobs, and a turn to social justice – will once again connect to the tide of change.Prof James CurranGoldsmiths, University of London • I couldn’t agree more with Jonathan Freedland. As a member of the Labour party, I wrote to Jeremy Corbyn and pointed out that although much of his manifesto was attractive, it was never going to happen as long as he remained leader – he was simply unelectable, as was Michael Foot. Right or wrong, he carries too much baggage, perceived or otherwise, to overcome the rightwing press. In my opinion, if Keir Starmer were the leader then Labour would walk it. Please, Mr Corbyn, do the right thing for the party that you obviously love.Bernard WrightAustwick, North Yorkshire • Jonathan Freedland hits the nail on the head for so many of us Labour members. On numerous occasions I have written to the Labour leadership making the point that we cannot win the next election under Corbyn but never get a reply. I now think we may have to live with a Tory government that has already devastated our welfare state and will do worse, and work for the election after next when surely Corbyn will have been replaced with one of the several electable members of the shadow cabinet. I only remain a party member because of an excellent MP.Alison WatsonLondon • Jonathan Freedland asks: “Why are you sticking with Corbyn?” Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership has been consistent, clear and strong, both on EU membership and other matters. Furthermore, he, his shadow cabinet and most of the parliamentary Labour party faithfully reflect the Labour party’s public manifesto. That’s why.Nigel DickinsonGooseberry Hill, Western Australia • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition