Liam Williams says Wales believe they can go all the way in Japan as they prepare for Sunday’s World Cup quarter-final against France. They are not brash or ahead of themselves but Warren Gatland’s players have complete faith in their ability. Williams summed up that self-assurance in Beppu on Tuesday. “There is only one thing we think we can do and that is to win it,” the Wales full-back said of their World Cup chances. “I wouldn’t say we’ve got the easy route but we’ve got France next and we need to beat them to be looking at the bigger picture. I think we can go on and win it.” Wales, who beat France on the way to the Six Nations Grand Slam this year, won all of their Pool D fixtures – Georgia, Australia, Fiji and Uruguay – to set up a last-eight tie in Oita. Their captain, Alun Wyn Jones, has already told his team they are only three games away from doing something special and for which they would be remembered for ever. Williams, too, is on the verge of his own place in rugby history. No player has won the English Premiership, European Cup, Six Nations and World Cup in the same season but the 28-year-old is getting close to what would be a remarkable achievement. He sealed a domestic and European double with Saracens this year and starred for Wales in the Six Nations before travelling to Japan. Wales will look to continue a run over France that has seen them lose only once to them since they were defeated 9-8 in the 2011 World Cup semi-final. “Over the past 18 months we’ve won the Six Nations and had a lot of success. It has been great for Wales and hopefully it is going to put us in really good stead,” Williams said. “We have been happy with four wins from four here but it doesn’t mean anything unless we beat France. “We have beaten them seven of the last eight times but this is the biggest one. They have been playing well in this World Cup. It is going to be a tough game.” Williams used to struggle with a stammer that inhibited his ability to give interviews but it has improved to the extent he cracked jokes as he cut a relaxed figure. He has grown both on and off the field into one of rugby’s best players and has been in fine form in Japan, with tries against Georgia and Fiji. “I love Japan and I love the people,” Williams said, before adding with a laugh. “I love the naked spas – they are really good with the boys.” But on a more serious note, he reflected on the change since he moved to England to join Saracens. “I was with the Scarlets for six years and leaving Wales to go and play in London has been great. That has taught me a lot about myself on and off the pitch. Maybe I’ve matured a bit.” Dan Biggar, Jonathan Davies and George North all returned to full training on Tuesday. Six players sat out the session – including Hadleigh Parkes, Gareth Davies and Josh Adams – but only to rest bumps and bruises. France will go into the quarter-final somewhat rusty having not played for two weeks. Their final Pool C meeting with England was cancelled because of Typhoon Hagibis. They are also concerned about the fitness of the scrum-half Antoine Dupont, who is struggling with a back problem. The France No 8, Louis Picamoles, said: “Wales are a team we know well. It’s always a special match. We haven’t beaten them very often, but we’ve never been far off either. “We want to play a good match on Sunday so we can start to dream.”