Quique Sánchez Flores remained upbeat about Watford’s chances this season despite seeing his side’s winless run, which stretches back to the start of the campaign, extend to 10 games with this goalless draw. Watford spurned a chance in the first minute when a Gerard Deulofeu cross found Abdoulaye Doucouré, who fired over from close range, before Aaron Ramsdale was forced into his first save and Craig Dawson saw a shot blocked. Despite Watford’s early momentum, Bournemouth came closest to taking the lead when Steve Cook’s powerful header from a Ryan Fraser corner rebounded off the woodwork. The visitors grew into the game and in the 22nd minute Ben Foster had to dive low to keep out a strike from Philip Billing. Just after the half-hour mark, Bournemouth almost took the lead when the ball fell to Diego Rico at the edge of the area, and he hit a superb half-volley that Foster was only just able to get down and reach. Just before the break Foster was called upon again and came off his line quickly to deny Arnaut Danjuma. “I am confident and I am realistic too,” said Flores, who oversaw his third straight draw since taking the Watford reins. “I know how the players are training every week. They deserve to win. We are creating something solid for the future. I believe that. I want to think in a positive way and that this was a good base for the future.” Bournemouth’s best chance of the first half came on the stroke of half-time when a quick counterattack released Callum Wilson on the right and his cross to the far post was met by Danjuma, whose effort was again kept out by the diving Foster. “I am frustrated on one hand but on the other hand we could have also lost the game,” said Eddie Howe. “We don’t normally struggle to score but today at least we did not struggle to create chances.” Foster, meanwhile, had no complaints. “We had a few chances and probably it was a fair result in the end,” the Watford keeper said. “We know we have a solid base to start from. We can keep clean sheets and can score goals so we can build on that.” After the interval it was his counterpart’s turn to provide the highlights, Ramsdale first denying Deulofeu at his near post and then flying low to his left to palm away a low drive from Will Hughes. “We created attempts from the first minute and had one of the most clear attempts,” said Flores. “It’s true we don’t score too much, but the most difficult thing in football is to create attempts. We have very clear attempts, so we don’t need to be worried for that. The moment we stop creating attempts we should be worried.” With less than 10 minutes left, the Hornets came agonisingly close to scoring when Roberto Pereyra flicked on a corner which was deflected just ahead of the arriving Andre Gray at the far post. Harry Wilson came close at the other end from a free-kick just outside the box, curling over the wall and just wide of Foster’s goal. The result leaves Flores’s men bottom of the table with five points. “This draw was good,” said Flores. “It is the base for something better. We need to get to another part of the league, but we are not losing and we are not losing confidence. We are more mature [when] defending and we don’t concede too much. The feeling in the team is growing, every single week. I can feel it. We go with a passion to [get a] win and I can feel it’s close.”