With Prince Andrew back in the headlines as his friendship with convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein is placed under scrutiny, this controversy-courting documentary takes a look at the historic scandals that have beset the House of York. Aside from the relationship rumours and tabloid frenzy surrounding Andrew’s 1996 divorce from Sarah Ferguson, there is analysis on the historical roles of the Duke of York, most notably George VI’s accession. A royalists’ romp. Ammar Kalia The hapless grooms are once again left in sole charge of the nuptials in this new series of Don’t Tell the Bride. Bride-to-be Conna dreams of a simple, classic wedding but groom David wants a Narnia-themed ceremony. Will roller derby-loving Conna be taken in by the kitsch, or are David’s plans just a fantasy? AK Since the possibility of space flight first developed, the race for dominance has been a swift one. This series looks at the space money can buy, starting with the UAE’s National Space Programme and its lofty ambitions to build an Emirati satellite and an unmanned probe to study Mars. AK As Strictly settles in for another series, here comes Movie Week with the promise of Harry Connick Jr for Sunday night’s results show. At this stage, the standard still varies from the dizzy heights of Emmerdale’s Kelvin Fletcher to the barely hanging on (but very entertaining) Chris Ramsey, but it’s still a sparkling watch. Hannah Verdier It’s finally time for this “Olympics of Talent” to award its coveted champions’ trophy. The international contenders include an 11-year-old German dog trainer and a Ukrainian sand sculptor, but don’t bet against the Spanish-British salsa duo of 85-year-old Paddy and 45-year-old Nico. Ellen E Jones Wossy bids hello to The Farewell’s Awkwafina, star of the tender comedy-drama and a rapper and comic besides. Plus, McFly, cricket ace Jofra Archer, music from Dermot Kennedy, and Danny Dyer, a Jonathan Ross veteran but always worth a slot – and never without a new project or 12 to plug. Hannah J Davies La La Land 9.20pm, BBC Two This vibrant and touching musical about the heartachey romance of jazz pianist Seb (Ryan Gosling) and wannabe movie star Mia (Emma Stone) is propelled by breathtaking, Hollywood golden-age dance numbers and is presented in brilliant primary-colour designs, winning it six Oscars in 2017. Paul Howlett Rugby World Cup: England v Argentina 8.10am, ITV. England beat Argentina at their last meeting in 2017 – will they win again? Premiership Football: Brighton v Tottenham 12noon, BT Sport 1. Top-flight clash from the Amex. International Women’s Football: England v Brazil 12.35pm, BBC One. A friendly from Middlesbrough.