In the polluters series, the Guardian has collaborated with leading scientists and NGOs to reveal the fossil fuel companies that are perpetuating the climate crisis. According to research, the top 20 coal, oil and gas firms on the list have contributed 35% of all energy-related carbon dioxide and methane worldwide, totalling 480bn tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (GtCO2e), since 1965. The Guardian has collaborated with leading scientists and NGOs to expose, with exclusive data, investigations and analysis, the fossil fuel companies that are perpetuating the climate crisis – some of which have accelerated their extraction of coal, oil and gas even as the devastating impact on the planet and humanity was becoming clear. The investigation has involved more than 20 Guardian journalists working across the world for the past six months. The project focuses on what the companies have extracted from the ground, and the subsequent emissions they are responsible for, since 1965. The analysis, undertaken by Richard Heede at the Climate Accountability Institute, calculates how much carbon is emitted throughout the supply chain, from extraction to use by consumers. Heede said: "The fact that consumers combust the fuels to carbon dioxide, water, heat and pollutants does not absolve the fossil fuel companies from responsibility for knowingly perpetuating the carbon era and accelerating the climate crisis toward the existential threat it has now become." One aim of the project is to move the focus of debate from individual responsibilities to power structures – so our reporters also examined the financial and lobbying structures that let fossil fuel firms keep growing, and discovered which elected politicians were voting for change. Another aim of the project is to press governments and corporations to close the gap between ambitious long-term promises and lacklustre short-term action. The UN says the coming decade is crucial if the world is to avoid the most catastrophic consequences of global heating. Reining in our dependence on fossil fuels and dramatically accelerating the transition to renewable energy has never been more urgent. Those identified range from investor-owned firms – household names such as Chevron, Exxon, BP and Shell – to state-owned companies including Saudi Aramco and Gazprom. We’d like you to help us understand more about these fossil fuel companies. Do you work for a fossil fuel company? If so, we’d like to hear from you. What’s it like to work in the industry? Do you think there’s enough recognition about the impact of fossil fuels on climate change? Do you have any information you’d like to share about your work and its effect on the environment? What more could your company do that it isn’t doing? What new laws, government policies or market regulations could accelerate the industry’s transition away from fossil fuels towards renewable energy? We’re interested in hearing about projects and initiatives that are trying to tackle the issue, too. You can share your responses, anonymously if you prefer, via our encrypted form below. Only the Guardian will see your contributions. If you feel that you need a higher level of security, you can see some of the secure ways to contact the Guardian here. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.