Let’s work on the assumption that you didn’t watch The X Factor on Saturday. In fact, let’s work on the assumption that you haven’t watched The X Factor for several years – that you were gradually worn down by the repetition and the mediocrity and all the relentless, empty, cynical bombast being flung in your face at a hundred miles an hour for hours at a time. Let’s assume that is the case with you, because it is certainly the case with me. I stopped watching The X Factor in 2015 for these reasons, and I am someone who was paid to watch The X Factor. To put it another way, I had to quit my job because The X Factor was so bad. But this year The X Factor is trying something new. Gone are all the ambitious wannabes – the overlooked backing singers, the last-chance bar crooners, the shelf-stackers with dreams of superstardom. In 2019, The X Factor has cleared the decks and reinvented itself as a celebrity singing contest. Where once it aspired to give the world its newest bona fide musical icon, it now appears that The X Factor is content to rehash the format of Soapstar Superstar. Out of nothing but morbid, self-hating curiosity, I tuned in to see just how bad it was. But here is the horrible truth. I didn’t hate it. I didn’t hate The X Factor. Now, let’s be perfectly clear for a moment. I didn’t love it. I won’t be rewriting my end-of-year list or anything as drastic as that, but I watched 90 minutes of The X Factor on Saturday night and didn’t find myself filled with a violent disdain for all of humanity. Which is new. Let’s set some proper expectations, though. None of the celebrities on The X Factor: Celebrity were celebrities. They were an awkward mix of reality stars, YouTubers and people who hadn’t been in the public eye for a couple of decades. But at least the show didn’t pretend otherwise. In fact, watching the celebrities attempt to justify their existence to each other during their initial meeting was wildly entertaining. It was like watching a broken version of the Post-it game in which everyone had their own name written on their head, while Dermot O’Leary – having finally succumbed to the stupidity of his role – merrily Statler-and-Waldorf–ed away from afar. This set the tone of the entire show. The “audition” round essentially took the form of a garden party at Simon Cowell’s house. The celebrities got up on stage, did a bit of low-stakes karaoke for a loosened-up crowd, received approximately 30% too much praise for their performances, then wandered off for a drink. Cowell – who has come to resemble a Monkey Christ fresco version of himself – was amiable and charming, knowing that his role may as well be filled by a stuffed monkey for all the good it does. As a result, he was better than he has been for years. Sure, at times, it fell into bad old patterns and tried to force a classic X Factor narrative on proceedings. Hayley (the daughter of David) Hasselhoff was painted as the hard-faced villain of the show, despite not displaying many overtly villainous tendencies, and Martin Bashir’sperformance of Nat King Cole’s L-O-V-E would have impressed even without the preamble about his late brother, which veered slightly too hard towards the sob stories of old. But, for the most part, nobody seemed to care very much. This is a version of The X Factor that is happy to coast along on charisma alone – the Ocean’s 11 of X Factors. I may be reading too much into it, but the big theme seemed to be acceptance. The show knows that it is never going to beat Strictly in the ratings again. It knows that viewers are abandoning it by the truckload. It even seems to realise that it can’t guarantee the winner a No 1 single. The X Factor fought hard and lost. Rather than bursting its blood vessels to try to demonstrate how big and important it is, it has given up. The X Factor has accepted its place as a lower-tier, past-its-best entertainment show, which has immediately made it five times better. It is more fun and loosey-goosey now. Watch, don’t watch – it is up to you. Will I watch every episode of The X Factor this year? God, no. But does the thought of checking in on it from time to time fill me with dread, like it has for the past few years? Also no. I don’t seem to hate The X Factor any more. Who knew?