Spoiler alert: this recap is for people watching Succession season two, which airs on HBO in the US and Sky Atlantic in the UK. Do not read on unless you have watched the season two finale. Well this is a killer all right. A finale that seems to be tapering towards a sombre, inevitable conclusion only to lash you round the face with the sting in its tail and set us up for the already-commissioned third season. With Logan making his curdling promise of a “blood sacrifice” last week, the emphasis shifted from which sibling will take over from Logan to who will be thrown out as red meat and bones to shareholders. They are getting restless at the inquiry into historical wrongdoing; one even suggests to Logan that he himself take the fall. He notes the suggestion. The clan are gathered for a mini-break in Venice aboard a huge, overbearing ship that passes through the water like a giant black shark. It ought to be fun; Roman has been sprung from his Turkish captivity, an experience that has subdued him and taken the edge off his customary caustic wit. There is a scene of almost affectionate lightheartedness between the siblings as they soak up the sun together. But as Logan arrives in his black helicopter, the mood darkens, lowering all their spirits. He immediately summons Roman, Karl and Laird for a debriefing on Turkey. Laird talks the thing up and praises Roman for securing a new deal with the president’s daughter’s husband. But Roman, with surprising, selfless honesty, declares it “horseshit”. An angry Laird, who was due a big slice of commission on the deal, storms off and quits the boat. Connor, meanwhile, is anxious about the bad reviews for Willa’s show. She almost steals this one, however, when she angrily throws the iPad overboard as she clocks the notices. Connor is in the financial crapper over the show; he sidles up to his dad to touch him for a $100m advance and maybe a lean on his papers to say nice things about the play. Logan agrees but only on the condition that he give up his presidential bid. “Everyone thinks you’re a joke and you’re fucking embarrassing me.” Over breakfast with family and top executives, a truly Shakespearian scene unfolds as Logan tries to determine who will be the “head on a spike” to appease nervous shareholders. First, Logan volunteers himself, only, inevitably, to be met with a shower of “No!”s. One by one, the possible candidates to be thrown overboard suggest, in a spirit of selfless generosity, candidates other than themselves. Roman proposes a “loyal servant like Karl”, for which the latter thanks him. There’s a polite pile-on on Gerri, though as Roman says, haven’t we killed enough women recently? The focus turns to Tom – perhaps with some “Greg sprinkles”? To his indignation, Shiv agrees that it would be “logical”. Connor, with magnificent conceit, then suggests himself as the “old Richelieu”, pulling the strings all these years. We’ll bear it in mind, half-smiles Logan. On a trip to a nearby cove, Tom opens up to Shiv. She had suggested a threesome earlier but Tom had demurred at the last minute, clearly nervous at the prospect. He now reveals he has never been happy about the open relationship, proposed by Shiv on their wedding day, that he feels “shanghaied into an open borders free fuck trade deal”. He’s genuinely unhappy with her, he says. Who would have thought he would have been the one to call time on the relationship? It’s his most affecting moment of the series. Shiv later pleads with Logan, however, not to sacrifice Tom. “For me.” Kendall is sent for by his father. There is a deathly inevitability about what happens next, especially as Logan relates how the Incas would sacrifice a child to the sun in times of crisis. “You’re the face – the optics make sense.” Kendall accepts his fate with the docile, filial devotion he has displayed all series. A press conference is set up; he will make a prepared statement, explaining his role in the illegality in the cruises division then take questions. Except he doesn’t. Instead, he declares, “the truth is that my father is a malignant presence, a bully and a liar and was fully aware of these events”, before concluding: “I think this is the day his reign ends.” Greg is standing by with an envelope full of documents that Logan signed off on. He is in this, too; his vengeance for being screwed over last week. Logan, watching the conference on TV, doesn’t explode. Instead, a strange look of pride floats across his face, as if to say, that’s my boy. Not the servile figure Logan has probably been holding in contempt, but a killer after all. Still, this means war … Roman, in an announcement tossed out by Logan almost as an afterthought. He’s now sole chief operating officer. But it doesn’t feel momentous, and Roman himself, scared decent by his recent ordeal, is more concerned for Kendall having to take the rap than his new responsibilities. • There is a touch of the Citizen Kanes about Connor’s bankrolling of Willa’s clearly awful show, reminders of Susan Alexander and her terrible opera career. Except Willa lacks Susan Alexander’s low sense of self-esteem and her benefactor is being bankrupted by the folly. • It would be a great shame for Connor to have to give up his presidential campaign, especially now he has his army of “Conheads”. Let’s hope it’s revived for series three. • Despite perilously low ratings, HBO has shown proper boldness in recommissioning Succession. Its reputation has grown enormously this time round; with its relentlessly acidic wit, it has represented many of the sordid realities and characters of modern life – Weinstein, Trump, Murdoch – with unerring pertinence. Meanwhile, as he did with Peep Show, the creator Jesse Armstrong has shown that a series can not only survive but thrive without likeable, moral and sympathetic characters. And even find a way of making us care for them. Until we meet again …