Richard Sherman says that he plans to apologize to Baker Mayfield after accusing the Cleveland Browns quarterback of not shaking his hand before Monday night’s game. Sherman initially said he felt Mayfield disrespected him before the pregame coin toss by ignoring him, but after videos showed that Mayfield did shake hands with Sherman, the San Francisco 49ers cornerback has changed his mind. “It’s definitely my bad,” Sherman said on Wednesday during an appearance on The Pat McAfee Show. “I never want anybody to have to deal with some stuff that they didn’t do. And so, you know, the questions that he’s gonna get and the annoying, nonsense questions about some stuff that happened in a game that’s already been done, you know, sure he’ll get an apology for that. So Richard Sherman claims Baker Mayfield refused to shake his hand at the coin toss. This video seems to indicate otherwise: pic.twitter.com/4CgOsLKLPL “I’ll probably reach out to him via text or social media to actually get ahold of him and talk to him in person, I mean on the phone. But, yeah, because that sucks. Yeah, yeah, he definitely deserves an apology, and that’s my bad on that.” Mayfield threw two interceptions – one to Sherman – in the first quarter of Monday’s game, in which the Browns were trounced 31-3 by the unbeaten 49ers. Sherman had said after the game that Mayfield’s perceived slight helped him. “Sometimes you remember things a little differently than it happened,” Sherman said on Wednesday. “Obviously it still motivated me the same way.” Sherman was not the only 49er to clash with Mayfield this week. San Francisco defensive end Nick Bosa poked fun at the Browns quarterback after forcing Mayfield into a hurried incompletion in the second quarter. Bosa, the second overall draft pick this year, pretended to wave a flag and plant it in the turf as the crowd roared. It was a clear shot at Mayfield, who planted an Oklahoma flag in the turf after leading the Sooners to win over Bosa and Ohio State in 2017. The Browns, and Mayfield, had been tipped to be a force this year, but have stuttered so far and have a 2-3 record.