For now, we know very few details of what Boris Johnson and Leo Varadkar agreed at their private summit in Wirral yesterday. We do, however, know that it was enough for the UK and EU sides to enter the “negotiation tunnel” this weekend – an intensive period for hammering out the details of a potential new deal. Think the Channel tunnel, only this time you’re trying to drag two close partners further apart. It may be a technical extension of a few weeks, but it still breaks the pledge on which he has staked his leadership When we take a step back from Brexit’s daily developments, it’s clear that nothing really changes. The position in Dublin and Brussels has not fundamentally moved since the day of the referendum. Namely, the EU cannot agree to a scenario which necessitates border infrastructure on the island of Ireland, now or at any point in the future. Theresa May’s deal satisfied that demand, because it kept Northern Ireland in both the EU’s customs union and single market for goods, and ensured the arrangement could not lapse without the consent of all sides. Johnson’s proposal cannot satisfy it, because it institutes a different tariff regime for Northern Ireland without a credible alternative to the backstop, and allows the DUP to suspend alignment as soon as next year. The mood music so far suggests the concessions have come from one side only. Varadkar’s overt enthusiasm on Thursday contrasted notably with Downing Street’s reticence to comment. Unless Johnson has been deceiving his Irish counterpart, or Varadkar has gravely misunderstood him, it seems overwhelmingly likely that the prime minister has conceded the central point about customs: Northern Ireland cannot leave the customs union without viable alternative arrangements, and there can be no such arrangements without a fallback option enshrined in the withdrawal agreement. The issue of consent is also vital. The EU may be able to concede a little more ground here, but there can be no question of allowing the DUP a veto – or, put another way, the unilateral power to reinstitute a hard border on the island of Ireland. If the DUP were so empowered, it would also make Sinn Féin unlikely ever to share power with them again. As with so much in Brexit, apparently isolated political choices may set in train ramifications that the initial actors never imagined or understood. The more immediate point is that all this is academic for Johnson’s basic ambition, which is to take us out of the EU on 31 October at any cost. Consider this for a moment: it is now Friday. The European council summit is on Thursday. The two sides have merely agreed to begin negotiating. They must now find a delicate compromise to satisfy all interested parties, reach concrete agreement in the British cabinet and in every member state, draft a tight legal text with time for lawyers and officials on both sides to examine each word, then secure the final sign-off in EU capitals in order to prepare the council summit conclusions – all in six days. The first time round it took 18 months. This would all be hard enough if it were simply about resolving the Irish border issue and not endangering western Europe’s most fragile peace. But it encompasses even broader concerns. The EU negotiators must convince Emmanuel Macron, Angela Merkel and the entire European parliament that the deal guarantees the integrity of the single market in all circumstances. The UK negotiators must convince parliament that the deal “delivers Brexit” and is substantively different from May’s settlement, while also placating the concerns of both the communities in Northern Ireland. The DUP is unlikely to back anything that suggests indefinite divergence from Great Britain – and if it does not budge, neither will the Tory hardliners. If, by some miracle, the government can win round enough no-deal Brexiters and Labour waverers to get this deal over the line, it still does not rescue Johnson from his predicament. There is next to no chance that parliament can vote on a deal by Saturday. Even if MPs wanted to endorse the agreement, they would have no time to scrutinise it. Johnson will be forced to abide by the Benn Act and seek a delay. That may be a technical extension of just a few weeks, but it still breaks the pledge on which he has staked his leadership. More worryingly for the prime minister, Nigel Farage will be apoplectic. Not only will the Tories have extended Brexit yet again, but from the Brexit party’s perspective, they will have effectively rehashed May’s deal. In the election which follows, Johnson will confront the anger both of dedicated remainers and leavers. We must give the prime minister his due. We said he would have to climb down and he evidently has. But if he really is prepared to die in a ditch over the 31 October deadline, he should be aware that he has dug it himself. • Jonathan Lis is deputy director of the thinktank British Influence