My little sister Gemma was 11 years old when she was first subjected to street harassment. Afterwards, she asked me whether it had been her fault. The conversation that followed was not an easy one. First, she explained what had happened. It was the summer before starting secondary school, and she had been walking down our local high street in broad daylight. A van slowed down beside her and a man leaned out to make crude, sexual remarks about her body. Petrified and confused, she ran crying all the way to her friend’s house. Recounting the event, she admitted to feeling ashamed. She couldn’t work out what she had done wrong or how she had encouraged this man to say such horrible things. Eventually she concluded it was because she’d worn shorts that day. I knew all too well how she felt. As a 17-year-old who had also experienced this sort of guilty feeling, I tried to make her understand that none of this was her fault, that she should never feel guilty for being sexualised by adult men. What I found most painful was explaining to her that while the man’s actions were indefensible, what she had experienced was in many ways a “normal” part of being a girl, and just the beginning of a lifetime filled with such incidents. Most people who have young women in their lives can relate to the uncomfortable reality of seeing their loved ones sexualised far too early. Gemma’s right to discover her own sense of womanhood and sexuality was taken away, without her consent. The accepted becomes unacceptable when it happens to those we love. Street harassment is unbearable. And yet we do bear it – day in, day out. The truth is that Gemma’s first experience of street harassment was a typical one, and shared by two-thirds of girls in this country. Even the emotions she felt – anger, shame, fear – are the textbook response to everyday street harassment. In the long term, this form of gender-based violence has been linked to low self-esteem and depression. Gemma, thankfully, felt she could speak to someone about her experience; many girls don’t, and this can have serious consequences. Street harassment reflects a sad truth: the ability to feel comfortable in public is something not shared equally Five months ago, Gemma and I decided we’d had enough. Inspired by a new law introduced in France, we started a national campaign to make street harassment illegal in the UK. Since then, more than 160,000 people have signed our petition. Using our Instagram @OurStreetsNow, we have collected testimonies from women and girls up and down the country who want to share their experiences, creating a space in which their voices and stories are heard and validated by other victims. Some of the stories reflect our experiences; others don’t. I’ve had a man threaten to rape me, but I’ve never been followed to my door. I’ve been called a slut, but I will never be subject to the horrendous racial harassment that many women of colour experience alongside the sexual kind. A crucial part of our work has been to educate ourselves and our followers about how the street harassment we face is affected by our privilege. Ableism, homophobia, racism, transphobia and all other forms of discrimination inflect the way in which women and girls experience violence, and yet the stories we hear in the media always centre around one kind of body. We want to go beyond this narrow understanding of the problem. Unquestionably, street harassment is about power and control. It reflects a sad truth: we don’t own our streets and the ability to feel comfortable in public spaces is something that is not shared equally. But by telling our stories on social media, we are reclaiming our space – online, and on the streets. In the three years that have passed since Gemma first told me her story, I get harassed less while she gets more abuse. I’m 20 and look like an adult; she’s 14 and wears a school uniform. Hundreds of women have talked of having similar experiences – the levels of harassment they faced peaked at an age at which perpetrators believed them to be weak. But young women are not weak. This is the generation to say: no more. Across the world, those with power are being forced to wake up to the problem of street harassment by a wave of women and girls demanding to be heard. Two years since it went viral, and two decades after Tarana Burke first used the term, #MeToo is a large part of why we’re saying enough is enough. Social media have given us platforms to speak out and challenge the injustices we see. We’ve learned the power of our voices and, as a sisterhood, we’re going to use it to change the world. • Maya Tutton, with her sister Gemma, founded the Our Streets Now campaign to make street harassment illegal in the UK