Ben Ryan went from the streets of Brentford to becoming honorary Fijian royalty after leading their sevens team to gold at the Olympics in Rio in 2016. On Tuesday his latest project, RugbyX, makes its debut at the O2 in London. Many of his Fijian players will be turning out for the Barbarians, coached by Danny Care. England, France, Ireland and USA have also signed up – with both men’s and women’s teams. It is a unique rugby tournament: five-a-side, indoors, no goal-kicks, no line-outs, no half time, uncontested scrums. What’s the theory behind RugbyX?“To have a game you can play in a school gym without a coach, like pick-up basketball. The promoters had a look at the way rugby was going, the demographics, and thought indoors could be the way forward. We got World Rugby into the room on day one as that’s what you have to do – and the RFU. We messed around with the laws, taking away things that complicate it. There’s no goalkicking, so we don’t need posts. It had to be based on the fundamental core skills: pass, tackle, catch and decision-making.” Some people will wonder why we need yet another rugby format.“Well, if the game was thriving, participation was rising, stadiums were full and things were going through the roof, I’d accept that. But none of those things is happening. It’s a challenge in a very traditional sport. I thought it would be cool to have a game that takes the coach away.” Is there a plan to take RugbyX to arenas around the world?“We’ve talked to markets outside the UK but it’s got to work this time for us to expand. Any profits this year will go to charity. It’s more about creating a new format, a modified game, than this one event. If it takes off it will be significant for the sevens players, as you could add four or five of these events to the calendar. I’m excited because this a lot easier to get into a school in the inner city. The Welsh Prison Service want us to take RugbyX into every prison in Wales and I’m bang up for that. We’ve bought a full-size 4G pitch so we can transport it anywhere. Every time we use it we just lop a bit off the end, like a roll of carpet. It will run out eventually!” Isn’t rugby missing a trick in not encouraging players to try different formats and codes? “Definitely. In my last year with England (RFU), I met with the RFL. Barrie-Jon Mather had got the green light from their CEO to talk to me. We were going to get the best young league players into the sevens programme and give them the things that league said they were missing: getting used to travelling overseas and playing Test matches, get them out of the M62 bubble. They were telling us stories of players who had never had a night away from their parents’ house, who were suddenly going away to different cultures and weren’t travelling well. They also knew league is never going to be an Olympic sport, but we could get league players in there via sevens and that would raise the profile of rugby league. I was all for it as I saw how talented these kids were and we wanted a wider player base. It would be good for the game. It was all set up. Then I left and soon after Barrie-Jon left and it never got picked up. I still think that’s a very good idea and rugby league will engage in that still.” So a hugely talented 20-year-old from say, Wigan, who is not quite ready for Super League could spend winter doing the World Sevens circuit…“It would do them the world of good. He’d remain contracted to Wigan Warriors and everyone would know he’s a Wigan rugby league player, with all the profile and kudos that comes with that. The seasons are such that is would probably fit. I would definitely do it. It’s of even more value now as the England Sevens programme is losing funding, with no connection with the Premiership. Where are they going to get their future players from? League is one option. They should be re-engaging. They could slip it in at sevens level, run age group and senior sevens with crossovers. I think they could get that through.” In your book, Sevens Heaven, you kept losing Fiji players overseas. I’m surprised Australian and Kiwi clubs don’t hoover up everyone…“They have a good crack at it! In my three years I lost about 20. Half who went to top end clubs, the others disappeared to Federale 2 [French union’s third tier], Malaysia, Sri Lanka, semi-pro rugby league in Australia, Romania, all over the shop. After winning one tournament, we lost seven players to the Sri Lankan army! They were offering way more than we were. A French club will get Fijians on a flight, chuck them in a house and see who survives. I was able to find out which clubs treat them properly and they were the ones we really engaged with.” If Fiji had every eligible player available, how good would they be?“They’d win the sevens, every year. They’d be right up there in league, too. They’ve reached three World Cup semis in a row, with Fijians in opposition teams. Some of the best union guys, who grew up playing league and union in Fiji – like Viliame Mata, a ‘leagie’ who I got across to sevens – would be in the league side straightaway. They’d be finalists, I think.” You seemed to have entirely different experience with Jarryd Hayne than his NRL reputation…“What you hear and what you see can be very different things. You have to go on what you see. I always do due diligence on a player coming in. But I don’t put them bottom of the class. I put them as A* and it’s up to them to hang on to that. With Jarryd, we were in camp together for about seven weeks and he didn’t ever put a foot wrong. He pulled out of some of the early sessions as he just wasn’t fit, but he flew in a masseur that he needed and they looked after everyone, at his cost. Jarryd stayed when we didn’t select him [for Rio] and ran water. He got a load of brand new kit flown over for the boys, too. He managed to get Masivesi Dakuwaqa, the guy who is blind in one eye, to Canberra Raiders and he’s now signed for Toulon, which is brilliant.” Was the negativity around him a mystery?“I could see how Jarryd could drop off. It was clear how you had to handle him. I went for a coffee with the Gold Coast Titans staff as they asked how to deal with this guy. In Fiji, when everyone is at the same level, very basic, the simple things in life, he thrived. When money, the big city life, media scrutiny, television and the wrong people get involved, things fall apart for him. I’ve only got good things to say about him.” The Fiji sevens team survived Cyclone Winston, then thrived after it, heading to Rio 2016. Could you have done that if the cyclone had hit earlier in your time there?“Wow… gosh, I don’t know. Their psyche as a culture is: if something really bad happens and they lose something, they say ‘oh well, we didn’t have much in the first place’ so they just get on with it. They deal with it. They’re living in the present and are grateful for what they have. They don’t think: ‘Oh shit! The next five years are going to be rubbish for us and our village.’ The negatives are pensions don’t really exist, the free bar and buffet gets cleaned out pretty quickly – but they’re enjoying life. Being new to their environment and culture, I might not have stuck it out, especially when I wasn’t getting paid and we weren’t winning. I might have jumped ship.” You’ve went to both state and private schools, Loughborough University and Cambridge. Has that helped you?“Definitely. I taught in both, too: an inner-city comprehensive school and a boarding school. I’ve never really felt I could put myself in any category. I grew up in Brentford next to a council estate but we had a really nice house. I’ve flipped between different parts of society. It made me more rounded. I just like to get the best out of other people and I definitely have a soft spot for the underdog.” • RugbyX takes place at the O2 in London on Tuesday and tickets are available from Ticketmaster and AXS (£20 adults and £10 concessions).