There was a moment last week, in the gardens of the Manchester hotel where the Great Britain squad were assembling, when Zak Hardaker was afforded a moment of contemplation. Twelve months ago, the Yorkshireman was in the wilderness, serving a 14-month ban for drugs use before being convicted of drink‑driving, a few weeks before he was due to return with Wigan. His previous included a five-match ban imposed in 2014 for homophobic abuse. Now, having celebrated his 28th birthday while flying to the southern hemisphere, he is returning to international rugby with the Lions. Calling Hardaker’s career turbulent does not even begin to scratch the surface but this year feels somewhat different for the former Leeds and Castleford full‑back. In January, Hardaker told the Observer on the eve of his comeback how he was eager to prove he had finally learned his lesson and that he was a changed man once and for all. Does a call-up for Great Britain – who kick off their four-game tour, their first since 2006, with a match against a Tongan XIII on Saturday – show he was a man of his word? “That’s for everyone else to decide,” he says. “It’s a day‑to-day process for me and for a lot of people looking at me. I’m always learning and I understand what I’ve done means I’ll be in the public eye for the rest of my career. But I would like to think I’ve shown this year that there is a different side to me.” Hardaker’s first season with Wigan has been impressive. The 2015 Man of Steel was instrumental in the Warriors’ mid-season revival, which took them to within one game of the Super League Grand Final. “It took me a bit longer than I thought it would to get back up to speed,” he says. “But I got there in the end and so did the team. I just wanted to repay Wigan for signing me and show people there is a different side to me.” Despite his excellent end-of-season form, the Lions call came as a surprise to everyone, especially given he had not been involved in the England training squad this year. “I’d resigned myself to going on holiday and watching the Great Britain lads on telly,” he says, smiling. “You do start to worry if you’ll ever get the call again, and wonder if everything that’s happened has gone against you. “To be honest, I admitted defeat in terms of a call-up earlier in the year. Now, to be on the tour is beyond my wildest dreams. But it doesn’t mean I’m back. There’s still lots of work to do and, like I say, it’s still very much a day‑to-day process.” Hardaker has been candid about his struggles with his mental health and alcohol in the past, but his move to Wigan felt like a fresh start for a number of reasons. “I did need to get away [from his Pontefract roots] and start again,” he says. “I can drive again in January so I can go home and see family, but in Wigan, I’m happy for all the right reasons. Before, at home, I was happy because I was selfish. It makes life so much easier to see my partner and my family happy. It’s something I’ve learned to cherish.” Having never held a conversation with the Great Britain coach, Wayne Bennett, before his call-up, Hardaker’s opportunities to perform in a squad littered with players in a similar position could be limited. But having come so far in such a short space of time, the opportunity just to impress Bennett is one Hardaker is understandably savouring. “I don’t really know where Wayne sees me in terms of my position,” he says. “But give me any number, any position … to play for Great Britain after all that’s happened? I’m lucky, I know that. “To be back in the international fold is incredible but there’s so much more to come. Most importantly, my family are proud of how far I’ve come and it’s little moments like that which allow you to take a step back and see how much things can change in a year.” Great Britain tour dates 26 Oct Tongan XIII 8am 2 Nov New Zealand 4am 9 Nov New Zealand 7am 16 Nov PNG 7.30am All UK times