Prep 20 minMarinate 2 hr-plusCook 40 minServes 4 as a starter 1 tbsp olive oil200ml cider vinegar200ml cider50g caster sugar1 garlic clove, peeled and crushed2 thyme sprigs2 bay leavesSea salt4 sustainably-sourced mackerel, filleted and pin-bonedA few dill sprigs, to finish For the slaw2 white onions, peeled and peeled and sliced2 carrots, peeled and grated20 radishes, trimmed and sliced400g mixture of white cabbage, cauliflower, celery and/or brussels sprouts, trimmed and finely sliced80g caster sugar2 tsp salt200ml cider vinegar4 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil2 tsp black mustard seed1 tsp ground black pepper3 tbsp each chives, mint and parsley, choppedSea salt and freshly ground black pepper For the salad cream2 free-range egg yolks1 tbsp wholegrain mustard2 tsp caster sugar2 tbsp lemon juice100ml light olive oil150ml double cream Heat the first seven ingredients in a pan to dissolve the sugar, then simmer for two minutes and add a pinch of salt. Lay the fish in a dish in which they’ll fit snugly in one layer. Submerge in the liquor, cover and leave to pickle for at least two hours. (The fillets can be kept in the liquor for up to two days.) Toss the slaw veg in two tablespoons of sugar and salt, and gently scrunch. Tip into a sieve and drain for 20 minutes. For the salad cream, whisk the egg yolks, mustard, sugar and lemon juice for a minute. Whisk in the oil in a thin stream, then whisk in the cream, season with salt, cover and refrigerate. In a small bowl, mix the rest of the sugar with the vinegar, oil, mustard seeds, pepper and a pinch of salt. Toss the vegetables in the dressing, add the herbs and season again to taste. Spoon some salad cream on to plates and top each with a pile of a pile of slaw. Lift out the fish fillets, lay two on each plate, sprinkle on sea salt and dill, and serve. Prep 15 minMarinate 12 hrCook 30 minServes 8 as a starter 300ml white wine150ml white-wine vinegar150g caster sugarSea salt and freshly ground black pepper8 banana shallots, peeled and finely chopped2 large baking potatoes, peeled and cut into even chunks1 pinch saffron strands300ml whole milk2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped2 bay leaves500g sustainably-sourced smoked haddock or pollock fillet, skinned and pin-boned200ml cold-pressed rapeseed oil, plus extra to finish2 handfuls flat-leaf parsley leaves, plus 2 tbsp, sliced, to garnishJuice of 1 lemonFrench bread, sliced Put the wine, vinegar and sugar in a pan, add a pinch of salt and bring to a gentle simmer. Put the shallots in a bowl, immerse in the hot liquor and leave to cool. Cover and marinate for at least 12 hours. (They’ll keep for three months in an airtight jar in the fridge.) Put the potatoes in a pan, add water to cover, a big pinch of salt and the saffron. Bring to a simmer and cook for about 15 minutes, until soft, then drain and leave to dry. Put the milk, garlic and bay in a pan, bring to a gentle simmer, then lay in the fish, turn off the heat and poach in the residual heat for six minutes. Lift out and flake into the bowl of a food processor, reserving the milk. Gently warm the oil in a pan. Blitz the fish to a puree, then, with the motor running, slowly add the warm oil and reserved milk. Once mixed, add the parsley and potatoes, and blitz for 30 seconds. Add most of the lemon juice and a good grind of pepper, then scrape into a bowl. Season to taste, and add more lemon juice if need be. Toast the bread. Lift some shallots out of the liquor, toss with the sliced parsley and arrange on four plates. Add a mound of brandade, top with a drizzle of rapeseed oil and a little parsley, and serve with the toasts. Prep 20 minCook 30 minServes 4 as a starter 150g crust-free granary or sourdough bread, torn into pieces50ml light olive oil, plus extra for drizzling on the bread and to finish1 litre vegetable or fish stock50g unsalted butter1 large white onion, peeled and peeled and finely chopped1 fennel bulb, tough outer layer removed, the rest finely chopped2 garlic cloves, peeled, germ removed and finely chopped240g carnaroli rice50ml white-wine vinegar100ml dry white wine2 tbsp dried seaweed flakes, plus 1 tsp extra to garnish400g each live cockles, clams and mussels, cleaned100g grated parmesan8 spring onions, trimmed and thinly sliced1 handful tarragon leaves, chopped1 handful flat-leaf parsley leaves, picked and finely choppedGrated zest of 1 limeSea salt and freshly ground black pepper Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Put the bread on an oven tray, drizzle with olive oil, season and bake for 10 minutes, until golden and crisp. Tip out on a plate lined with kitchen paper to drain, and set aside. Meanwhile, bring the stock to a simmer. Put a large, heavy-based saucepan on a medium heat and add the oil and butter. Heat until bubbling, then add the white onion, fennel and garlic, and cook, stirring, for three minutes, until the onion is translucent. Add the rice and cook, stirring, for two minutes. Add the vinegar and wine, and cook, stirring, until the liquid has reduced to almost nothing – about three minutes – then add the seaweed flakes. Add the stock a ladle at a time, stirring slowly and continuously and letting the rice fully absorb each ladleful before adding the next – about 12 minutes. Add the shellfish and another ladle of stock, cook for two minutes, until the shellfish start to open, then stir in the cheese, spring onions and herbs, and turn off the heat. Give the rice a gentle stir, then share between warmed plates; remove and discard any unopened shellfish. Scatter over the crisp bread and lime zest, sprinkle with seaweed and serve at once. Prep 15 minMarinate 30 minCook 30 minServes 4 as a starter 400g sustainably-sourced monkfish fillet, skinned and pin-bonedZest of 1 lime, finely grated2 tbsp chopped coriander½ tsp cayenne pepper½ tsp ground cuminSea salt and freshly ground black pepper100g gluten-free self-raising flour120ml dry sparkling ciderSunflower oil, for deep-frying2 limes, halved For the mayonnaise2 egg yolks15ml white-wine vinegar30g jalapeños in vinegar, drained250ml sunflower oil15g flat-leaf parsley, picked and chopped10g coriander, picked and chopped25g rocket, chopped15g grated parmesan For the mayo, blitz the egg yolks, vinegar and chillies for 30 seconds, then scrape down and blitz again. With the motor running, slowly add half the oil in a thin stream. Add the herbs, rocket, parmesan and a big pinch of salt, blend for a minute, then slowly add the remaining oil, until the mix emulsifies and goes thick. Season, cover and refrigerate until needed. Cut the fish into 4cm chunks. In a bowl, mix the zest, coriander, cayenne, cumin and a good pinch of salt. Toss in the monkfish pieces and marinate for 30 minutes. For the batter, mix the flour and cider until smooth. Heat the oil to 180C in a deep-fat fryer (or deep-sided, heavy-based pan) and season the fish. Dip each chunk of fish in the batter to coat, then deep-fry in batches for three to four minutes, until cooked and crisp. Gently lift out, drain on kitchen paper and keep warm. Sprinkle the fish with a little salt and spear on to cocktail sticks. To serve, put the sticks on plates, add a dollop of mayo and serve with a lime half. The Guardian aims to publish recipes for fish rated as sustainable by the Marine Conservation Society’s Good Fish Guide. Nathan Outlaw is chef-patron of Restaurant Nathan Outlaw in Port Isaac, Cornwall, and Siren at The Goring in London. His new book, Nathan Outlaw’s British Seafood, is published next month by Quadrille at £14.99.