It is 35 years since Sarah Connor and the Terminator’s eyes first met across a dark 80s nightclub, shortly followed by his red laser sight meeting her forehead. They have had their ups and down since: attempting to destroy each other in the first movie; teaming up again seven years later to avert Judgment Day in Terminator 2; then being torn apart by the increasingly erratic Terminator timeline. But as they meet again at last, in the new Terminator: Dark Fate, it is striking how much of Linda Hamilton and Arnold Schwarzenegger’s lives came to be shaped by these roles – albeit in very different ways. It was at Hamilton’s urging that James Cameron refashioned Sarah Connor between Terminators 1 and 2, from damsel-in-distress to muscular, shotgun-pumping, commando tiger mom (Cameron did much the same for Sigourney Weaver’s Ripley in Aliens). Action cinema was never the same again. Hamilton had recently divorced and given birth to her first child, so she was in the mood for a transformation. It worked so well, she and Cameron became a couple and had a daughter together. “I think what happened there is that he really fell in love with Sarah Connor,” Hamilton recalled in a recent New York Times interview, “and I did, too.” After T2, Hamilton wanted to branch out and make comedies, but she was only offered more action roles. She and Cameron separated in 1999. Not unlike Connor herself, Hamilton practically became a recluse. Schwarzenegger, on the other hand, rode the wave, leveraging his Terminator success into a good run as a Hollywood leading man: Predator, Total Recall, True Lies, er, Jingle All the Way. He went into business (you can still buy a “Terminator” cocktail at Planet Hollywood; it sounds gross), and then into politics – all the while successfully trading on his cyborg persona (“Hasta la vista baby to the car tax!” he proclaimed during his 2003 campaign to become California’s “Governator”). Now, as they meet again on screen, they are bringing very different sets of baggage. Arnie’s attempts to rebuild a movie career post-politics have largely faltered, his only real success being The Expendables, on the basis that no satire of past-it action men would be complete without him. Hamilton, on the other hand, has largely sustained a dignified, contented silence, save for a few well-received, small-screen roles. In her absence, though, Sarah Connor has become a cultural beacon for many an aspiring female action hero, and our screens are currently littered with contenders in her mould. The Terminator was supposed to be the one who comes from the future, but looking at the two characters today, it seems that Connor was the future all along. Terminator: Dark Fate is in cinemas on 23 October