The pilot of a helicopter that crashed into the Clutha bar in Glasgow, killing 10 people including himself, decided to ignore low fuel warnings, an inquiry has found. The crash on the night of Friday 29 November 2013 killed the pilot, Captain David Traill, two police officers and seven customers of the bar. A further 31 people were injured. In his written determination following five months of oral evidence in a fatal accident inquiry, the sheriff principal, Craig Turnbull, said: “Captain Traill consciously took a risk in proceeding on the basis that the low fuel warnings were in some way erroneous (when they were not). That decision had fatal consequences.” Turnbull added: “The central issue was why Captain Traill allowed the supply tanks to deplete to the point that they did when there was more than sufficient usable fuel available to him in the main tank to allow [the helicopter] to return safely to [base].” He concluded it was “more likely than not that the quantities of fuel displayed on the fuel quantity indication system of [helicopter] contradicted the low fuel warnings, in a manner that persuaded Captain Traill that it was safe to continue flying”. Reacting to the report, family members of those who died expressed frustration that so little new information or explanation had been provided, given the pilot’s failure to follow the fuel warning had been established by a prior investigation. They were also highly critical of the time taken to hold the fatal accident inquiry. Turnbull said it was clear from the evidence that the accident was caused by Traill’s failure to ensure that at least one of the fuel transfer pump switches was set to on. The inquiry heard that the helicopter’s engines flamed out sequentially as a result of fuel starvation while the craft was airborne. However, Turnbull said there was no evidence to suggest the pilot deliberately caused the crash, and it was clear he “made a valiant attempt to land … after both engines had flamed out”. Turnbull said he did not believe he could offer recommendations to prevent further deaths occurring in similar circumstances, because the particular circumstances of this crash “appear to be unique”. He said: “Had Captain Traill performed the actions set out in the pilot’s checklist, the accident would not have happened.” Those who were in the helicopter were Traill, 51, PC Tony Collins, 43, and PC Kirsty Nelis, 36. The seven Clutha customers who were killed were Gary Arthur, 48, Joe Cusker, 59, Colin Gibson, 33, Robert Jenkins, 61, John McGarrigle, 58, Samuel McGhee, 56, and Mark O’Prey, 44. Witnesses told the inquiry that they heard a spluttering and grinding noise before the helicopter fell. The inquiry, roughly equivalent to an inquest, was charged with establishing what caused the fatal crash and how the victims died. It took place in a temporary court at Hampden Park football stadium to accommodate the scores of witnesses, aviation experts and family members. Breaks in the hearings were scheduled to fit around football matches and concerts. An Air Accidents Investigations Branch (AAIB) report published in 2015 found two fuel supply switches were off and the pilot did not follow emergency procedures after a fuel warning in the cockpit. The Crown Office, Scotland’s prosecution authority, ruled there was not enough evidence to justify criminal proceedings. The police interviewed 2,000 witnesses and amassed 1,400 pieces of evidence for the FAI.