At least 13 police officers were killed and three injured on Monday by gunmen in the western state of Michoacán, a region where violence attributed to organized crime has spiked in recent months. The state police officers had gone to a home in the town of El Aguaje in Aguililla municipality to enforce a judicial order when “several armed civilians fired on them”, Michoacán’s state security department said in a statement. After the attack, the area in western Mexico’s so-called “hot lands” was reinforced by federal and state security forces, who installed checkpoints to find the assailants. Michoacán, an important avocado-growing state, has seen a spike in violence that has brought back memories of the bloodiest days of Mexico’s war on drug cartels between 2006 and 2012. In August, police found 19 bodies in the town of Uruapan, including nine hung from a bridge. Later, an area roughly 45 miles north of Aguililla was the scene of fierce clashes between members of the Jalisco New Generation cartel and regional self-defense groups. In 2013, civilian groups faced with what they said was state inaction armed themselves in Michoacán to fight the Caballeros Templarios (Knights Templar) cartel, one of whose bases was Aguililla. They said they took up arms to defend themselves from kidnappings, extortion and killings. But some of the self-defense or vigilante groups were infiltrated by cartels and gangs. The government of the former president Enrique Peña Nieto launched a process to disarm and legalize the vigilante groups and incorporate them into official security forces. Michoacán’s governor, Silvano Aureoles, has said the self-defense groups have not returned and has criticized federal authorities for not attacking cartels in his state with sufficient force and negotiating with vigilante groups he refers to as criminals. Besides avocado orchards, Michoacán for decades has been known for marijuana plantations and the making of methamphetamine, as well as being home to the port of Lázaro Cárdenas, a key entry point of precursor chemicals used to make synthetic drugs.