August is my favorite month because every year my family goes on an African American themed Caribbean Island cruise – replace the shuffle board with a basketball court, switch out the chicken nuggets for southern fried chicken, and get rid of whatever weak a capella group is performing and insert Fantasia. But the summer before my senior year in high school, my family and I flew to New Orleans instead – my dad had a surprise specifically for me. When he met me in our hotel lobby with my uncle Al, I thought to myself, “A little father and son and uncle bonding time. I’m with it.” But then a luxury tour bus pulled up to the curb, and suddenly all these people piled out of the hotel and started boarding. “Oh, a wine tour?” I thought. My dad, my uncle and I hopped on last. I saw a digital sign above the bus driver’s head that read: “PLANTATION TOURS.” There was not a single black passenger on the bus besides the three of us. I turned to my dad and asked, “Are we really going to a plantation? Like – on purpose?” The bus driver, an older black man, must have overheard what I said because he turned around and replied, “I was thinking the same thing. Y’all the first black people I’ve ever seen on this tour …” To be honest, even though I believe it’s important to learn about your family’s past, slavery is something I’m comfortable only reading about. Although my family is from the south and always talked openly about slavery, I grew up in California where slavery wasn’t something I learned much about in school. So it feels more distant, not as present, with fewer reminders – the sugar cane fields, the old mansions – all around like I’d see in the south. These reminders give me an eerie feeling when I’m in Louisiana, but on the drive out to the plantation, the driver just pointed them out like monuments. Everyone was so intrigued. I even saw a young white guy with tortoiseshell glasses writing in a notebook. Was he taking notes? On what? On how to run a plantation? The bus driver quickly interrupted my thought with, “Who here loves the movie ‘Django Unchained?’” I raised my hand. But when I looked around, I saw no other hands and slowly lowered mine. “Well to your right we have the Candyland plantation from Django.” I started to hear the “oohs” and “aahs”. The person behind me commented on the “tall white pillars” and the “beautiful outdoor staircase” that lead from the front garden to the balcony of the second floor. Everyone’s phones were out. Then we got out, and the place was creepier than the bus ride. The employees at the plantation were walking around in full 1800s slave master outfits. To my left was the “big house” (for the slave owners). To the right, about 100 yards away, were the slave quarters. And right in front of the slave quarters were a gift shop and a restaurant. The restaurant is known for all-you-can-eat pancakes. No joke. The overall vibe was far too festive, too tourist-y – and disrespectful. Everyone seemed to be doing more reminiscing than reflecting. My boy tortoiseshell? He was still taking notes. I couldn’t help but look at the way the Spanish moss hung and swayed off the trees. I thought about the bodies that likely did the same over this ground that now is home to some tasty pancakes and souvenirs to remind you of the good ole days. I thought about my dining room back home, where we have slave bill of sale papers from my dad’s side of the family in a picture frame. It’s hanging right next to a picture of our family today. Apparently, my dad’s ancestors were held at the same plantation as Nat Turner. That’s why my last name is Turner. So looking at the Spanish moss hit me in all sorts of ways because being there on that plantation, I could almost imagine slavery happening to me. It’s hard to put into words. And this was all before the tour even started. The next thing I noticed was a mint julep stand. I was surprised to see a young black woman working there (the only black employee there as far as I could tell). The idea of getting a celebratory drink seemed stupid, but at this point seeing another black person felt like home. So my dad and I walked over. “Bourbon or rum?” she asked. Even though I’m not yet allowed to make 21-and-up decisions, I replied, “Let’s go with the, um, uh bourbon.” While she made the drink, through some type of black telepathy I tried my hardest to communicate how strange this place was to the employee. As I walked away with my drink, I quickly doubled back and said, “This is weird, righhh–” And before I could finish my sentence, she replied, “Weird as hell.” We began the tour with a guide wearing a long tan suit jacket and a white shirt with frills on it. Nervously he said, “Um, I just want to say by no means are we condoning what happened. We are just showing people the history of this land.” It seemed as if the tour guide was looking at us to pardon him on behalf of all black people. So my dad, uncle and I nodded. The big house was still in great condition. Even I caught myself marveling at the architecture for brief moments – the way the ceiling had beautifully hand-designed white borders that matched the borders on the floor that lead to the fireplace with so much detail in each corner. The strong, rich hardwood floor told stories of its own. Then my eye caught an extremely worn-down spot in the corner of the room. I asked, “What’s that over there?” The guide replied, “Oh they would usually have a slave boy stand there at every meal, pulling a rope the entire time to activate a fan over the dinner table.” My palms got really sweaty. He continued the rest of the tour, but none of it really stuck. I was so zoned out – how many slave boys stood there for hours pulling a rope to fan the room? I now wished that I didn’t ask that question, that I didn’t notice that spot. Then I thought, “If this is a slave plantation tour, how come there aren’t any employees dressed as slaves walking around?” I started to feel lightheaded. Then I found myself being dragged outside. The next thing you know, I was at the back of the “big house” with my dad. Just me and him. He said, “Hey, you good?” “Yeah, I’m fine. It’s just a lot …” He nodded saying, “I know. It’s crazy seeing how our family was treated worse than animals isn’t it?” He looked at the big house. Then at me. Underneath his mowing-the-lawn sun hat, a devious smile grew on his face. He took a step toward the house – first staring at the ground where his feet sink into the dirt, then scanning the house intensely. His face was one shot of curious, two shots of scared for what these walls have seen. Then he looked back at me and said, “Spit on it.” What? Of all the things he could have said in that moment, that was the furthest from my mind. “Spit?” I said, unsure if he was joking or not. “Yes. The house. Spit on it.” I swung my head to see if anyone was around. No one. Then my dad started making guttural throat sounds, put his back into it, and spat on the house. Honestly, that is one of the most disgusting things I’ve seen my dad do. But as soon as he did it, it felt like the air got easier to breathe. My dad was laughing like a little mischievous kid and said, “Now it’s your turn – for all the people who didn’t get a chance to spit before.” So I got the biggest loogie my throat could muster, put my back into it and spit on the house. Suddenly, my body felt lighter and I couldn’t stop laughing. I knew spitting on the house was not that big of a deal. But it felt like a secret I had from the plantation. My own rebellious Nat Turner moment. My dad leaned over and said, “You can’t let that happen Nyge.” I was confused. “Let what happen?” He said: “You know what I always say when it comes to you and your brother right? I’m raising lions. You can’t make anyone make you feel smaller than you are. You’ll feel this more when you get older and I know you feel like I’m a little bit extreme, but when situations arise later in life, I want you to be able to see it for what it is. Don’t let any surroundings shrink you. Always spit on the house. Always.” Nygel Turner, 23, is co-host of the podcast Adult ISH – the culture and advice podcast by folks who are almost-adults – produced by YR Media and brought to listeners by Radiotopia. This essay is adapted from an Adult ISH episode called Roots ISH.