This picture was taken in downtown Soho, New York, and I’m wearing a large, striped, mohair sweater and booties, both from Acne, with Jesse Kamm jeans and a vintage silk blouse. I love this outfit because it has elements of style that make me feel mature and the pieces are by really imaginative designers. I don’t have a problem with spending money on more expensive items as long as I am buying them to feel good and provided they will last me quite a while. I’m a petite person and I love wearing oversized items in an effort to be both comfortable and chic. Sometimes I change my outfit a couple of times a day depending on how I feel or how I want to feel. There was quite a while when I dressed monochromatically; my personality is very colourful and I felt there were many different tones happening at once. I tend to be a pretty frenetic thinker – I scale emotional heights and dip to emotional lows many times a day just as part of being a live human person – so it felt very good to dress in one colour. It meant that at least one thing about me was very simple and straightforward and complete. I stopped dressing monochromatically almost a year ago when I realised that I wanted to be what I am, and not always try to control it. Occasionally, however, I still feel the need to dress in just one colour, and now I know that move is available to me. I am a fan of miniskirts, silk patterned dresses and things that might be seen as more traditionally femme. But I really like wearing outfits where I feel I am separated from qualifications that are put on gender. I love vintage Katharine Hepburn, as well as Hepburn later in her life and what she wears in the movie On Golden Pond. I’m from Massachusetts, and love a tweed and a nubby wool. Right now I find myself trying to dress like characters in The Wind in the Willows – I really like those natural tones. There have been times when my fashion inspiration was Carmen Miranda or Fiona Apple, but at the moment I am drawn towards more earthy colours. I’m also really into brushing my hair out like Diane von Furstenberg – that is so luscious.