Fiona Benson’s second collection, Vertigo & Ghost, has won the prestigious £10,000 Forward prize for best poetry collection, seeing off competition from fellow TS Eliot prize-shortlisted poets Ilya Kaminsky and Vidyan Ravinthiran before that prize being announced in January next year. Described as a collection that brings the violence of Greek myths into the #MeToo era, Vertigo & Ghost explores female fear, desire and ferocity, while rebranding the god Zeus as a serial rapist. Throughout the collection, Benson draws clear parallels between the events of Greek mythology and our own contemporary political moment: “I kept the dictaphone running / it recorded nothing / but my own voice / vulcanised and screaming / you won’t get away with this.” Shahidha Bari, the chair of the judges, called it “a work of unfaltering determination and self-inspection. It is an exhilarating collection that pulses with fury, fear and defiance – and enduring hope too.” Benson, who spent a decade crafting her debut collection Bright Travellers, said in an interview with the Forward Arts Foundation that the poems of Vertigo & Ghost “came in what felt like an involuntary rush, and sometimes in the case of the Zeus poems, I felt I didn’t want them, or couldn’t keep up … There was no plan.” This is not the first time Benson has been singled out for the Forward prizes. She was shortlisted for the best single poem category in 2018 for Ruin, as well as the best first collection category for Bright Travellers in 2015. Earlier this week, it was announced that Vertigo & Ghost has also been shortlisted for the TS Eliot prize for poetry. Alongside Vertigo & Ghost, Stephen Sexton’s If All the World and Love Were Young won the £5,000 Felix Dennis prize for best first collection, with his moving exploration of how video games shaped his grief over his mother’s death. Sexton, stating that he found the idea of writing a book about Super Mario “mildly absurd, and utterly compelling”, soon discovered that his memories of childhood were inextricably linked to grief. He said: “I discovered I was actually writing an elegy for my mother, which came as a surprise to me. In terms of genre, it’s a pastoral elegy, and the digital landscapes of Mario’s world are put beside the actual landscapes of our world.” The Afghani poet Parwana Fayyaz also walked away with the prize for best single poem for Forty Names, which depicts the experience of 40 women who jump off of a cliff in order to preserve their “honour”. Fayyaz only began to write poetry in 2010, when she learned English as a second language. Bari called Forty Names “a poem that feels close to a prayer, and yet is shocking and vital.” She said: “It startled us with its simple, invocatory power, and reminded us of the profound act of witness that poetry can be.” Collectively, the five-strong judging panel – made up of the poets Tara Bergin, Andrew McMillan and Carol Rumens, as well as Bari and the British Library’s Jamie Andrews – read 204 collections and 183 single poems before coming to their final decisions. Bari said they were all “immensely proud of the winners”. She added: “These are poets who inspired us with their conviction and impressed us with their fearlessness. They remind us of what poetry can feel like at its very best: politically urgent and emotionally resonant.” Past winners of the Forward prizes include three of the UK’s poet laureates – Ted Hughes, Carol Ann Duffy and Simon Armitage – as well as Kathleen Jamie and Seamus Heaney. Benson, Fayyaz and Sexton collected their awards at a ceremony in London’s Southbank Centre on Sunday night.