The Guardian’s  climate ranking shows the broad voting trends of individual MPs on climate-related issues. It also compiles donations, salaries, gifts and other interests registered by MPs that are linked to fossil fuel industries or organisations that have denied or cast doubt on climate science. Starting with the Climate Change Act of 2008, it covers 16 votes covering a range of approaches to reducing carbon emissions. The scores are indicative rather than conclusive; the constraints of the party system, the arcane procedures of parliament and the complexity of the voting process are all factors that are hard to quantify. These 16 parliamentary votes on climate (the full list is at the bottom of this article) were chosen by the Guardian and DeSmog UK, which undertakes not-for-profit investigative environmental journalism, . The selection of votes sought to cover a spectrum of policies and motions would affect the UK’s carbon emissions, with an emphasis on votes where MPs were willing to break ranks and put the climate before their party. The list was drawn up in consultation with multiple sources, including Friends of the Earth, Greenpeace, Rebecca Willis (a research associate at Lancaster University) and others. These groups did not see the overall results before publication. Some of the organisations consulted disputed the inclusion of two of the 16 votes: on carbon capture and storage, and nuclear power. However, because of the effect that both bills would have had on carbon emissions, the Guardian included them, though it recognises they are expensive options. On the scorecards, a pro-climate vote (determined purely by its likely impact on emissions, according to the Guardian and DeSmog) is marked with a green tick; negative votes are marked with a black X. The votes were sourced from the Public Whip’s division repository. MPs were assigned points based on the following scoring system: “Negative” vote = -1 “Positive” vote = +1 Both (where an MP walks through both divisions) = 0 Each individual’s cumulative score was divided by the total number of votes he or she participated in. The result is expressed as a percentage. The scoring system was devised by the Guardian. All MPs’ voting records were later checked against the relevant record of the divisions on Hansard. Votes by assent were not included because there are no records to show which MPs were in support. For this reason, parliament’s declaration of a climate emergency and its endorsement of a carbon-neutral goal for 2050 are not included in the scorecards. Minimum qualification: MPs had to have voted on at least three occasions to receive a score. For example, MPs first elected in the 2019 byelections do not feature on the scorecards because they have not taken part in enough votes. Sinn Féin MPs do not have scores because they do not take their places in parliament. Absenteeism: Because of the pairing system operated in the UK parliament (the agreement between two MPs from opposing parties to not vote in a particular division, which in effect means they can cancel out each other’s vote), absent votes were not included in MPs’ scoring cards. The graphic only shows those votes for which an MP was present. Rebellions: The decision was taken not to award MPs extra points for rebellion votes as this would have unfairly disadvantaged individuals who consistently voted green. Tellers’ votes: Tellers (MPs appointed to verify the count when there is a division in the Commons and report the results) are included as an aye or no vote depending on what side of the division they represented. Party/cabinet/shadow cabinet scores: These are based on the average (mean) votes of the relevant group. The party average is based on MPs’ current party affiliation, which is not necessarily their party affiliation at the time of the votes. Senior cabinet members are included in the cabinet score, but not the chief secretary to the Treasury, the leader of the House of Commons, the chief whip, the attorney general or others who attend cabinet meetings, including Lady Evans, leader of the Lords, who is not an MP, and Alister Jack, who assumed office in June 2017 and therefore did not have the requisite three votes required for a score to be assigned. The same calculation was carried out for their Labour opposites, excluding Dan Carden, Keir Starmer and Lesley Laird, who also did not have the requisite three votes. Whipped/free votes: Parties do not consistently reveal whether votes are free or whipped. Our assessment of “rebellions” is based on whether MPs voted against the majority of their party, following the approach used in the Public Whip website. The Guardian has collaborated with leading scientists and NGOs to expose, with exclusive data, investigations and analysis, the fossil fuel companies that are perpetuating the climate crisis – some of which have accelerated their extraction of coal, oil and gas even as the devastating impact on the planet and humanity was becoming clear. The investigation has involved more than 20 Guardian journalists working across the world for the past six months. The project focuses on what the companies have extracted from the ground, and the subsequent emissions they are responsible for, since 1965. The analysis, undertaken by Richard Heede at the Climate Accountability Institute, calculates how much carbon is emitted throughout the supply chain, from extraction to use by consumers. Heede said: "The fact that consumers combust the fuels to carbon dioxide, water, heat and pollutants does not absolve the fossil fuel companies from responsibility for knowingly perpetuating the carbon era and accelerating the climate crisis toward the existential threat it has now become." One aim of the project is to move the focus of debate from individual responsibilities to power structures – so our reporters also examined the financial and lobbying structures that let fossil fuel firms keep growing, and discovered which elected politicians were voting for change. Another aim of the project is to press governments and corporations to close the gap between ambitious long-term promises and lacklustre short-term action. The UN says the coming decade is crucial if the world is to avoid the most catastrophic consequences of global heating. Reining in our dependence on fossil fuels and dramatically accelerating the transition to renewable energy has never been more urgent. Each individual’s record of interests was taken from the They Work for You website and saved as a text document. These text documents were then compared to a list of more than 400 search terms agreed by the aforementioned panel, including (but not limited to) organisations and individuals listed on DeSmog’s Climate Disinformation Database. Every resulting interest was manually checked for errors and false positives, for example where one MP’s interests was erroneously listed on another MP’s page or where the term “BP” was detected because it formed part of a postcode. Interests registered prior to 28 October 2008 (the date of the third reading of the climate change bill) and after 3 July 2019 (the date of the final search) are not included. Wherever possible each individual’s entry was checked against the original parliamentary record. Where an individual MP had declared multiple interests, an editorial decision was taken as to which interests were of a higher priority. For example a sizeable monetary donation would potentially be prioritised over a lower value ticket to a sports event. List of votes: Climate change bill – third reading (and other amendments) – 28 Oct 2008 at 21.58 Airport expansion (parliamentary approval) – 24 Feb 2009 at 16.39 Government to sign up to 10:10 climate change campaign – rejected – 21 Oct 2009 at 18.53 Energy bill – clause 42 – energy efficiency requirement for landlords of private rental properties – 14 Sep 2011 at 18.00 Energy bill – clause 11 – subsidy of nuclear power generation – 3 Jun 2013 at 19.00 Energy bill – clause 1 – requirement to set a decarbonisation target range – 4 Jun 2013 at 15.45 Energy bill – third reading – 4 Jun 2013 at 18.54 Energy bill – clause 10 – financial incentives for larger small scale low carbon generation plants – 4 Jun 2013 at 17.45 Infrastructure bill – new clause 9 – moratorium on onshore unconventional petroleum – review impacts of exploitation – 26 Jan 2015 at 17.30 Infrastructure bill – new clause 1 – environmental permits for hydraulic fracturing activities – 26 January 2015 Finance bill – application of climate change levy tax to electricity generated from renewable sources – 8 Sep 2015 at 19.45 Finance bill – clause 42 – vehicle tax – relation to carbon dioxide emissions – surcharge for vehicles costing over £40,000 – 26 Oct 2015 at 17.30 Energy bill – new clause 3 – carbon capture and storage strategy for the energy industry – 14 Mar 2016 at 19.30 Energy bill – new clause 8 – setting a decarbonisation target range – 14 Mar 2016 at 19.30 Energy bill – clause 79 – onshore wind power – delay exclusion of onshore wind contribition to renewable electricity generation requirements – 14 Mar 2016 at 17.30 National policy statement: airports – Heathrow north-west runway – 25 Jun 2018 at 21.51