A 60-year-old punter from Loughborough says he is “gutted” that the betting arbitrator IBAS has ruled against him in a dispute with Betfred worth £189,000. David Smith was paid £23,000 for a six-horse bet he placed in June, as five of the horses won, but believes he should have had £212,000 on the grounds that he clearly intended to include Bialco, a winner, rather than Bailarico, the bet’s only loser. Smith says he confused himself over the similarly named horses. But he wrote “2.15 P” next to Bailarico’s name on the betting slip, a reference to the 2.15pm race at Perth which Bialco won, whereas Bailarico was third in the 3.40pm at Goodwood. He also wrote Bialco’s odds, 7-4, next to Bailarico’s name, while Bailarico was 10-1 at the time. With help from the online campaigner Paul Fairhead, Smith advanced these and other arguments at an IBAS hearing, and referred also to a Twitter poll in which just 19% of voters thought the bet should be settled on Bailarico. Fairhead contended that Betfred’s rule on ambiguous instructions should be invoked, so that Smith’s stake would be split between Bialco and Bailarico, in which case he would be due around £90,000 more. But IBAS ruled there was no ambiguity, in that Smith had clearly written Bailarico’s name, and the bet therefore had to be settled on that horse, in line with established bookmaker practice of giving precedence to the horse name stated on a slip over other details, a precedence also referred to in Betfred’s rules. “I really am gutted by this,” said Smith, who wants to appeal. “It was so obvious which bet I wanted. They didn’t look at my case at all, really. They’ve just looked at Betfred’s case.” Fairhead added: “In terms of fairness, there’s a solid argument here for acknowledging it could be one of two horses and therefore the stakes should be split. There’s nobody who could look at this dispute and say Betfred have treated that customer fairly.” Arguing that it is not too late for Betfred to do the right thing by Smith, Fairhead said he would even give up his longstanding Twitter handle, BoycottBetfred, if the firm did so. But, for now, his argument is with IBAS, as he pointed to a decision it made this summer, in which, for once, it decided against strict application of a bookmaker rule. That was a Lucky 63 naming five winners at the Cheltenham Festival, with a unit stake of 50 cents in the ‘win’ box but a total stake of €63 for a bet that should only have cost half that. The punter argued this should be settled as an overstaked bet under Paddy Power’s rules, in which case it would be treated as if his unit stake was €1 to win. But IBAS referred instead to surrounding circumstances in deciding it should be settled at 50 cents each-way, saving the bookmaker tens of thousands in the payout. “I’m just astonished at the inconsistencies in their rulings,” Fairhead said. “The point of IBAS is to make sure people are treated fairly and avoid the need for a court case.” Hurray for the return of Cheltenham and hurray in particular for fancied runners from the Fergal O’Brien yard, which has proved profitable to follow at the great track over the years. Today, O’Brien fields Benny’s Bridge (5.30) in the closing handicap hurdle and the 7-2 is acceptable, though well done to you if you got that bit of 8-1 that was briefly offered last night. This race is for conditional jockeys and O’Brien may be a force in those over the next few months as he tries to help the capable Connor Brace in the conditional jockeys title race. Bennys Bridge won a better race than this here in January and is not to be harshly judged for two subsequent defeats in very valuable contests at Sandown. He remains well treated. Meldrum Lad (3.10) is such a good price for an earlier handicap hurdle that I’m rather put off him. Admittedly, this is his first run over hurdles for years but he is lightly raced for his age and has looked well handicapped since joining Justin Landy. At 33-1, he has each-way potential, even in a hot-looking race. Pick of the card at soggy Newbury may be Teruntum Star (4.35), formerly a very useful handicapper for Kevin Ryan and now threatening a comeback with David Griffiths. He ran well over five furlongs twice this month but today’s six might be more like it and 14-1 is fine. Newbury 1.10 Bullfinch 1.40 Bright Eyed Eagle 2.15 Mishriff 2.50 I'm Available 3.25 Hamish 4.00 Zeyzoun 4.35 Teruntum Star (nb) 5.05 Mr SmithDoncaster 1.50 She's A Unicorn 2.25 Lady G 3.00 Magnetised 3.35 Pendleton 4.10 Caravan Of Hope 4.45 Passion And Glory 5.15 Casting Spells Cheltenham 2.00 L'Air Du Vent 2.35 Al Dancer 3.10 Meldrum Lad 3.45 Dinons 4.20 Getariver 4.55 Mustmeetalady 5.30 Benny's Bridge (nap)Newcastle5.25 Anyonecanhaveitall 6.00 Tadreej 6.30 Ventura Destiny 7.00 Jazz Style 7.30 Trinity Girl 8.00 Millicent Fawcett 8.30 High Fort