Good morning briefers. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories to help you start the week. Rights campaigners have described as “utterly chilling” a secret database compiled by counter-terrorism police containing personal information about thousands of people referred to the government’s controversial anti-radicalisation Prevent programme. The Prevent Case Management (PCM) database is accessible to all police forces in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, and the Home Office is also able to request data from it, according to documents sent to the human rights group Liberty and seen by the Guardian. Prevent is a voluntary programme which aims to divert people from terrorism before they offend. Up until now it was not known that police could enter details from each Prevent referral into the PCM database, including personal details and reasons for the referral. Gracie Bradley, of Liberty, said it was “utterly chilling that potentially thousands of people, including children, are on a secret government database because of what they’re perceived to think or believe”. Rethink required – Boris Johnson’s Brexit plan appears at risk of disintegrating this week after Emmanuel Macron warned that it needed fundamental revision before there could be any progress towards an agreement. The French president, who refused to meet the prime minister for talks this weekend, gave him until the end of the week to rethink his proposals to overcome the Irish border problem. Pressure heaped on No 10 after its top negotiator, David Frost, was told by EU officials that there will be no last-minute talks at next week’s crunch summit in Brussels. Jeremy Corbyn will meet other opposition leaders today to thrash out how they can ensure that the government adheres to the Benn Act and does not take Britain out of the EU without a deal before the end of the month. The letters page passes judgment on Corbyn’s chances of success. Britons with serious illnesses who live in the EU say they face a “living nightmare” over the prospect of not being to access healthcare after Brexit. “It’s like a death sentence,” said Denise Abel, who moved to Italy in 2012. Our economics editor, Larry Elliott, reckons that the disastrous 1960s Beeching rail cuts paved the way for our current woes.. Police failings – Only one of the officers referred to the police watchdog for questioning over the disastrous inquiry into a bogus VIP paedophile ring was interviewed face-to-face. The report from the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) into Operation Midland will be released later today and will explain why no police officers will face any action over how they fell for the allegations of child abuse levelled at prominent figures by the fantasist Carl Beech. But the Guardian has learned that two officers referred for investigation over their role could not be forced to be questioned in person because they had retired. Shutdown threat – Extinction Rebellion activists are planning to descend on London from all over the country this morning in an attempt to “shut down” the heart of government with two weeks of disruptive protests. Activists plan to blockade roads into Westminster from around 9am today with target areas including Trafalgar Square, Horse Guards Parade, the Mall, Victoria Street, and Westminster and Vauxhall bridges. Leaders of UK XR, as the group is known, also plan to disrupt Smithfield market and the City of London airport during 14 days of protest. One activist, Leo Barasi, writes today that the movement must now ensure “green” politicians are forced to adopt concrete policies. Streaming switch – The BBC is planning a complete revamp of its iPlayer system in the face of competition from streaming services such as Netflix and as traditional scheduled television continues to decline. The iPlayer is destined to become the main way people view BBC programmes but bosses believe it needs to be refreshed to maintain relevance to younger viewers. Five years ago, its share of the streaming market was 40% but this has fallen to 15% in the face of competition from Netflix and Amazon Prime. The changes will transform the “look and feel” of the system and will see shows made available by default for up to a year, rather than 30 days. Syria withdrawal – The White House is pulling its troops out of northern Syria and giving the green light for Turkey to launch an offensive in the area, abandoning its Kurdish allies to their sworn enemies in Ankara. A statement from the White House said the US was pulling out because it had “defeated Isis”, and also criticized “France, Germany, and other European nations” for not repatriating their citizens who had joined Isis but had since been detained in northern Syria. The surprise decision followed a call between Donald Trump’s and his Turkish his counterpart Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and will raise renewed questions about the president’s erratic foreign policy judgment. So ‘toxic’ – Graham Norton has revealed that he quit his agony column for the Daily Telegraph because he had begun to feel “nauseous” about the newspaper’s “toxic” stance on political issues. The chat show host quit his 12-year stint last year but has not said why until now, revealing that the paper’s position on stories such as Brexit and the US supreme court justice Brett Kavanaugh convinced him to walk away. “About a year before I left, it took a turn and there were some things in that paper about which I thought, ‘I cannot be contained within the same pages as this.’” Our technology editor, Alex Hern, joins Anushka Asthana to discuss how the Chinese-owned social network TikTok has seen massive growth by using shareable short videos set to catchy soundtracks. But is it also being used as a tool of Chinese foreign policy? Plus: Marie Le Conte on the role of political gossip. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2019/10/06-78326-191007TIF_tiktoknew.mp3 The El Paso shooting, carried out eight weeks ago by a 21-year-old who parroted Donald Trump’s hate speech about Mexican immigrants, has sent tremors through America’s Hispanic community. They are more wary about where they go, when they do their shopping and how white America sees their place in the country. Dani Anguiano has spoken to Latinos from California to Florida and hears about how racial slurs screamed out of car windows, insults for speaking Spanish in public and school playground “jokes” about building the wall have become commonplace. As one migrant, Lidia Carrillo, says: “It’s my country too.” Pep Guardiola admitted his Manchester City players were “nervous” as they were beaten by Wolves at the Etihad Stadium thanks to two goals from a former Barcelona player, Adama Traoré. A bewildered looking David de Gea described Manchester United’s form as “unacceptable” as a 1-0 defeat at Newcastle United left Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s side only two points above the relegation zone. Despite a week in which Dina Asher-Smith and Katarina Johnson-Thompson hit the very highest notes, the British team left the World Athletics Championships in Doha with its worst medal tally since 2005. Sebastian Coe says he has not yet read the report that led to Alberto Salazar being banned for four years by the US Anti-Doping Agency – but insists that athletics does more than most sports to catch drug cheats. Eddie Jones plans to ring the changes against France on Saturday, with England having already qualified for the World Cup quarter-finals. Police say they wrote to Uefa to urge it not to stage England’s Euro 2020 qualifier against Czech Republic in Prague this Friday night, amid fears over drunken and antisocial behaviour from travelling fans. And Phil Neville admitted his team have “got to be able to perform at home in front of big crowds” after England suffered a bruising 2-1 defeat to Brazil in front of 29,398 spectators at the Riverside. HSBC is planning to cut 10,000 jobs across the world, according to the FT, as it struggles with low interest rates, Brexit and the uncertainty over the US-China trade war. It comes weeks after chief executive John Flint quit unexpectedly after 18 months in the top job. Asian markets were relatively calm overnight but the Chinese currency dipped after reports that Beijing will not meet Donald Trump’s trade demands. The FTSE100 is also seen opening flat while the pound is buying $1.233 and €1.122. More on Brexit from the Times, which reports: “Johnson in last-ditch bid to save Brexit plan”, the Telegraph: “Boris to seek supreme court ruling on no-deal”, the i: “French and Irish unite to frustrate Johnson”, the Express: “PM warns Macron: Don’t think we won’t quit” and the Mirror: “No-deal could kill”. The FT has a story about HSBC planning to axe up to 10,000 jobs in a cost-cutting drive, while the Guardian reports “Thousands unknowingly on secret Prevent database”. The Sun’s splash is “Beyond a Joker”, saying that Gary Glitter is due to make a “fortune” after one of his songs was used in the score of the new movie, and the Mail has more on the bogus VIP paedophile ring: “Judge blasts ‘Nick’ police whitewash”. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com