Steve Hansen has revealed a deep respect his England counterpart, Eddie Jones, after the duo swapped messages as their tactical duel approaches. When England and New Zealand collide in Yokohama on Saturday for a first World Cup meeting since 1999 respect will be quickly set aside but whatever transpires, the content of the New Zealand head coach’s text exchange with Jones suggests semi-final tensions will be left there. “I said: ‘Looking forward to seeing you and win, lose or draw we’ll have a beer afterwards,’” Hansen added after New Zealand’s 46-14 quarter-final victory over Ireland and as he began to focus on preparing for England. Hansen was happy to detail why he holds England’s coach in such high regard. “His passion, he loves the game. He’s got a work ethic second to none – he put himself in hospital when he was here, he worked that hard,” he said. “Anyone who loves the game will get my support. He’s done a fantastic job with England. They’ve got a world record for most wins in Test rugby along with ourselves. They’ve got a harder edge about them. “Eddie has been part of a winning World Cup team with South Africa [as assistant in 2007], he’s had the disappointment of losing to England when he was coaching Australia [2003] but to get to the final is being successful anyway, even if you don’t win it. He’s got to the ability to understand what’s coming and he’ll share those with his coaching and playing group.” Hansen shares similar relationships with other coaches throughout the rugby world, formed during his 17-year career on the Test scene. Before the All Blacks crushed Ireland Hansen caught up with the Ireland defence coach, Andy Farrell. Hansen previously enjoyed similar close ties with the former Springboks coach Heyneke Meyer, often hosting midweek dinners when touring their respective nations. As the teams warmed up before Saturday’s quarter-final Hansen and the Ireland coach, Joe Schmidt, chatted animatedly in the middle of Tokyo Stadium for 10 minutes. Hansen has, however, also fired plenty of verbal barbs in his time. The departing Australia coach, Michael Cheika, has been on the receiving end on several occasions. So, too, the Wales and Lions coach Warren Gatland. Hansen claims these jibes are fun and games, part of the preliminary to the main theatre. “You see some of the banter which is really only to help promote the game as being, ‘Oh, these guys don’t like each other’, which couldn’t be further from the truth. “Coaches, regardless of whether you’re playing against their team or not, go through the same emotions. You spend a lot of time in the same mental space. It’s a game of footy, it’s not life or death. The closer you are the more you communicate. It’s like when you play against your brother or your sister: it’s important, but it’s not life-threatening. “Rugby is a special game. Those of us that have been around long enough understand the game is bigger than everybody else. It’s the game that’s more important than all the coaches and players. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales “One of the greatest things about the game is the camaraderie not only in your own team but that you get from being involved in a contest and sharing those moments and then moving on to the next one. The game has been professional for a while but if you look back teams always shared those moments after Tests together. It’s something that is really important that we don’t lose.” The All Blacks suffered one minor injury blow against Ireland with the openside flanker, Matt Todd, aggravating a troublesome shoulder complaint. Hansen indicated he was unlikely to recover for England, which could pave the way for the bigger physical presence of Shannon Frizell, the more traditional blindside option, to take a spot on the bench.