Unsightly thrashings by the vastly superior of the hopelessly under-resourced remain a thing at World Cups. The days of the three-digit hiding seem past but a cynic will tell you the World Cup begins only now. Some of these knockout matches will be tight, breathlessly so. If too tight, there will be extra time of 10 minutes each way, then, if necessary, sudden death for another 10 minutes. If still unresolved, there will be a place-kicking competition between five kickers from each team. See the Heineken Cup semi-final of 2009 for the only precedent. It was brutal. Just how tight these games are will be swayed in some cases by the referees’ waving of cards at players trying to make honest tackles. Since World Rugby’s directives came in, we have decried and celebrated these cards in more or less equal voice, the rugby world split over their efficacy and appropriateness. But now we could see a World Cup decided by one or more of them. One half of the debate will scream the tackler will “just have to get lower”; the other will counter that tacklers are lower but still the red cards keep coming. Maybe they are unavoidable? For all its maddening controversies, this is a golden age for rugby. We have never had it so good. Don’t let anyone tell you rugby was better in the “olden days”, when set pieces were as numerous as tackles, players were wilfully and spinelessly vicious yet barely ever penalised, let alone sent off, and play never made it beyond a couple of phases. Now, even the old adage that defence wins prizes is under threat, with all eight quarter-finalists (well, maybe not Wales) favouring attack over defence. The teams are split five and three between northern and southern hemispheres but the coaches one-seven. Could that have anything to do with it? The darlings of the rugby world, Fiji, Tonga and Samoa, have departed the stage. Or at least the teams bearing their flags have. The peoples themselves are well represented, with all four quarter-finals featuring players of island descent. But for injury and suspension (brandishing red cards is one thing but do players really have to be banned from the rest of a World Cup too?) there would be even more. Marvel at their speed, their power and deftness of touch. Remember where they come from, consider the economic realities that have scattered them around the globe and just be grateful for exhilarating rugby. Of all the stats we have been bombarded with at this World Cup, here is the most pertinent: 60 million plus. That was the TV audience in Japan for the home side’s victory over Scotland, smashing their own record. In 2015, 25 million watched their penultimate pool match against Samoa, which in turn had smashed rugby’s previous record for a TV audience in a single country — the 21 million in France who watched the 2007 host country lose their semi-final to England. Japan are doing more than lead the old guard a merry dance on the field. They could end up changing everything off it, too. Imagine if they make it to the final.