Private renters in England are losing out on about £70m a year when landlords kick them out as missed time at work, cleaning bills and moving costs stack up to £1,400 each on average, housing campaigners say. An estimated 146,000 households have been asked by landlords to leave their homes in the past three years, with rent arrears and an alleged lack of care for the property the most frequently cited reasons. The campaign group Generation Rent, which calculated the costs of moving out, said more than half the public believed landlords should foot the bill. “Tenants should not have to bear the costs of their landlords’ personal decisions and the wider public agrees,” said Caitlin Wilkinson, a policy and public affairs manager at Generation Rent, one of several campaign groups urging the housing secretary, Robert Jenrick, to reform the system. The government’s public consultation on scrapping no-fault evictions using section 21 notices closes this weekend. The Residential Landlords Association said on Thursday that any abolition of such evictions would threaten the supply of private rented homes, which it said were now relied on by 4.5 million households. The association said more cases would be likely to go to court and it would become almost impossible to evict antisocial tenants. Demand for private rented homes still outstrips supply, according to the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors, which is predicting that rents will rise faster than house prices in the next five years. Plans to reform the system were first announced by Theresa May as prime minister in April. She said landlords would still be able to end tenancies where they had legitimate reasons to do so, but they would no longer be able to evict families with only eight weeks’ notice. “Everyone renting in the private sector has the right to feel secure in their home, settled in their community and able to plan for the future with confidence,” she said at the time. Maddie Moore, 32, a renter in Malvern, Gloucestershire, told the Guardian she was served with a no-fault eviction notice in July 2018, two weeks before she was due to give birth. She had to take seven days off from her self-employed sales job to find a new property and was faced with a £220 bill for professional cleaning. “I felt as though if you own your own home you can have a baby; if you don’t own your own home you have no protection,” she said. “I couldn’t nest or do anything. It was a very difficult time.” Shelter, the housing charity, has found strong support among renters who are likely to vote at the next general election for section 21 to be scrapped. It commissioned a YouGov survey of private renters and found that among those that intended to vote, 67% agreed they would be more likely to support a government that said it would scrap no-fault evictions. It said this figure was the equivalent of 3.1 million voters. Polly Neate, Shelter’s chief executive, said: “For too long England’s 11 million renters have been living with the threat of eviction looming large but just one more simple move in the right direction will give them the security they desperately need. The government has already done the legwork by setting up a consultation on how to scrap section 21. Now they need to see it through and prove that they really do care about our nation’s renters.”