Not now, darling. There are really more important things than women. And the Labour party. There is Brexit, the Queen’s speech, voter suppression, almost every other issue – and the unfettered egos of Boris Johnson and the posh bouncer Dominic Cummings. And there is the Brexit party on the sidelines, with its Stepford Wives view of femininity. This is not the time to think about that “single issue” of female representation, because everything else is more urgent. Except, actually, there is no policy that doesn’t affect the majority of the population – women. And there is no future for Labour unless it attracts women voters. When John McDonnell spoke of shortening the working week, which is great, I wondered how this plays out in the double shift of paid work and domestic work that is most women’s lives. Jeremy Corbyn’s power is leaking away. No simple chant can bring it back – and if you want to call me a Tory for saying so, more fool you. Polls, schmolls. The process of putting him out of his misery has already started. McDonnell is taking control. “I’m still of the view now that whoever comes after Jeremy has got to be a woman,” he says. But how much Labour wants to elect a female leader is debatable. It feels more like it is being embarrassed into it because the Tories have had two and even the very male-dominated Lib Dems have managed one. This is not an argument about women being better, or even helping other women. It is an argument about basic representation. The sudden argument from some pundits that representative democracy is in crisis? Well, hello: for some of us it has been in crisis for decades. Its institutions are not fit for purpose. The Labour party does not stand outside this. Misogyny, openly weaponised by Johnson with his contemptible reply of “humbug” to the female politicians who live daily with death threats and panic buttons, is not in question on the right. On the left, though, particularly that part of the left Corbyn represents, it is rife. Once you take a position of moral superiority and declare yourself anti-racist, ant-sexist and most of all, anti-capitalist, you don’t actually have to give up your own power or do anything about it: you know the tune; just hum the words. Just as antisemitism has been repeatedly ignored, so too has sexism, because loyalty is valued over self-reflection. Of course there are some brilliant women in the Labour party, but few remain in the inner circle and some of these are finally breaking rank. I never expected much from the type of guys who visit Cuba without noticing it’s a police state, where prostitution is rife and ordinary people cannot buy ibuprofen. Or the people who denied the corruption in Venezuela. I have known such revolutionaries all my life. What has been shocking, though, is that even for the sake of “optics” they will not address the clear and present anti-women bias in their midst: from the all-male shortlists for their elected mayors – Sion Simon, Andy Burnham, Steve Rotheram – to the dreadful online abuse directed at any woman who challenges Corbyn. (Think of a woman who has given her life to the Labour party, such as Angela Eagle.) The leadership position on rape allegations and sexual harassment is that no outside body needs to be involved; this can be done with an internal inquiry. All this while the Corbyn outriders call any woman who disagrees with them a centrist melt. Or things I can’t say here. Then there is the list of women MPs now facing deselection. How do they think this looks? It’s amusing to see Alastair Campbell spar with McDonnell over having a female leader. I really thought there could be no more monotonously laddish leadership than New Labour and its football schtick. I was wrong. But the retro machismo of Labour conference this year was abhorrent. A female leader is only part of the answer, though. There is something rotten at the core of this administration that comes out of a political formation that has never prioritised women. Like many other failing political institutions where no one cares about gender, everyone just wants the best person for the job – and it always happens to be a bloke. Labour knows it has to change. Too little, too late. Suzanne Moore is a Guardian columnist