Brexit uncertainty has been a drag on the economy. The International Monetary Fund thinks most of the damage it estimates will occur as a result of Britain’s decision to leave the EU has already happened. For obvious reasons, investment has been particularly weak with businesses reluctant to commit to new capital projects until they have a better idea what the future holds. As a matter of logic, therefore, the fresh delay to the Brexit process – unless it is short-lived – means more uncertainty and weaker activity. Investment plans will remain mothballed. Construction sites will go into hibernation for the winter. Retailers, with their busiest time of the year coming up, will have every reason to be worried about how sales will hold up. Quantifying the scale of the damage is impossible until the length of the delay is known. But on the assumption that it will be the end of the year at the earliest before the Brexit fog lifts, certain conclusions can be drawn. First, the calling of an election before Christmas will require a dissolution of parliament in the next couple of weeks and so deprive Sajid Javid of his opportunity to deliver a voter-friendly budget on 6 November. Second, the pound is likely to weaken in the currency markets. Its recent rise has been due to increasing confidence that a Brexit deal by the end of October deadline was becoming more likely. A delay plus a general election means both economic and political uncertainty. It is hard to see the pound going above $1.30, easy to imagine it sinking back to $1.25. Finally, it seems inevitable that the Bank of England will downgrade its growth forecast in its upcoming quarterly inflation report, due out at the start of next month. The only real question is whether Threadneedle Street’s monetary policy committee feels the need to give the economy a boost with a quarter-point cut in interest rates. That still looks unlikely but the chances of it happening have certainly increased. The blame game is well under way at Thomas Cook, and it is turning into quite a nasty affair. Under questioning from a Commons select committee, the company’s last chief executive, Peter Fankhauser, said the debts left by his predecessors prevented him from turning the business around. This is like the Premier League manager who says he would have been wonderful were it not for the fact that the last guy in the dugout left him with a bunch of no-hopers. Harriet Green, who was in the hot seat before Fankhauser, tried another Premier League trope: I had a plan to bring the company into the digital age and it would have worked if only I had been granted more time. Then there was Green’s immediate predecessor, Manny Fontenla-Novoa, who saddled the company with debt during his time there. No surprises for guessing his defence: the prospects for the team were good when I left in 2011. The drastic dip in form is nothing to do with me. None of these explanations cut much ice with Rachel Reeves, the business select committee’s formidable chair. Reeves summed things up well when she ran through a series of lame excuses – hot weather and volcanic ash included – before concluding it would be good if somebody from Thomas Cook owned up to getting it wrong. Quite. But there has to be a winner in the blame game, and on the day it was Green. Her argument at least had the ring of truth about it. Fankhauser and Fontenla-Novoa were less convincing and can expect a right kicking when the committee gets round to publishing its report. The Ribble Valley in Lancashire is the happiest place in Britain. Northern Ireland is happier than England, Scotland or Wales. Harlow in Essex has experienced the biggest increase in wellbeing since the government first reported on how content people were in 2013. Attempts by the Office for National Statistics to move beyond gross domestic product as a yardstick of economic success are welcome. Even so, the latest release suggests this is very much a work in progress. Why? Because while the ONS can tell us that happiness has been on an upward trend over time, and that inner London boroughs such as Islington and Camden consistently score below average, there is no explanation for why that might be. Without context, statistics are just statistics and don’t tell us very much.