With most of Everton’s players sloping straight off to the changing rooms following their latest lame defeat it fell on Marco Silva to head to the away fans and applaud them alone. He was met by a sea of V-signs. It may be predictable to state the pressure is mounting on the Everton manager following a fourth successive Premier League defeat but predictable was Everton’s afternoon here. A starting lineup assembled at a cost of more than £250m were laboured, lacking in discipline plus concentration and beaten on their travels by yet another set-piece. It held no surprises for an Everton support who are watching their expensively assembled team stroll through the motions once again and a manager seemingly powerless to prevent another nothing season. Burnley, by stark contrast, amply compensated for any technical gaps with a work-rate, defensive resilience and clinical touch that elevated them to fifth in the table and dropped Everton to 17th. Jeff Hendrick volleyed home an Ashley Westwood corner as the home side capitalised on Séamus Coleman’s foolish dismissal to record their third home win of the campaign. Their effort, organisation and upward trajectory puts Everton to shame. Silva’s positive take on the game was misguided but not his assessment of the growing anger. “If you are asking me if they should be angry with the team and with myself then that is normal,” he said. “In the last four games we didn’t get the results and they have all the reasons to be angry with us. “It is up to us to work harder, to be braver, to be more clinical and our attacking players need to be more aggressive and assertive in these type of games. Our confidence is not the best at the moment. I understand 100% why they are angry with us but we have to stick together and the next game is a must-win game for us.” Everton controlled possession during a tedious first half but showed no attacking intent with it. Coleman was arguably fortunate to escape a red card when he accidentally but dangerously caught Erik Pieters’s ankle having over-run the ball – a recurring trait throughout the Everton side – but the foul was deemed worthy only of yellow. Pieters reappeared for the second half but was unable to continue. His aggressor lasted two minutes more, Coleman inviting a second yellow card with a needless leap into Dwight McNeil for a header he was never going to win in an unthreatening area of the pitch. “A really harsh decision,” said Silva. “The second yellow had a big impact on the game.” Sean Dyche, more accurately, said: “Let’s make it clear, Coleman is not that type of player but in the modern game he was fortunate not to be sent off. The second one was a poor challenge too. The referee had no choice.” Burnley unsettled the visitors merely by increasing their tempo and getting balls into the penalty area quicker in the first half. That brief period demonstrated how vulnerable the Everton defence could be and their tendency to switch off at set-pieces. On the half-hour Westwood swung a corner over from the left to the back post where Hendrick, unmarked, volleyed goalwards and Jordan Pickford saved with his legs. The warning was not heeded. With 18 minutes remaining Burnley repeated the trick. Westwood delivered a deep corner from the left and there was Hendrick again, unmarked again, to volley into the roof of the net. Coleman’s dismissal was no excuse with Everton having eight players in their six-yard box to Burnley’s four. Silva replaced Dominic Calvert‑Lewin with Moise Kean, a move met with boos from the away section on account of its predictability rather than a slight on the young Italian striker. Silva’s formation, selections and substitutions are as predictable as his team’s laboured play. Burnley have a plan. They stuck to it and won. Silva needs something similar and fast.