Whatever the true story of the people who died in a refrigerated container turns out to be (Report, 28 October), can we build on the sympathy and horror felt by most people when confronted with this tragedy? Can we remember that people who need to reach safety are dying in great numbers, but unnoticed by us: in Libya’s detention camps after being turned back as a result of EU policy; drowning in the Mediterranean or Aegean because rescuing them would be “offering encouragement”; after being forcibly repatriated as failed asylum seekers to oppressive countries like the Democratic Republic of the Congo where they can be returned to the torture and detention from which they thought they had escaped. Can we now resolve to let our politicians know that we want to stop this suffering and loss of life by making it possible for people to reach our country safely, and tell them that what is needed is a fair, humane and just process whereby all asylum seekers are given the chance to explain their story while being treated in a respectful manner and given proper legal and expert advice to enable them to present their claim? In my experience, people who are awarded refugee status become loyal citizens who work hard, often starting their own businesses, and they want to repay the kindness and help they have received.Jackie FearnleyGoathland, North Yorkshire • The prime minister of Vietnam has ordered an investigation into human trafficking, but this will not stop such tragedies. The dire poverty in many countries driving people to take such risks is a direct result of the actions of western governments in the past. We have a duty to financially assist the countries we impoverished, and provide a safe way for people to migrate legally. Governments and media worldwide should have a campaign to tell the truth: that life as an illegal migrant in the west is harsh, miserable and dangerous – and not worth the risk. This message is clearly not being heard.Jane GhoshBristol • As a result of the terrible humanitarian tragedy of 39 people losing their lives in their attempt to seek a better life in the UK, I have read articles calling for a tightening of border controls and instant repatriation. I would like to call for an amnesty for all those in detention centres and those awaiting the outcome of appeals at tribunals. Let us show our humanity by welcoming these people and affording them the right to settle here. Let some good come from this tragedy, and let us show we do have respect for those who are less fortunate than us.Marie JenkinsHeolgerrig, Merthyr Tydfil • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition