The Conservatives have restored the party whip to 10 of the 21 rebel MPs who were ejected in September after they voted to support a backbench-instigated bill seeking to block a no-deal Brexit, the party has said. A Conservative spokesman said the MPs restored to the whip were Alistair Burt, Caroline Nokes, Greg Clark, Nicholas Soames, Ed Vaizey, Margot James, Richard Benyon, Stephen Hammond, Steve Brine and Richard Harrington. Of these, Burt, Benyon, Soames and Harrington have already announced they will stand down at the election, but the others will be free to seek re-election as Conservatives, subject to agreement of their local parties. The spokesman said the 10 met Boris Johnson at the prime minister’s Commons office on Tuesday evening, after a process led by party whips. He gave no reason why these 10 had been picked, or what could be done by the remaining 10 also be readmitted. One, Sam Gyimah, has since defected to the Liberal Democrats. The deciding factor appeared not to have been recent loyalty, given that Harrington was among MPs who had voted against the government’s compressed Commons timetable for its Brexit bill, which stalled the process. In contrast, the former justice secretary David Gauke, who supported the programme motion, remains exiled. The Conservative spokesman declined to explain this, saying the decision came after a procedure led by whips. It did not mean those still outside the party system could not be readmitted, “but there is clearly a process” for them to go through, he added. Asked if the restoration of the whip was conditional on future loyalty on Brexit, the spokesman said: “The expectation of all Tory MPs and candidates who are standing for election is that when we come back we will get this deal passed.” The expulsion of the 21 Tory rebels not only lost Johnson his working majority but caused significant disquiet among many other MPs, who feared it meant the Conservatives were being reshaped as a less centrist force. Speaking earlier on Tuesday, the former chancellor Philip Hammond – among those still without the whip – said he feared Johnson wanted to use an election to remove MPs such as him from the Commons. He told the BBC: “I fear that the real narrative here is that the Vote Leave activists – the cohort that has seized control in Downing Street and to some extent in the headquarters of the Conservative party – want this general election to change the shape of the Conservative party in parliament. To get rid of a cohort of MPs it regards as not robust enough on this issue and then replace them with hardliners. “It really doesn’t matter how many times my party kicks me, abuses me, reviles me, they are not going to stop me feeling like a Conservative. And I am not ready yet to give up fighting for the soul of the Conservative party.” The Conservative spokesman said Johnson had sought to reassure those restored to the whip: “The PM made it very clear to them that he is a one-nation Conservative and it is important the party moves forward.” The MPs still without the whip are Gauke, Hammond, Guto Bebb, Kenneth Clarke, Justine Greening, Dominic Grieve, Oliver Letwin, Anne Milton, Antoinette Sandbach and Rory Stewart. Several of the still-whipless MPs say they do not plan to stand again in the election, including Clarke, who will step down after just short of 50 years in the Commons, and Stewart, who has launched a bid to become mayor of London as an independent. The future of others is less certain. Sandbach faces deselection after Tory party members in her Eddisbury constituency in Cheshire passed a vote of no confidence in her earlier this month. It is not clear whether Gauke will be able to stand again as a Tory, while Philip Hammond has said he could stand as an independent in his Runnymede and Weybridge constituency.