Neil Lennon hopes racist incidents will not mar Celtic’s Europa League home game against Lazio, with the manager vowing to support his players should they be targeted by away fans. Lazio have been punished by Uefa because of their supporters’ actions which, added to a string of recent racist incidents across Europe, has sharpened the focus on elements of Thursday’s match. “Racism of any sort is distasteful, it’s certainly not something we want to see,” Lennon said. “I just hope we’re talking about the football and a great footballing night. There are so many different cultures now in the game and everyone should be respected. Players just want to play football. You don’t play the game to get abused for the colour of your skin or what religion you are. You play football to enjoy it and make a few quid.” Lazio’s home game with Celtic on 7 November is to be played in a partially closed stadium – albeit that sanction is under appeal – after Uefa found fans racially abused Rennes players this month. That game was already subject to a partial stadium closure for racist chants during a Europa League game against Sevilla in February. Police have raised the risk level of Lazio’s visit and Celtic have also made a plea for good behaviour. Three hundred Lazio ultras, among a total travelling support of 1,500, have reportedly made the trip to Glasgow. The match referee, Ivan Bebek, was in charge of Bulgaria’s match against England in Sofia, which was marred by racist behaviour. Lennon reasserted his stance of backing any player who walked off because of racist abuse. “They’re my players in there and they’re human beings,” he said. “They are here to play football, so if they are getting abused and are emotionally upset or personally upset by idiots in the crowd and we’re not dealing with it, then I have to protect my players and defend them. And that’s exactly what I’ll do.” Celtic top Group E after taking four points from two games. Despite the difference in quality of the opponents, Lennon believes a similar performance to the 6-0 win against Ross County on Saturday would give Lazio a problem. “I think going into the game it’s pretty even,” he said. “People probably see Lazio as firm favourites but we can beat anybody at home. This is really important for the club’s reputation. It’s important for the fans and for the players.”