David Brindle is absolutely right that most homecare agencies are at breaking point (Society, 23 October). Reform is long overdue. The trend towards people wanting to receive care in their own homes is one the country needs to embrace. We need to build the system around this choice, and currently we are failing. High staff turnover and unfilled jobs aren’t uncommon, but it doesn’t have to be that way. Through reorganisation of priorities it is possible to pay a higher hourly rate, as well as pay for a carer’s travel time between visits. I co-founded an organisation that is both a social care provider and a tech company. Social care is around 20 years behind health when it comes to making use of freely available technology. A quick fix isn’t the answer, but while we’re waiting for bigger, slower reform we need to make more use of tech for immediate change – to free up staff to focus on care not admin, to drive savings that push up carer wages, and deliver better care. We’re making change harder than it needs to be, and the oldest and most vulnerable in society suffer as a result.Dr Ben MaruthappuCera Care, London • David Brindle’s article on homecare is concise and timely. I read it the same day I attended a preview of Ken Loach’s new film, Sorry We Missed You. One of the key characters is a homecare worker and the film accurately presents the dilemmas, pressures and inadequacies of the homecare. I’m a former charity chief executive for an organisation that supported people with learning disabilities. Most homecare workers are low-paid, working-class women, often from minority ethnic communities. Many charities have stopped providing homecare as we can’t use charitable funds to prop up a failing system. Local authorities are strapped for cash, and still waiting for a social care bill. But most tragic of all is the person who needs that care and support, who is caught in a debate around funding, time and quality. Their quality of life is now measured in minutes of chargeable care. Because this happens in people’s own homes we don’t see it, debate it, or resolve it. Reminder – we are the fifth richest country in the world. Is this really how we want society to be?Sally YoungNewcastle upon Tyne • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition