It is not often British rugby league can be grateful to the England rugby union team, but Saturday morning was one such occasion. While the Great Britain Lions were suffering a shock 14-6 defeat to Tonga in New Zealand, England were putting in a perfect display to overcome the All Blacks en route to the Rugby World Cup final. It was a good time for the League Lions to bury a staid performance. Their task for this Saturday coming is to ensure that British league fans have breakfast with a satisfied smile, not a grimace. Five hours before England play South Africa in the other code’s showpiece, the Lions face the first of two Tests against New Zealand at Eden Park, the union and cricket citadel in Auckland. The match on Saturday morning is part of a triple-header that also features Australia v Tonga and Fiji v Samoa. The Lions will have to play better than they did last weekend, but there is some consolation: New Zealand were well beaten by a new-look Australia last Friday. The Lions’ first match since 2007 did not go well. They hardly had an attacking set in the first half as Tonga flexed their rather large collective muscle to a rousing backdrop of flag-waving and hymn-singing from their fans. It was refreshing to see so many women in the crowd. Tonga’s national governing body are suspended by International Rugby League so it was technically a Tongan Invitational XIII, but this was the real deal. Tonga included several of the NRL’s fiercest and finest. What comes next for the Lions is even tougher: successive Tests against New Zealand. England have had the better of the Kiwis at home in recent years but this task should not be underestimated. Since the game went fully professional, British international teams’ record against the Kiwis in New Zealand is woeful. The Kiwis have won their last nine home games against Great Britain, England, Wales or Scotland since the Lions won 19-16 at Auckland’s much-missed Carlaw Park in July 1992. Coach Wayne Bennett has re-jigged his backline. Full-back Lachlan Coote is dropped for St Helens’ club-mate Jonny Lomax, who replaced him after 55 minutes last Saturday. Hull’s Jake Connor comes in at centre for the injured Oliver Gildart, with Wigan full-back Zak Hardaker remaining the other centre. Jermaine McGillivray (who, by his and Bennett’s own admission had a poor season with Huddersfield) and Ryan Hall, despite playing only a handful of games all year for NRL premiers Sydney Roosters, retain their wing spots. England hooker Daryl Clark and Ireland’s Joe Philbin are on the bench. Bennett is admirably loyal to the players who have delivered for him, but having seasoned NRL players in your line-up is no guarantee of quality. There was a suspicion that some of his foot soldiers looked past their best while others can consider themselves fortunate to still be there after mediocre seasons. It would be understandable if the St Helens, Salford and Canberra Raiders contingent struggled to lift themselves again so soon after Grand Finals, although tryscorer John Bateman was his usual relentless self on Saturday. Without the injured Luke Thompson – the one Lions forward who would get in every team in the world – it is hard to see who is going to punch holes in the Kiwis line. The contrast between the Lions’ trundling pack and the Kangaroos young bucks who destroyed the Kiwis is concerning. After a magnificent season for Salford, Jackson Hastings had a mixed international debut as he partnered Gareth Widdop in the halves. The third Australia-born player in the squad, Blake Austin, awaits his turn. All three qualify for the Lions courtesy of their grandmothers: Coote’s from Glasgow, Hastings’ from Plymouth and Austin’s Middlesex. This was Bennett’s England team with the addition of Coote, born and bred in Windsor – New South Wales, not Berkshire. Coote, 29, played for Scotland in 2016, and is the first Lion ineligible for England since Jonathan Davies made his Lions debut weeks after arriving at Widnes from Wales in 1989. Only captain James Graham already knew how it felt to represent the Lions, the Liverpudlian veteran receiving a Golden Cap for becoming only the eighth man to play 50 internationals. Garry Schofield also reached a half-century, but Great Britain v Rest of the World was not classified as a full international, much to his understandable chagrin. Schofield was Great Britain captain for that last away win against the Kiwis, the 15th and final game of the last “proper” Lions tour, a victory that also secured their place in the World Cup final. Bennett’s men will need to show similar perseverance, passion and tenacity to see off a New Zealand team desperate to restore pride on sacred turf. Spain battled heroically before conceding four late tries to go down 42-8 to Ireland in their World Cup qualifier in Xàtiva last Saturday evening. Darren Fisher’s side put in a proud performance and should test Italy on Saturday, when a victory will keep their World Cup dream alive. Ireland coach Stuart Littler fielded an all-Super League pack, so Spain did remarkably well to only trail 12-2 at half time with a side comprising mainly of France-based semi-pros plus their two domestic quota players, Antonio Puerta and Rafael Garcia from Madrid club Custodians. An Italy victory on Saturday will mean that both Ireland and Italy qualify from Pool A with a game to spare. In Pool B, Scotland all but sealed their place in the 2021 World Cup last Saturday. Young Leeds’ half-back Callum McLelland was the only debutant in arguably the strongest Bravehearts side since the 2016 Four Nations. Scotland racked up 15 tries - seven in the first 20 devastating minutes – to hammer Serbia 86-0 in Glasgow, a record home win to mark their 25th birthday. Caretaker coach Nathan Graham, the former Scotland captain, had six Super League regulars and three other full-timers in his side. Among them was St Helens prop Luke Douglas, who is expected to make the final appearance of his splendid career against Greece on Friday night at London Skolars. Greece arrive from Athens on Thursday with 15 Australian-based players and five from the Greek league. The Rugby League World Cup 2021 will be more equitable than any previous event. The participation fees (which are up 125% on 2017) and prize money will be the same for women’s, wheelchair and men’s teams. The women’s tournament has also been brought forward to ensure that players have a minimum of four rest days between games. It is not the happiest claim to fame but the Moriarty family now have a father and son who have both lost a World Cup semi-final. Nineteen years ago, former Widnes and Halifax second-rower Paul returned to league and, in his 13th and final appearance for the Dragonhearts, helped Wales to within half an hour of an astonishing place in the World Cup final. Clive Griffiths’ huge underdogs terrified the Kangaroos and were leading with 23 minutes to go. Last Sunday, a week after scoring the winning try against France in the quarter-finals, Ross Moriarty’s dream of reaching the Rugby World Cup final ended at the hands of South Africa. Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook