The choreographer Shobana Jeyasingh was born in Chennai, India, in 1957 and currently lives and works in London. Her company, Shobana Jeyasingh Dance, is currently celebrating its 30th anniversary. Jeyasingh has collaborated with musicians, writers, film-makers, mathematicians and animators, among others. Her new piece, Staging Schiele, will tour from 18 October to Ipswich, Tewkesbury, Belfast and Huddersfield, ending at the Queen Elizabeth Hall, London, 4 and 5 November. Staging Schiele is inspired by the work of the Austrian artist Egon Schiele. What drew you to him?It was happenstance. During my research for my last piece, Contagion (2018), which was about the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic, I went to an exhibition of Schiele’s work, and I realised he’d been a victim. He was only 28 when he died. He was very prescient. In much of his early work he was interested in the body as a corpse, with the potential for decay. This was what was happening in Europe, with the war and then the pandemic. And he was an amazing graphic artist. He’s a brilliant amalgam of rigour of line and the emotional narrative that comes from those lines. Contemporary dance doesn’t have a story like ballet does, so choreographers are interested in the psychological landscape built out of elements like framing and line. Schiele’s engagement with women interested me too. You mostly don’t see a great sense of autonomy from the painted nude – she’s neutralised by the painter. Schiele imparted a greater sense of agency, even though he painted women who were socially not very powerful – they were usually from working class or lower-middle class backgrounds. The inspiration for your pieces is wide-ranging – Schiele, Rodin, the Spanish flu, La Bayadère, to name a few. Do you have a favourite?If I had to chose one, it would be In Flagrante (2014), a short dance film I made in collaboration with film-maker Ravi Deepres. It gave me a lot of satisfaction because it was a subject that gave me pause: I was commissioned to make a piece about cell division for an exhibition. I had to do a lot of learning, but I was working with the geneticist Dr Kim Nasmyth; the man was so passionate about his subject that it was easy to learn. This year is the 30th anniversary of your company. How has the dance world changed in that time?When I started, there was huge public confidence in funding for the arts – there was a feeling that the core script of the nation included the arts. You’d look to the Arts Council for funding. Now that’s changed, for economic reasons more than anything else, and the funding model is closer to business than ever. I think branding has now become a much more potent concept for artists, not necessarily in the making of the art but in the delivery of the art – marketing, social media, how you get your audience. If you weren’t a choreographer, what would you be?I’d love to be a film-maker. It’s not dissimilar to being a choreographer. Instead of a camera frame, choreographers have the stage. The audience is still sitting there, it’s the same gaze – you’re dealing with light, bodies, perspective, in a similar way. But of course what the film-maker has is the luxury of structuring in retrospect – he can go away and work with his editor. What is your biggest professional triumph or disaster?Oh, there were tons of disasters… Triumphs? When I first started the company, I made this piece called Romance… With Footnotes, in 1994 or 1995, and we won the Prudential awards for the arts – the prize money was £100,000! It was an amazing start for a very young company. That’s an obvious triumph. But, also, one can’t live on those triumphs for ever. For more everyday triumphs… when we toured Contagion, it was shown at IWM North in Manchester, on a Saturday morning. There was a mother there with two very young kids who came to talk to me at the end. The six-year-old girl asked such amazing questions about what she’d seen: I’d engaged her in a 20-minute piece about the Spanish flu. I treasure those moments.