Many readers will wish to vote tactically to defeat the Conservatives and prevent Brexit. But they should be wary of relying on advice from the Best for Britain website getvoting.org (Labour attacks remainer tactical voting website for offering ‘bogus advice’, 31 October). For my postcode, on 30 October it recommended that to get a pro-EU MP I should vote Lib Dem. Yet I have a pro-EU Labour MP who in 2017 polled 35,116 votes. The Lib Dem candidate polled only 1,343 votes. After I raised concerns it has changed to recommend Labour. I also understand that in a number of Labour/Conservative marginals the website recommended voting Lib Dem. I’m unaware if these have been corrected. There are other tactical voting apps whose purpose seems to be to harvest user data. Apps and websites may misinform and manipulate voters. Readers would do better to just look at the 2017 election results for their constituency and use these to make their own informed choices on how to vote.Steve BonhamLeicester • Unless you’re a Tory, the only thing that matters is getting rid of their government. There’s no need for pacts. Just vote intelligently: either for the opposition party that won last time (Green in Brighton Pavilion, Plaid in Arfon, SNP in Falkirk, and so on), or for the party that came second in seats the Tories won. This is easy to look up online, so there’s no excuse for not doing it. It means voting Lib Dem in St Albans, even if you’re a Corbynista; Labour in Uxbridge, even if you worship the ground Jo Swinson walks on; and SNP in Stirling, even if you oppose Scottish independence. If you don’t vote with your head, you will share the blame for putting Boris Johnson back in power.Jon GriffithHastings • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition