England have moved into the Japanese equivalent of Rotorua with hot springs all around them and a whiff of sulphur in the air. Look out of the hotel window and there is so much rising steam it suddenly becomes easier to understand why the tournament organisers chose unflashy Oita to stage two of this weekend’s four quarter-finals. Because this week is all about staying relaxed under pressure: who will respond best and not blow their tops as the tension mounts? Given only four of England’s squad – Ben Youngs, Manu Tuilagi, Dan Cole and Courtney Lawes – have experienced a World Cup knockout game, it is an area Australia will hope to examine given the way their opponents imploded during the 2015 pool stages. It is a fair enough target. As Japan have shown so wondrously against Ireland and Scotland, the side who can release themselves from the shackles of self-doubt and express themselves become infinitely more dangerous. If there is a greater threat to England’s aspirations than the Wallabies, it is fear itself. They are a good team but, under intense pressure, they have not always responded as positively as they might have liked. Joe Marler, their fit-again prop forward, was interesting on the subject on Tuesday. As one of the squad’s more senior players, he was around when England travelled to Cardiff in 2013 in pursuit of a Six Nations grand slam that never materialised. “I was involved in the 2013 England team and I remember the feeling among the group being really nervous. We were so close, we just had to win this game. Other teams I’ve been involved in have let nerves overcome them and caved in, allowing the nerves to become negative.” I’m sure a lot of ’03 boys will then be looking over their shoulders thinking: ‘Oh God, we’re going to be struggling for after-dinner gigs now’ And now? According to Marler that 30-3 Millennium Stadium drubbing is ancient history, as is the tension-racked 2015 World Cup which he described only last month as a “crap” experience. “I don’t feel that in this group. You may turn to me on Sunday and say: ‘You ballsed that up, Joe’ if we end up losing but I don’t feel that. I feel the boys embrace that nervousness and use it as positive energy to drive us on. We have a bring-it-on mentality.” It is Marler’s belief, too, that England’s sizeable Saracens contingent, all accustomed to winning domestic and European club trophies, make up for any shortfall at Test level. “On paper there are only four boys who have been in a World Cup quarter-final before but the Saracens boys have been in big games consistently over the past four or five years. They’re big leaders in this team, huge cogs, and I think we’ve got enough in us to be able to cope with the challenge that presents itself on Saturday.” In Marler’s case, reversing his decision to retire from international rugby and making himself available for this World Cup has also clearly given him a fresh sense of perspective. He looks and sounds like a man who now views this weekend as a fabulous opportunity, having “worked my buns off” to show the management he remains hungry to succeed at the top level and, in the nick of time, resumed full training having been ruled out of last week’s cancelled France fixture. His time out of the England picture has also taught him that what works as a motivational tool for some does not necessarily suit everyone. “Each individual is different. Jonny Wilkinson used to speak about the thing that drove him most was the fear of failure and that worked brilliantly for him. He was one of the best ever to play the game. “Jamie George, by contrast, is Mr Positive, Mr Energy all the time. He doesn’t focus on any of that [negativity] because that brings him down. Everyone is different but as a group, as a collective, we focus less on the fear factor, more on the opportunity and the challenge. Me? I want to be part of a squad that wins a World Cup. That was part of the reason I came out of retirement. I could see the potential in this group and I wanted a taste of that. That’s ultimately what’s driving me on.” Two more wins and he and his teammates will have a clear shot at matching the legends of 2003. Marler jokes that the next three weekends could make a big difference to this England side’s profile – “I’m sure a lot of ’03 boys will then be looking over their shoulders thinking: ‘Oh God, we’re going to be struggling for after-dinner gigs now’” – but finding the right mindset to tackle Australia is all that currently matters. Amid the steaming onsens of Oita, England feel they are coming nicely to the boil.