What were you hoping for?Finding astrological perfection, or at the very least an evening of lol moments. First impressions?He seemed a bit nervous. What did you talk about?His ex-girlfriend, our jobs, what we do in our spare time, and what we are looking for in a partner. Any awkward moments?Most of the evening. Good table manners?They were good. Best thing about Mike?He seemed sweet. Would you introduce him to your friends? I’m not sure he would find that enjoyable. Describe Mike in three words?Proactive, independent, shy. What do you think he made of you?I was very surprised when he asked to swap numbers and see each other again. I’m not sure we were on the same date. Did you go on somewhere?To the underground. And… did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I’m not sure we were very well matched, so maybe we’d have had more fun separately. Marks out of 10?2. Would you meet again?We haven’t planned to. What were you hoping for? To have a nice date and maybe make a friend. First impressions? Nice and friendly, quite direct, pretty confident. What did you talk about?What music she liked, her job, what she wants in the future, her interests, what she likes in a man. Any awkward moments?Probably when I asked her for her number and she said no. Good table manners?Yeah. She ate really quickly – I didn’t expect that. Best thing about Ashleigh?She had good eye contact and pretty eyes. Would you introduce her to your friends?Probably. Describe Ashleigh in three words?Direct, straightforward, unpredictable. What do you think she made of you?Not too much. I got rejected: she probably thought she could do better. Did you go on somewhere?After she didn’t give me her number, I didn’t see the point in trying to carry on. And… did you kiss?No, just a hug and goodbye. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?For it not to have been so soon after breaking up with a girlfriend. I wasn’t really in the mood for it. Marks out of 10?3. Would you meet again?Probably not. I don’t think she wants to anyway. • Ashleigh and Mike ate at Chez Antoinette, London SW1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like‑minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com