“We are already a long time in the bedrooms of terrorists,” a German security official is quoted as saying in Azadeh Moaveni’s superb book, longlisted for the Baillie Gifford prize. The occasion is the controversy over the former FBI agent Daniela Greene, who fell in love with and married the Islamic State fighter she had been assigned to investigate. So twisted is her story no one can tell if it is a “coup for the FBI for sneaking in an agent into the heartland of Isis” or a victory for the terrorists. Moaveni profiles 13 women, including Shamima Begum, who left their homes in the UK, Germany and other countries to join Isis. Greene is not one of the 13 yet the tricky questions surrounding her case are pertinent. To what degree can we empathise with the women (many just teenagers, many fleeing difficult home lives) without becoming complicit in their adulation of terrorists? And are we as readers to allot levels of culpability depending on the details of the individual stories? Is Begum, who, her mother having died, was eager to escape a loveless life in a council flat, more or less culpable than Leena, the mother of three who flees an abusive marriage? And is their existence somehow of value to the West, which can offer them up as proof that Muslim women as well as men can be radicalised? The guest house is a real place 'of such deliberate uninhabitability that few women could stay long without going mad' Moaveni offers detailed depictions of the lives of Nour, Dua, Kadiza and her other subjects, and in doing so invalidates the stereotype of the Isis bride as a seductive, sinister figure bent on mass murder. The daily realities in Raqqa are far more mundane. There is the constant waiting for husbands who disappear for days, and the disposability of marriages when being widowed is a near-guarantee. The “guest house” from which the book takes its title is an actual place “of such deliberate uninhabitability that few women could stay long without going mad”. The discomfort is intentional; the worse the conditions in this limbo between marriages, the more likely the widows are to accept whichever husband they are told to marry next. The exalted positions they were promised as the female pioneers of a new society turn out not to exist. Instead, each of the women finds herself in some semblance of hell. There is also a replication of the colonial hierarchies that Isis ostensibly set out to eliminate. “Why do they get to do whatever they want?” a recruit grumbles when she sees European teenagers being treated better and having more privileges in the Caliphate than the local Syrian women like herself. Her friend can only offer a half-hearted retort: “Maybe because they had to leave their countries to come here …” When Greene, FBI agent turned Isis wife, returns home, she receives a short two-year sentence to atone for her terrorist romance. But Begum, found pregnant and languishing in a camp aged 19, is stripped of her UK citizenship. Dalliances with terror, like everything else, have different consequences for different women; the mastery of Guest House for Young Widows is to show us just how distinct and devastating each can be. • To buy Guest House for Young Widows for £14.95 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837.