Up in the Emirates Stadium directors’ box, Josh Kroenke must have been asking himself whether any of this is sustainable. The son of Arsenal’s owner, Stan, was paying their employees a visit and saw the latest iteration of what has, with eye-popping speed, become a scarily familiar script. This was a raw, wild, sometimes genuinely unpleasant evening that only became so because Unai Emery’s team, two goals up after nine minutes and threatening more, switched off and threw it all away. If that was the entire story then perhaps Kroenke could limit himself to frustration that nowadays their box-office appeal lies almost solely in their uncanny capacity to create doubt from serenity. But what he saw in the 61st minute would trouble any decision maker and suggest that it will take an almighty turnaround to heave relationships back to normal from here. Granit Xhaka is hardly the most popular club captain but this had not been his worst game, even if fingers could be pointed at him for failing to stop James McArthur chipping over the cross from which Jordan Ayew completed a deserved turnaround for Crystal Palace. Emery decided to replace him with Bukayo Saka and, taking what looked a poor decision to walk off rather than break into a jog, Xhaka was sent on his way with a crescendo of boos and jeers. The scale of the vitriol was startling and it brought out the worst in Xhaka, who walked straight down the tunnel after gesticulating towards the crowd and appearing to mouth “fuck off”. It was a desperately poor look for everybody and that arguably includes Emery, given that his captain was already hardly flavour of the month around these parts. He feels Xhaka has broad shoulders but on present evidence it would be a wonder if the fault lines between player and support ever heal. Xhaka and Emery will discuss what happened on Monday and the midfielder might be entitled to suggest he was thrown under the bus. Despite the venom and overriding bitter taste, Arsenal will still wonder why they did not win. That is not because they merited three points against opponents who have assumed a nemesis-like quality in recent times. Rather, they are entitled to ask why an apparent winner from Sokratis Papastathopoulos seven minutes from time was disallowed after a lengthy VAR review with no explanation offered to anyone in the stadium, replays later showing a possible infraction by Calum Chambers in trying to reach Nicolas Pépé’s corner but nothing fitting a definition of “clear and obvious”. The level of communication with the paying public, not to mention those physically involved in the match, was diabolical and it cannot be right that the pitch of confusion is heightening, rather than abating, nearly three months into the season. That was unlucky for Arsenal; no question. But they have papered over so many cracks in recent weeks and, from another angle, this simply felt like the universe calling time on their streak of escapes from the fire. For half an hour no such excitement had ever seemed likely. Pépé, fresh from delivering two late free-kicks to complete one of those salvage operations against Vitória Guimarães on Thursday, swung in two corners within nine minutes and Arsenal scored from them both. Xhaka, at a happier time, nodded down astutely for Sokratis to drive in the first. The second, whipped in at speed, was flicked on by Alexandre Lacazette and helped into the net by David Luiz. All seemed in apple-pie order, for once, and if Wayne Hennessey had not saved brilliantly from Lacazette their capacity for setting themselves riddles would have been sorely tested. Then, after a nonexistent half-hour from Palace, Wilfried Zaha woke up and decided to show why he thought Arsenal signed the wrong Ivory Coast winger. He might not have Pépé’s left foot but he had too much speed for Chambers, who clipped him in the box. At first Martin Atkinson detected a dive and booked Zaha, but a VAR review always seemed likely and there was little doubt about this one. A penalty was awarded, the yellow card rescinded – a first – and Luka Milivojevic dispatched confidently. Now the familiar nerves were back in force and they showed in the second half’s early stages, when Arsenal simply forgot to play. Instead they were sucked into the kind of niggly, antsy scrap that would always give Palace a chance. They conceded a string of soft free-kicks and then, perhaps aggrieved at not winning one of their own when Pépé went down, switched off. Xhaka offered minimal resistance to McArthur’s advance down the left and cross that for Ayew, craning his neck at the far post, converted on the run. That seemed like enough drama but, by the standards of what followed, was only the half of it. The increasingly valid question is whether the Kroenkes will countenance Emery presiding over much more.