If you have problems with the term “late-stage capitalism”, I hope you can get behind the alternative “ironicidal capitalism”. This is the bit where democracies are so evolved and self‑assured they sell their freedom of speech to totalitarian regimes. I know! But kind of logical, when you think about it. There was basically nothing left to flog. For those who’ve missed the saga of the NBA’s travails in China, have no fear. It isn’t going away any time soon, with last weekend’s development being groups of fans wearing masks and “Stand With Hong Kong” T-shirts standing in protest at the Brooklyn Nets preseason finale at the Barclays Center, in a show of support unlikely to be looked on fondly by the People’s Republic. Tuesday night’s opening NBA games were duly blacked out by China’s state broadcaster. First, though, a recap of the story: earlier this month, the Houston Rockets general manager, Daryl Morey, tweeted his support for pro-democracy protesters in Hong Kong. In fairly short order, the Rockets stated that his views did not reflect those of the team, while the NBA informed the world it was “regrettable” Morey’s tweet had caused offence. You know you’re in dangerous territory when you’re reduced to nodding along with Ted Cruz, but the Texas senator declared: “We’re better than this; human rights shouldn’t be for sale and the NBA shouldn’t be assisting Chinese communist censorship.” Suggesting there may yet be one bipartisan issue left in the US, the Democratic hopeful Beto O’Rourke was soon voicing similar sentiments. Alas, none of these were really what the Chinese government wanted to hear, leading to the state threatening to cut ties with the NBA. Some Chinese companies have pulled sponsorship. Slightly changing tack, the NBA mounted a grimly mealy-mouthed defence of Morey, with the NBA commissioner, Adam Silver, explaining: “I understand there are consequences from his freedom of speech and we will have to live with those consequences.” Over to Chinese state television. “We’re strongly dissatisfied and oppose Adam Silver’s claim to support Morey’s right to freedom of expression,” CCTV said in a statement. “We believe any remarks that challenge national sovereignty and social stability are not within the scope of freedom of speech.” As for who should give a toss what they believe, unless you’re Chinese and have no choice … enter LeBron James. Given what a powerful voice the Lakers star has been for civil rights in the US, there was a certain amount of disappointment that he opted to say of Morey: “I believe he wasn’t educated about the situation at hand and he spoke. Just be careful what we tweet … even though, yes, we do have freedom of speech. But there can be a lot of negative that comes with that, too.” Though James walked back the statement almost in real time, given the reaction to it, it wasn’t quick enough for rightwing pundits, who continue to jump on it, as well as the failure of other stars to speak out in support of the protesters. Yes, those who for so long lacerated sports stars for getting political are now demanding to know why they aren’t. Athletes who have been told to shut up and play are now told to speak out, and criticised if they don’t. Suddenly, the last thing anyone seems to want them to do is “stick to basketball”. Silver himself has found slightly more of a backbone, revealing he resisted Chinese demands to fire Morey. China denies this version, and CCTV stated he will face “retribution sooner or later” for it. As for how this huge and deepening mess will play out for the NBA, it isn’t clear, though it would be nice to think politicians and pundits may grasp that it’s not actually up to LeBron James to sort out China. But in the wider contexts of sports, the affair should be viewed as highly instructive as an indication of the lengths to which the Chinese state will go to collect on their various deals. We saw glimpses of this in the Beijing Olympics, where promises to the IOC about freedom to protest were broken once the event was under way. But it apparently wasn’t alarm-bell ringing enough for the IOC not to award Beijing the 2022 Winter Olympics. Will it be enough for Fifa? Like the IOC, Fifa loves an authoritarian regime in which to locate their quadrennial mega-event – it makes things so much easier on a lot of levels – and the chatter that the 2030 World Cup may just end up going to China is getting louder with every month. Meanwhile, the tale should also be cautionary for the Premier League and its bigger clubs, which have ever-increasing commercial and even physical presences in China. If athletes or management staff or even banner-toting fans should speak out visibly on this, or other current or future Chinese issues, it feels reasonable to assume some version of the NBA saga could take place. Forms of self-censorship for commercial gain in China are already being “strongly encouraged” by other entertainment businesses. According to a recent BuzzFeed report, some showrunners on Apple’s new original programming slate were instructed by Apple leadership to avoid negative portrayals of China. The video game company Blizzard suspended a player for voicing support for Hong Kong protesters. All sorts of sports may find their businesses getting sucked into this nasty business because, instead of staying the irrelevance they may prefer, the question is moving centre stage: what price market access?