When Motherland’s pilot episode was broadcast in September 2016, it was – like the first dad at a breastfeeding support group – a quiet revolution. Previously, sitcom mums tended to be the calm centre in the storm of family life (Susan in My Family, Sue in Outnumbered, Clair in The Cosby Show, Jackie in Friday Night Dinner). There was nothing quite as thrillingly chaotic as Julia, played by Anna Maxwell Martin, attempting to buy black school shoes with her two kids in tow, on the last day before term starts, five minutes before the shop closes, as she does in the opening scene of Motherland season two. Nothing, in other words, that was truly honest about the experience of being a mother. To Helen Linehan, one of the series’ writers, the reason for this omission is obvious: who would want to watch a show about the stress of motherhood? “For me, all I wanted to do was just have a nice conversation about music or something and not bloody babies,” she recalls of the time in her life when Motherland was first conceived, and she was a stay-at-home mother of two. “Because what everyone wants to talk about is their baby and it’s the most boring subject.” This is the kind of extreme boredom that can drive people to extreme behaviour, it turns out: “Some of the antics that go on! Especially with PTAs. There’ll be people in tears or there’ll be fights and stuff and the behaviour is so bizarre that it wouldn’t translate to telly, d’you know what I mean? No one would believe you.” Still, Linehan thought there might be a sitcom in it. She and her husband, Graham Linehan (Father Ted, The IT Crowd), approached another writing team, Sharon Horgan and Holly Walsh, who had separately been working on a pilot with similar themes for US television. “We wrote a show for a US network about a mother who was struggling, fucking up, getting it wrong,” explains Horgan. “By the time we came to shoot it she was 60% less of a mess. So it was 60% less funny. I think at that time there wasn’t an appetite for mothers on screen who were saying this is all wrong or kicking back.” The four joined forces around their common idea. Unlike the many, less funny, family sitcoms that came before, Motherland would not be a show about how mothers relate to their offspring, or how mothers relate to fathers (both the children and the nominal co-parents are mostly off-screen). It would be about how mothers relate to each other. Maybe the day-to-day business of mothering is too boring for television, but motherhood? That’s one of the most fascinating – and funny – life experiences there is. Three years on and Motherland’s second series has started, with a third already commissioned. At the same time, an explosion of online parenting content – ranging from Insta-influencers to confessional “slummy mummies” – has helped both consolidate an audience for motherhood comedy and provide writers with a treasury of new material. Motherland is now one of several shows that present child-rearing from a woman’s point of view. There are international takes, such as the Australian TV show The Letdown and Canadian series Workin’ Moms; semi-autobiographical portraits of single motherhood, such as Pamela Adlon’s Better Things and Frankie Shaw’s SMILF; and even a sub-genre of heavily pregnant standup specials, including Ali Wong’s Baby Cobra and Amy Schumer’s Growing. The implicit promise of them all is that they will give it to us straight. Ali Wong on work-life balance, for instance: “Real talk? I have a nanny. That’s it. That’s the answer. Yes, it’s very unlikable and unpopular to broadcast that because not everybody can afford a nanny, it’s super-expensive. Both me and my husband have to hustle. We have to work very hard to not take care of our child ourselves.” In a relatively short time, motherhood has gone from a comedy blindspot to one of its favourite topics. For all the talk of funny women making waves, this might be the most compelling evidence yet of real progress towards equality: not only are women more numerous in creative roles, they have the power to get shows made about topics relevant to them, whether or not the menfolk are also laughing. It is a trajectory that is also reflected in the Motherland writers’ room, now that Graham, the show’s sole male writer, has been replaced by writer-performer Barunka O’Shaughnessy (Hunderby, Timewasters). Get four working mothers together in one room and you’ll get four very different solutions to that hoary old conundrum: “How does she do it?” Motherland’s perspective is undeniably that of the comfortably-off London mum (it’s set around Acton, west London) – but even within that specific stratum there are variations. Between the writers, they have children from toddler age to teens, experience of state and private schooling, stay-at-home parenting and various types of outsourced childcare. During the series, we’re also reintroduced to super-stressed Julia who, early in season two, swaps a full-time event-planning job for working from home, but finds she’s no less stressed. Alpha mum-turned-mumpreneur Amanda (Lucy Punch) might be more enviable if she wasn’t so relentlessly judgmental about everyone else’s choices. Single parent Liz (Diane Morgan) is a heroic source of dry wit and ingenious parenting shortcuts, but her income source remains mysterious. Then there’s Kevin (Paul Ready), the stay-at-home dad who’s recently taken on some work at soft-play centre Kiddiverse. “It’s really great!” he tells Liz during a school gate catch-up. “Part-time, so I can still drop the kids, very average wage so Jill doesn’t feel threatened … whole package, really!” For the second series, Motherland’s horizons have been further expanded by the introduction of a new character. “When I came, what I thought was missing was a character who’s able to do everything,” says O’Shaughnessy. “So for me it was more about: well, who is this extraordinary character? And what can we do with her that makes her sort of slightly fallible.” By this point the other writers had noticed an omission, too: people of colour. Series two introduces Meg (played by black British actor Tanya Moodie), a high-flying businesswoman who has five children. “Y’know, that sort of Nicola Horlick template of motherhood,” says O’Shaughnessy. “You’re always looking for a chink in their armour, because you’re always comparing yourself.” The introduction of Meg goes some way to pre-empting any criticism of Motherland’s narrow focus but, as O’Shaughnessy acknowledges, there is a limit: “I think if you want to tell a different side to motherhood you have to go to a different area and into a different class or, whatever, background, and you can cover that … There are other shows that are about the more vulnerable end of being a parent in this world but that’s not our remit.” If Motherland’s creators seem anxious to do their bit for inclusivity, that’s understandable. You don’t need to spend much time on Mumsnet to realise that the same properties that make motherhood such a bounteous topic for comedy also make it a touchy one. The “mommy wars” rumble on, on various fronts (breastfeeding v bottle-feeding, stay-at-home v working, sugar-free v reality etc), emotions run high and everyone is sleep-deprived. Even in the manuals and blogs designed to support parents, generalised observations can feel like personal digs. “It upsets me when we’re not united in saying it’s fucking hard,” says Horgan. “A girl at my daughter’s school told her that her mum was worried I didn’t spend enough time with my daughter and she just ‘wishes’ I was around more. Seriously, you take one job away from home four years ago! Anyway, now I want to give her a one-inch punch in her judge-y chops. Y’know, I thought it was sort of funny. But I also thought that that kind of thing is so unhelpful. And feeding into a sort of sexist bias that puts all the responsibility on the mother, to be a certain type or project a certain image. Fuck that. Stick together and support each other. Your daughters need to see that.” And don’t forget about the dads. Paul Ready, who plays Kevin, says he pushed to ensure that his character gets to “win a bit more” this season. “Socially, if the world is changing and we need more stay-at-home dads and there’s going to be proper equality, then I think it’s dangerous to have a stay-at-home dad who is just the butt of the joke,” he says. Rest assured that Kevin’s desperation to be part of the mum-crowd is still the butt of many jokes, and probably always will be. “I think he always has to slightly lose,” says Ready, “or he wouldn’t be Kevin any more.” The brutal reality of school-gate society is that excluding those who don’t fit is an essential bonding ritual, and this is at the very core of Motherland. Indeed, excluding outsiders (all the characters are outsiders, in some sense) might be the only group-bonding method strong enough to bring together women who, as Walsh has joked, “have nothing in common except the fact that you all had unprotected sex on the same weekend”. That explains how the mud-flecked, military-influenced motto “No mum left behind” gets taken up as series two’s sometimes ironic, sometimes earnest rallying cry. “I’ve read a lot of scripts lately dealing with these themes – the difficult, painful, often hilarious reality of parenting,” says Lucy Punch, who plays Amanda. “I think there’s a trend and need in our culture right now for authenticity and honesty, not just in comedy … Those fantasy worlds that [once] existed … wouldn’t feel relevant or work in the same way now.” Not for Motherland, then, the mysteriously baby-free brunching of Sex and the City, or the perfectly coiffed labours of Friends. Instead, this season features those half-term holidays that end up being no kind of holiday at all, the manic #mumdrunk hedonism of a rare night out and the sweaty guilt of missing sports day. How does Motherland transform such recognisably stressful events into an enjoyable half-hour of weeknight comedy? It’s a question Linehan once asked herself: “I thought: ‘Would I want to sit down with a glass of wine and watch this? After wrangling my kids all day?’” Somehow it works, and Linehan has a theory: “Hopefully, it’s just so extreme you think: ‘Oh, thank God my life isn’t like that!’ When, actually, it nearly is.” Motherland is on Mondays, BBC Two, 10pm