Hughie Morrison is planning to appeal against the decision of the Racing Victoria stewards to rule Marmelo out of next week’s Melbourne Cup. The six-year-old was beaten just a length into second by Cross Counter in last year’s running, and was among the leading hopes again for the two-mile prize after winning a Deauville Group Two contest in August.However, he was ordered to undergo a scan at the start of this week after Racing Victoria vets found him to be sore – and that test has revealed two “incomplete fractures” in both a fore and hind leg. The stewards duly ordered his withdrawal on Wednesday, along with the Charlie Appleby-trained Ispolini, who also underwent a scan which “indicated pre-fracture pathology within the horse’s right front cannon bone”. The East Isley trainer, who arrived in Australia on Tuesday to supervise Marmelo’s build-up, was quick to signal his intention to appeal, describing the stewards’ views about the scan as “inaccurate and unfounded”. He added: “I’m trying to sort an appeal out. It’s not only me this has happened to.” A statement on http://www.racingvictoria.com.au read: “[The] stewards received a [Racing Victoria] veterinary report advising that Marmelo would not be fit to compete in the Melbourne Cup if it was held on the day of final acceptances [on Saturday]. Marmelo was referred to the University of Melbourne equine clinic to undergo a scan across the weekend after showing signs of soreness upon inspection by veterinarians.“The results of the standing CT scan indicated an incomplete fracture in the horse’s near fore cannon bone and an incomplete fracture in its off hind cannon bone. Having considered the veterinary report, in addition to veterinary reports submitted by trainer Hughie Morrison, stewards acting under AR20(d) have ordered the withdrawal of the horse from the Melbourne Cup. [The] stewards made their decision to ensure the safety and wellbeing of Marmelo, along with his potential competitors and riders.” The withdrawal of Marmelo leaves leading jockey Hugh Bowman without a ride in the Melbourne Cup.Ispolini’s absence is a further blow for Godolphin after Saeed bin-Suroor’s Cup outsider Red Galileo was ruled out and referred to the University of Melbourne Veterinary Hospital at Werribee for scans – having pulled up lame after a gallop. The owner will now rely upon Appleby’s Cross Counter, who is set to shoulder top weight following his 2018 victory.