‘Broadway” and “Hollywood” have long been words of derision. So I take a secret pleasure in telling people who speak movingly of the impact on them of the Midsummer Night’s Dream that I put on in Stratford, London and New York in the early 70s that the great influence that made this possible was my experience on Broadway. Every year back then I would find a reason to go to New York. By contrast with the stately, unchanging, middle-class London theatre, Broadway was vibrating with new people, new ways, new life. Of course, the often ruthless aim was success: great notices on the opening night or else the show had no chance of survival. But in exchange, all the very best talent flocked to Broadway. And it wasn’t all musicals; the straight theatre too had the top adventurous new talents – Arthur Miller, Tennessee Williams, Edward Albee – and groundbreaking directors like Elia Kazan. But the great magnet in New York was indeed the musical. After years of being a cosy entertainment for tired businessmen and their wives came Oklahoma!, South Pacific, and on to the unforgettable shocks of West Side Story and Guys and Dolls! Here, the Shakespeare model was incarnate: never to lose the common touch. So a hit could travel round the world and become a household name. For me, there were two experiences inseparable from Broadway. One was the first visit of the Chinese acrobats. They demonstrated that the way to suggest the fairies of the spirit world was not with pretty, transparent costumes on girlish dancers. It was by evoking lightness with seemingly effortless acrobatics. The other eye-opener came from Jerome Robbins. The musical called on top choreographers to bring a new life to the customary routines of the operetta, to develop their own dancers in their own way. Robbins was already one of the luminaries of the New York City Ballet. His new work was called Dances at a Gathering. A small group of dancers are discovered round a piano. The pianist began to play the first notes, notes that belonged to the ballet world – Chopin. The dancers were all dressed in simple, white, everyday clothes. Gone was the moonlight, the painted trees, the tutus. Gradually, as though responding for the first time to the notes, they left the piano and, in an unchanging bright light, there flowed a series of pas de deux for man and girl, easing into wider animation when the whole ensemble left the piano to make patterns of light movement. When we needed to find a path to the hidden life of A Midsummer Night’s Dream, my constant collaborators, the composer Richard Peaslee and the designer Sally Jacobs, had long been fed our own experiences in our workshops, but what Broadway gave us was the need and the courage to develop what we had begun to discover. Truman Capote, a young gay writer whose books were on every coffee table, had proposed turning his own short story House of Flowers into a musical. He would write the script and the lyrics for a top composer, Harold Arlen, famous for Judy Garland’s Over the Rainbow among other hits. Also joining the team was no less than George Balanchine, the purest of choreographers. And our star was the most vibrant Broadway actress, singer Pearl Bailey. Our young New York producer could sleep happily: it could not go wrong. But it did. How could such a seeming hit become a flop? I began painfully to discover the unknown rules of Broadway. In all my London experiences, the director was the top dog and had the final say on how a show should be made; all the elements – cast, music, settings – were the director’s territory. In the London theatre jargon of the time the director was called the producer. (Director was a business term, referring to the managing director of a company.) Of course, above the producer was the management, who usually owned or had long-term deals with the theatres. Naturally, the producer would listen to their comments and happily accept good advice from experienced eyes with a certain detachment. New York was a very different scene. The person called the producer had become the absolute boss. He was the management, and he found and provided the cash. By contrast, the person called the director could, like all the team, be hired and fired at the producer’s whim. Before opening on Broadway, a show would often go for an out-of-town try-out – a valuable system allowing changes to be made but also a ruthless process whereby writers, actors and directors could be sent packing overnight. On my very first trip to New York I was the guest of a top producer who was interested in a show we were doing in London. He kindly offered to get me a ticket for the musical that everyone was talking about. I was very disappointed by it, and when I saw him the next day I began to give him my criticisms. He cut me off sharply. “Nonsense!” he said, “It’s the hottest seat in town!” I gradually learned the tremendous advantage of creating a play in the secure conditions of the London West End, and if it happened to click, it would be that very production which enterprising producers would invite to New York. With House of Flowers I learnt that the American musical had a complex series of rules, unknown to the visiting director. Truman Capote had never written a musical, so it was the responsibility of the director to coach him, rewrite after rewrite, until his script conformed to what Broadway musicals demanded. Step by step, composer, choreographer, designer knew that they too had to conform to what was demanded of them by the all-knowing eye of the man who paid – the producer. Harold Arlen and Capote’s first attempts at lyric writing were far from what an audience had been conditioned to expect. Marlene Dietrich was such a friend and fan of Arlen that she moved in to encourage and guide him through a show-business world that she knew only too well. Pearl Bailey was a long-established singing star – and was in no way convinced by the other unformed but talented singers in the cast, mostly recruited from the West Indies. I saw the unbridgeable distance between these two worlds in rehearsal when she came to me to pour out her anger against a young singer who dared to take herself too seriously: “Who does she think she is? She carries on as though she’s a star. I tried to slap her down, to get some sense into her. So I said to her, ‘You think you’re a star? Just listen to me, honey! If you’re a star, just tell me – where are your furs, where are your diamonds, where are your cars?’’ And as we rehearsed, our poor young producer, watching me at work, did not feel he had the authority to step in and say to me: “No! You’re getting it wrong.” He just sat and suffered. And of course the show could not come together. The story was a good one. The House of Flowers was a brothel in the port of a Caribbean island. A group of enchanting ladies were the Flowers. At the rise of the curtain they were sitting sadly hoping for a ship to bring some customers. Arlen had given them an enchanting chorus that began: “Waiting. Waiting. Waiting, it is so irritating. Waiting for a ship to come by.” Then the story started with cockfights and voodoo. By the time the show had – very rapidly – given up the ghost, I had already left for Europe, but my greatest disappointment was that the score was so quickly forgotten. For years, in Paris, I hoped to make a musical free of Broadway pressures. However I had already been deeply immersed in the world of musicals in the free atmosphere of London at the time. Popular music is always a guide. When the great American musicals swept across the world, neither London nor Paris had anything to compare, and we realised how poor our old-fashioned forms of musical theatre had become. A new young generation began to explore what could be alive for them then. Deep in the world of rock, they were to make musicals that did not copy American models. This is an edited extract from Playing by Ear: Reflections on Music and Sound by Peter Brook, £9.99 paperback, published on 24 October by Nick Hern Books.