A point is a point is a point, so this match was not a complete waste of time, except perhaps for the spectators. Mind you, those who turned up can at least say they witnessed one of the misses of the season thanks to Andre Gray. Danny Welbeck and Craig Dawson also had good opportunities but were denied by Dean Henderson, but do not let those facts kid you into thinking Watford were unlucky not to claim their first win of the season here. This woeful game at least ended with a fair result. Watford’s teamsheet read like a classified ad: Desperately Seeking Solidity. Their manager, Quique Sánchez Flores, tried to repair a defence that had conceded 20 goals in their previous seven league matches by changing formation and giving Sebastian Prödl a first league start for 17 months, putting him in the heart of a five-man rearguard. Flores later denied it was his intention to sit deep and hope for counterattacks at home to a newly promoted team; but that is how things panned out. The Blades had most of the ball but were unable to unpick the Watford padlock. Perhaps the hosts’ meekness lulled the visitors into laxity in the 11th minute, when a token ball into the right-hand channel by Daryl Janmaat turned into an incisive through-ball because no United player chased it. Roberto Pereyra spotted the opportunity and charged on to it before firing in a low cross that Henderson could not cut out. There were gasps of disbelief around Vicarage Road when Gray scooped the ball over the open goal from five yards. For all their possession, the visitors created few openings. The most difficult save Ben Foster had to make came when Craig Cathcart sliced the ball over his own goalkeeper’s head, forcing Foster to arch backwards and slap the ball away to prevent an own goal. Creativity was conspicuous by its absence. But at least the visitors showed fluency before running out of precision near the opposing box, whereas Watford stammered along. The home side should have scored on the counter four minutes into the second half. Welbeck did well to beat John Egan to a bouncing ball in the centre circle and then sped away from the defender. Henderson rushed out to the edge of the area to save the striker’s shot. Henderson rescued his team again in stoppage time, blocking a header by Dawson from Gerard Deulofeu’s free-kick. It was a fine way for the goalkeeper to reassert his quality after the mistake that led to defeat against Liverpool last week. “These things happen in football and in life and it’s how you react and overcome the next hurdle,” said United’s manager, Chris Wilder. “It’s no surprise to us how he’s done it. He’s come roaring back.”