Hannah Gadsby’s not in America any more: she leaves an applause break after the first mention of her smash hit show Nanette, and no applause comes. But Nanette is why we’re all here. A fierce exposé of the trauma and abuse (homophobic, sexist) she’d sublimated in her standup, that tense anti-comedy became a totem of the #MeToo movement and made her a global celebrity. It’s also guaranteed her biggest ever audience for this follow-up, Douglas, which toured the US and now arrives in the UK. But “if Nanette brought you here,” asks Gadsby, “what the fuck do you want out of tonight?” In a real coup, she begins the show by telling us what we’re going to get. Post-support act but pre-interval, Gadsby offers up an itinerary of the set she’s about to deliver. There will be an anecdote about walking her dog, an awkward sex story, and some “gentle, good-natured needling of the patriarchy”. She’ll indulge in a little “hate-baiting”, winding up the trolls who branded Nanette a “lecture”. And there’ll be a big reveal, about Gadsby’s recently diagnosed autism – which we’ll have to pretend she hasn’t just told us about. It’s a superlative opening, predicting not just when we’ll laugh but how, and inverting the usual structure that places big callback laughs at the end of the show. It’s got chutzpah in spades, as Gadsby revels in (and sends up) the confidence accrued from Nanette’s success. And – as an example of organising, sequencing and avoiding surprises – it tees up the show’s theme, which is Gadbsy’s out-and-proud neurodiversity. The show lives up to the preamble. It finds Gadsby having more fun than she did in its predecessor, without stinting on Nanette’s key qualities of angry anti-sexism and fierce assertiveness of her right to be herself. Even ardent Nanette-bashers would have to acknowledge Gadsby’s skill in combining laugh-heavy standup with trenchant argument, as her goofy story about oversharing on a dog walk shines a light on men’s zeal for claiming and naming things. The pill? “Balls” for testicles? The so-called Pouch of Douglas, a cavity between the rectum and the uterus? Gadsby is indignant – and funny – about all of them. The subject of her autism is introduced via an anecdote about school-age Gadsby missing the point – by a wide margin – in a lesson on prepositions. Finally, the show proposes her autism as an answer to what Gadsby’s comedy is – neither lecture nor monologue, but an autistic woman’s way of sharing her idiosyncratic perspective. This is demonstrated via an irreverent art history tour, singling out (usually chauvinist) details in Renaissance painting. Elsewhere, there’s less idiosyncratic material, in a middle section where Gadsby proves “I don’t need hormones to be unreasonable” by grouching about Where’s Wally? and men who golf. An attack on anti-vaxxers, however justifiable, is distinguished more by heat than light. But Douglas remains a rich and entertaining show from Gadsby, one that achieves the impressive feat of both living up to Nanette and moving on from it. At the Royal Festival Hall, London, 25 and 27 October. Then touring.