Years after she was twice convicted and then twice acquitted for murder in Italy, Amanda Knox will be taking her opinions into the public sphere through an advice column in a local Seattle publication. Knox, now 32, will be periodically answering reader-submitted questions in her new column entitled, “Ask Amanda Knox” which will be published in the Seattle-area news outlet, Westside Seattle. The weekly print and online newspaper serves parts of Seattle and a few surrounding cities. The Seattle native recently married Christopher Robinson, whose family publishes the newspaper. Knox was already listed as a contributing writer and photographer for the publication. She produced opinion pieces about her time in Italy, her family and even her religion. The news comes a decade after Knox was initially found guilty of the murder of 21-year-old British student, Meredith Kercher, who she lived with in the Italian town of Perugia. She was sentenced to 26 years in jail, but she and her ex-boyfriend, Raffaele Sollecito, ended up only serving four years in prison. Last summer, she traveled back to Italy for the first time since her release from prison in 2011 for the Criminal Justice festival in Modena. She discussed the experience of her arrest and prison sentence during a debate called, Trial by Media. Knox, who has repeatedly declared her innocence, has also published a memoir and participated in a 2016 Netflix documentary detailing the case. Westside Seattle published an editor’s note on Monday introducing the new column and explaining that the four years Knox spent in Italian prison “for a murder she didn’t commit” gave her “a unique perspective on life”. “Now fully exonerated, this bestselling author and advocate for criminal justice reform offers her insights, such as they are, to reader questions about life, love, suffering and meaning,” the publication said. After the publication announced the new column on its Facebook page, a commenter wrote, “No. Just no.” Patrick Robinson, Westside Seattle’s director of new media, responded a few hours later with a lengthy reply: “For those that have doubts or still, after all that has transpired, question her innocence all I can say is if you had met her, spoken with her, gotten to know her as I have you would have nothing but admiration for her… It’s as if she was meant to go through all this to become the remarkable, and brilliant, capable and deeply sincere woman she is.” Robinson later explained that Knox is not being paid by the newspaper, she has simply “chosen to use her life experience in a positive way.” The outlet did not respond to requests for comment, and did not provide information about when the column will be published or what questions Knox will answer. It was not immediately known precisely when Knox’s column would begin.