Netflix has released a trailer for the upcoming third season of the hit royal drama The Crown, with Oscar-winner Olivia Colman taking over the role of Queen Elizabeth II from Claire Foy. The series – created by Frost/Nixon writer Peter Morgan – progresses from 1964 into 1976. The first episode airs on 17 November, with Helena Bonham-Carter also joining the cast as Princess Margaret and Gillian Anderson set to portray Margaret Thatcher. The two-minute preview, released on Monday, shows historic events including the Aberfan disaster of 1966 unfold, while tensions rise within the Windsor family itself as the Queen approaches her Silver Jubilee. As Colman proclaims that “the place has fallen apart”, she seems to refer both to a nation in the grip of crisis and to the inner politics of Buckingham Palace, with Prince Charles becoming involved with Camilla Shand (later Parker-Bowles) and the appointment of Labour prime minister Harold Wilson among other catalysts for change. As well as Colman, Bonham-Carter and Anderson, the series has undergone a full cast overhaul. Tobias Menzes replaces Matt Smith as Prince Philip, Charles Dance plays Lord Mountbatten and Josh O’Connor (The Durrells) is Prince Charles. Emerald Fennell – of the BBC’s Call The Midwife, and also the screenwriter of the second series of Killing Eve – takes on the role of Camilla. The show has been a critical hit since it first aired in 2016 – with the Guardian describing it as “the service’s crowning achievement so far” – although the notoriously tight-lipped Netflix has never released official viewing figures. It has also been an expensive endeavour, with the first series rumoured to have cost £100m in total for 10 episode. The Guardian’s Charlotte Higgins gained exclusive access to the filming of the new season and wrote: “In some years it costs more to make The Crown than it does to fund the real Queen’s sovereign grant – that is, the income from her estates that she is allocated by the government.” Anderson, the former X-Files star, told the Observer earlier this year that “I am so excited … to have the opportunity to portray such a complicated and controversial woman. Thatcher was undoubtedly formidable, but I am relishing exploring beneath the surface and, dare I say, falling in love with the icon who, whether loved or despise, defined an era.” Elsewhere, Colman continues a starry, monarchical run, having won on Oscar early this year for her role as Queen Anne in Yorgos Lanthimos’ dark period comedy The Favourite. She isn’t hoping to emulate the Queen to a tee, however, telling the Sunday Times last week that “if people think they’re going to see the actual Queen, they can sod off. It’s a drama.”