Rivalry was the word of the day as fans filed into Sydney’s Qudos Bank Arena for game three of the Constellation Cup. In the 151st encounter between Australia and New Zealand, the screens were full of flashbacks to previous games, dating back to 1938. It was a sign of things to come – this was to be a classic battle between the two old foes. It was with a renewed sense of purpose the Diamonds took to the court. After a heartbreaking one-goal loss to their old rivals last week in Christchurch, and an at-times unconvincing win in Auckland, this was a team that looked fired up to be back on home soil. Australia raced out to a six-goal lead thanks to intense pressure that forced errors from New Zealand, chasing down every loose ball. In attack, they showed more patience with the Ferns’ zone, taking the safe options until it opened up, then using quick passes to exploit the gaps. The first half was an Ash Brazill show – one that her home town was only too happy to witness. With three gains, two intercepts and four deflections in the half, Brazill looked like she had found her home in the green and gold – her switches on to Laura Langman in the goal third were instrumental in shutting down the Ferns’ greatest weapon. Caitlin Bassett and Gretel Tippett found the timing they had been lacking in previous games in the goal circle and moved the ball with ease early on. But after the quarter-time break, New Zealand’s defence tightened up and the Diamonds shooters lost their rhythm. Coach Lisa Alexander pulled Tippett from the court late in the second quarter, introducing Tegan Philip into the game. Philip struggled to rise to the occasion and Tippett returned after half-time. After half-time the Ferns were switched on, scoring eight of the first 10 goals and forcing mass changes from Alexander. On to the court came the Melbourne Vixens shooting combination of Philip and Caitlin Thwaites, with NSW Swifts grand final hero Sarah Klau in goal keeper to the roar of the Sydney crowd. Klau’s impact was immediate, pulling in a strong rebound, and the crowd lifted again. The Diamonds closed the gap and the match swung, both teams pushed to their limits, neither able to pull away. New Zealand held a slight advantage, but a desperate Diamonds turnover and a calm Thwaites goal right on the final whistle of the third quarter sent them into the final 15 minutes with a one-goal lead. The pressure mounted with every second of the final quarter – bodies were flying everywhere, balls were sailing over the baseline at both ends of the court and the crowd rode every moment. The noise was deafening, and the players had little chance of hearing the umpires’ calls, let alone their own players’ directions. The quarter was full of key moments, each seeming they were the decisive factor in turning the game. A miscommunication between Laura Langman and Maria Folau. A rebound from Jo Weston, a miss from Tegan Philip. But each time the momentum swung again and the game was not decided. It was frantic, it was frenetic, it was loud. It was everything a game between the Diamonds and the Silver Ferns must be. In the end it came down to one goal. How could it go any other way? It was a script waiting to be written for these two old rivals. The series now heads to Perth on 27 October for the fourth and final match, with New Zealand well placed to win the Constellation Cup for just the second time and first since 2012.