Where, or rather what, would Rebecca be without Manderley, The Forsyte Saga without Robin Hill or Howards End without, well, Howards End? In this collection of 20 sparkling mini-essays, Christina Hardyment sets out to show how bricks and mortar make compelling fictional characters just as surely as skin and bone. Skilfully deploying biography, close reading and psychogeography, Hardyment creates a series of charming house portraits, starting with Horace Walpole’s gothic castle of Otranto (1764) and winding up with the equally crenellated Hogwarts, courtesy of JK Rowling (1997-2007). Along the way we stop off at Jane Austen’s Mansfield Park (1814), Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin (1852) and JRR Tolkien’s Bag End (1937). You can’t help noticing that there aren’t many airy, well-lit interiors in evidence here. No one seems keen on open plan, cleaning up or putting things away in their proper place. Instead, corridors twist and turn to nowhere, paintings of fussy-looking ancestors stare from the wall and talismanic objects – books, a dagger, an out-of-place saucepan – are left lying carelessly around just waiting to make mischief. This must be because the houses that authors create in their imaginations are dragged up from the twistiest parts of their unconscious, replicating those hidden corners where neurosis and creativity do their special dance. It is also, Hardyment suggests, because authors frequently base their fictional houses on their own beloved homes, which – surprise – turn out to be hugger-mugger too. The four-year-old EM Forster fell in love with his home’s breaks in logic, the way the three attics could smell of apple, mice and jam simultaneously A case in point. In 1883 EM Forster and his indomitable mother Lily moved into Rooks Nest, a mellow red farmhouse in Hertfordshire. Four-year-old Morgan fell in love with his rented home’s sharp breaks in logic, the way that there was a surprise set of stairs behind a door leading off the hall, or that the three large attics could smell simultaneously of apple, mice and jam. Away at boarding school in Kent he drew careful plans of the house, and even wrote it a nine-page love letter. He assumed that he would live and die at Rooks Nest and so when, after a mere decade, the owners reclaimed their delightful home for themselves, the boy was devastated. Twenty years later Forster recreated Rooks Nest as Howards End, the near-sacred refuge in which the Wilcox and Schlegel families work through the psychic wounds that come with being alive in the early 20th century. Here are the ruddy bricks of the original, there the flowering plum trees, while the smell of apple, mice and jam lingers too. “This house is my childhood and its safety,” murmured Forster on an ecstatic return visit to Rooks Nest in middle age, but it’s clear that he was dreaming too of Howards End. Not all fictional houses are made out of deep feeling. Some, indeed, are purposefully built from paper. Stella Gibbons’s Cold Comfort Farm is a carefully constructed parody of the grubby, seething homesteads that you find in the 1920s “loam and lovechild” potboilers of Mary Webb and Sheila Kaye-Smith, with an extra dash of filth from DH Lawrence. The incomparable Starkadder family have lived for centuries in Howling, Sussex, in a farm which “crouched like a beast, about to spring, under the bulk of Mockuncle Hill”. In the filthy kitchen, a bubbling “snood of porridge” hangs over the sullen fire and gives “an ominous, leering heave”. The stage is set for Flora Poste, the book’s brisk heroine, to descend on her cousins’ filthy burrow from London and work her cleansing magic. By the end of the book everyone, and even the farm itself, has had a good wash and brush-up and is ready to show a sparkling new face to the modern world. In truth, Hardyment has not found much new to say about these literary homes but, like an excellent housekeeper, she rearranges and polishes up the furniture in such a way that you find yourself inclined to linger. Nor is her job always quite as easy or obvious as you might at first think. Literary houses have a disconcerting habit of either disappearing halfway through a text, or switching places with an uncanny twin. Take Dickens’s Bleak House. Despite its ominous name, John Jarndyce’s eponymous mansion is actually a place of “light, warmth and comfort” and “hospitable jingle”. It is Chesney Wold, Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock’s cheery-sounding Lincolnshire stately home that exudes the drenched melancholy and clenched terror of the novel’s doubly narrated plot. And that’s not forgetting, of course, all the other bleak houses in the novel, from Krook’s hovel, to Tulkinghorn’s lair to Chancery’s fog-choked grandeur and, finally, the feverish accusation that is Tom-All-Alone’s. The best fictional houses, Hardyment argues, are complex, protean characters that act decisively on a novel’s plot, rather than mere moodsetters or expressive cartoons. • Novel Houses is published by Bodleian Library (£25). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.