The arrival of daylight saving is a victory for families with young children; sleeping in a little longer is always a win but the gift of being able to sit outside to eat is my family’s favourite part. As we set the table, little hands carry out cutlery and glasses. When the last dish is placed down, we sit together and eat before the mozzies eat us. Roasting a chicken used to be all Sunday lunch pomp and ceremony, but this method is fast enough for a midweek meal, and if you buy a larger bird, ensures a very quick dinner for later in the week, plus a lunchbox or two. The oven needs to be really hot (220C), the bird needs to be “spatchcocked” and then rubbed over with olive oil and lots of sea salt. Spatchcocked is really just a fancy way to say it is flattened out with the backbone removed, which is easy with some sharp kitchen scissors and a little determination. Flattening it out ensures a fast, even cook, no tricky turning and fabulous crackly, salty skin. The hot oven is not wasted by also roasting some sweet potatoes to turn into a warm spring salad, and warming up some bread if you only have yesterday’s loaf. A grazing dinner table at my house always has a variation of other little bowls we pick at while cooking and doing homework: whole olives, a bowl of kraut, little cucumbers, sliced breads, maybe some hummus. These usually make their way on to the dinner table if not finished beforehand. Prep 20 mins (mostly while the chicken is cooking)Cook 50 mins Serves 4 plus intentional leftoversFor the chicken1.6-1.8kg whole free-range chicken (size 16-18+) Olive oilSea salt Get the oven on to 220C; fan is ideal. Remove the chicken from any packaging and lay her straight into a large roasting pan, breast side down. Crunch the kitchen scissors, cutting down each side of the backbone to remove it. You can stash it in the freezer for stock or roast as a crunchy cook’s snack for later. Flip the bird over and press it out flat, gently ensuring symmetry of the legs and wings. Rub both sides with the olive oil and lots of sea salt, breast side up, bones down, then put it in the oven. Roast, without turning, basting or fussing for 40-50 minutes. Keep an eye out for even colouring. The skin should start crackling up as the cooking time comes to the end. Remove from the oven and rest for 10 minutes before cutting up to finger-size pieces to serve. Warm sweet potato salad with local asparagusIf you can’t get Australian asparagus, use green beans, peas from the freezer or a handful of green leaves instead. The sweet potatoes can be roasted in the same oven as the chicken, and dressed hot to soak in the flavours. 1kg sweet potatoes (I used a combination of orange, purple and white)4 whole garlic cloves, kept in their paper ½ a small red onion, paper skin removed, cut into quarters Olive oil Sea salt 2 tbsp sour cream 10 cornichons, sliced into rough rounds1 bunch of asparagus, cooked in boiling water for 2 minutes1 boiled egg, peeled. Soft-boiled is better but whatever you have will work. As soon as the chicken is in the oven, rough chop the sweet potato, leaving skins on, in about 5cm rough cubes. Put into another shallow or flat pan, drizzle with the olive oil and salt and put in the oven. Give the sweet potato a rumble after about 20 minutes, add the garlic cloves, red onion and more salt. Roast for another 5-10 minutes until soft and caramelised. While the sweet potato is cooking, add the sour cream, the chopped cornichons, the steamed asparagus and the boiled egg into a large mixing bowl. Break the egg up with a large spoon and smoosh it about, ready for the cooked sweet potatoes. As soon as the sweet potato, onion and garlic is cooked, add it to the dressing bowl, removing the garlic paper if it bothers you, and give it a really good mix. The sour cream and egg yolk soaks into the hot veggies and they get coated in flavours. Serve on to a plate for the dinner table, and dress with extra-virgin olive oil. Fennel and blood orange salad Mix together a crunchy fresh salad of shaved fennel, blood orange pieces and any soft herbs you have on hand, plus the fennel fronds. Mix with sea salt, extra-virgin olive oil and a simple vinegar, if you like it tarter, or just skip the acid. Plate it ready and waiting for the chicken to hit the table. Salsa verde Our fridge always has some or many types of dressings, relish and sauces that manage to collect, whether I’m recipe testing for work, using up herbs or just blending away a Sunday arvo. At the moment it’s salsa verde. Late summer it’s often pesto, other times chimichurri or nuoc nam. 160g parsley, remove the woody stalks160g basil, remove the thick stalks 160g mint, remove the woody stalks 80g cornichons, rough chopped80g salted capers, washed 240ml apple cider vinegar 600ml olive oil 120g Dijon mustard8g salt Add all the herbs to a food processor and blend to break up (a stick blender and jug will also work). Slowly add in the cornichons and capers with some of the liquids to make a thick paste. Add all components and some extra olive oil if you like it a bit looser. Put in a tall tub and run a layer of oil over the top, to stop oxidation. This will store in the fridge happily for a month or more. What to cook with the leftovers A benefit of separately plating each dish is that it’s helpful for repurposing intentional leftovers. Smaller refrigerated tubs of components are handy for adding to meals later in the week. Treat leftovers as meal-prep for later, not a burden to “use up” before becoming compost. The roast chook meat, sweet potatoes, fennel plus any other veggies at hand, would all happily become a nutritious frittata. Use a blitzed mix of six free-range eggs, about 100g of cream and a large pinch of sea salt, baked at 160C, and the chicken is repurposed into a meal in 15 minutes flat. Alternatively, bundle up components in rolls of fresh lasagne sheets, lay in a greased shallow baking dish and top with cherry tomatoes, a jar of tomato sugo, add some cheese and herbs. Bake, and dinner can be on the table, with barely a dish to be cleaned.