How many black families have been targeted by undercover police officers? This is the simple question we are still waiting for authorities to answer. More than five years have passed since Theresa May, then the home secretary, announced a public inquiry following “profoundly shocking” evidence that Met police undercover officers had spied on the grieving parents of murdered teenager Stephen Lawrence, as well as their campaign to get justice for their son. Despite Sir John Mitting’s ongoing undercover policing inquiry spending £21m since 2015, public hearings will only commence in the summer of 2020. In July, however, the inquiry did finally manage to publish the fake identity of a black undercover police officer, “Anthony Lewis”, who gathered intelligence on the Lawrences and their supporters. It has becoming clear the transparency we all want is unlikely to come – unless we push for answers ourselves “Lewis”, like a number of other undercover officers, has admitted he deceived a woman into a long-term relationship while using his fake identity. The exposure of this kind of abusive manipulation has forced senior officers to publicly apologise to other women who were targeted in this way. What we still do not know, however, is how many other campaigns like the Lawrences’, led by grieving families and friends seeking justice for their loved ones after a racist murder or a death in police custody, were targeted? Five years ago the police said there were 18 such groups and families, but no full list of those spied on has ever been published – although they said “the majority” were black. One of the groups that fought for justice for bereaved families was Newham Monitoring Project (NMP), based in east London, which I was an active campaigner with from 1990 – until it was forced to close due to a lack of funds in 2015. Its focus was on providing practical and legal support to victims of racist violence and the oppressive policing of black communities in east London. Over that period, NMP helped to organise and support numerous campaigns. This included work with the Tamil family of Panchadcharam Sahitharan, who was murdered in Newham in 1992; the death in police custody of Shiji Lapite in Hackney in 1994; Ibrahima Sey’s death in Ilford police station in 1996; all the way through to the aftermath of the killing of Jean Charles de Menezes by armed officers at Stockwell police station in 2005 – and the legal battle that followed. Just as the families we supported were spied on, the police have subsequently confirmed that NMP, too, was monitored – even though our important work was funded by the local council and the National Lottery. Why was so much police work put towards spying on the bereaved and their supporters? We are convinced that political policing units and their masters were primarily motivated by a desire to protect the Met’s already damaged reputation: they did so by deliberately trying to portray campaigns seeking truth and accountability as a potential cause of public disorder. This is, unquestionably in our view, a consequence of the police’s institutionally racist attitude to the “threat” posed by racialised communities in the UK. Unfortunately, although some family justice campaigners have been accepted by the undercover policing inquiry as “core participants” in its deliberations, others have not. Instead, they must wait until the inquiry says it finds evidence of spying at a later stage. Most of these campaigners still have no further information. Despite Mitting’s inquiry saying that more than 1,000 groups were targeted, we still have no idea of the true scale of covert intelligence-gathering on black justice campaigns. This is why the organisation I work for, the Network for Police Monitoring (Netpol) – founded a decade ago by groups including NMP – is launching a campaign with the Undercover Research Group to investigate the question the inquiry refuses to answer: how many black families were targeted by undercover officers? This new investigation aims to expand on work undertaken by the Undercover Research Group last year with the Guardian, which resulted in the publishing of a list of “spycops” targets. Almost all of these family justice campaigns no longer exist, and so we are hoping that people who once organised or participated in them will get in touch and help us expand on public knowledge of police surveillance on their activities. The annual remembrance procession led by the family and friends of those who have died in the custody of police and prison officers takes place in central London on Saturday. Unfortunately, over the last five years it has becoming increasingly clear that the transparency and fairness we all want is unlikely to come from the inquiry or the police – unless we push for answers ourselves. • Kevin Blowe is coordinator of the Network for Police Monitoring (Netpol) If you can help, please contact researcher Eveline Lubbers at the Undercover Research Group in confidence at evel@undercoverresearch.net