You do not have to look too hard for stories of redemption and personal gratification in the Salford squad as they prepare for the game of their lives next Saturday. The biggest underdog tale in rugby league’s modern history is one game away from the fairytale finish at Old Trafford, with the Super League leaders, St Helens, standing between the Red Devils and a first title in 43 years. But it is the backstory to this journey that makes their maiden Grand Final appearance all the more remarkable. Two years ago they were facing financial oblivion and this season, having cut their cloth accordingly with the second-lowest budget in the league, many fancied Salford – with players no other clubs wanted – to struggle to avoid relegation. No man epitomises their story better than Jackson Hastings. The 23-year-old Australian will likely be named the Man of Steel in Manchester on Sunday evening, 16 months after facing the prospect of his career being over. “I had a picture painted of me when I was a young lad and it can be hard to get rid of that,” he says. Kicked out of the NRL side Manly at the beginning of the 12018 season following an off-field incident, Hastings arrived in England with a damaged reputation and a point to prove. “I could have stayed and played reserve grade there, but for my career and my wellbeing, I decided to start again somewhere else,” he says. “It just so happens it was at a club I’d never even heard of.” That club was Salford, and by the time he plays his final game for them he will leave a legend. Hastings is bound for Wigan – the team Salford eliminated in style on Friday to reach the Grand Final – but the way he is adored by his people and the emotional bond he has built with the Red Devils is clear. “They saved me,” he says. “Wigan is next year – my heart is with Salford and that won’t change. We’re little old Salford. The final is another free hit for this club. Nobody will give us a chance in hell, just like all year.” It is clear Hastings is not the person many in Australia portrayed him to be. He has flown his family over for the play-offs and how he has integrated himself with the people of Salford befits an individual who will offer his employers much more than his undoubted ability. “I wish my grandma could have been here as she’s English. My grandad has struggled without her in the last couple of years but to do all this where she’s from … that makes me very proud,” he says. “We’ll experience this week as a family, because they were with me at my lowest point when it looked like I was done.” It will be a different Salford without Hastings next year. However, the half-back believes the foundations they have laid in defying the odds this year sets the club for a burgeoning future which goes way beyond Saturday’s game of a lifetime. “I know I’m leaving, but I want to help build a legacy that’s here for years to come,” he says. “This isn’t a one-hit wonder you’re witnessing. It can only go up from here. Look how much criticism the club got for signing most of the players – me included. I was a supposed gamble. Other lads were released and deemed not good enough. Those critics look pretty foolish now. “I’ve got tears in my eyes just thinking about what we’ve done as a group. It’s probably the best Salford side ever.” Hastings has made no secret that Salford saved his career: he can now repay them in the ultimate way. His teammates have been called everything imaginable in recent weeks; one pundit described them as Championship players. Even Hastings has described them as “a bunch of misfits”. One more win and there will be one more word to describe them: champions.