This year has been a bumper one for anniversaries: Queen Victoria’s 200th, Proms founder Sir Henry Wood’s 150th and half-centuries apiece for the moon landings, Stonewall riots and Woodstock. You could be forgiven for not having also clocked the 50th anniversary of HarrisonParrott, one of the biggest names in classical music you’ve probably never heard of. But if it doesn’t ring any bells, the formidable roster of artists this agency manages certainly will: from pianist and conductor Vladimir Ashkenazy, represented by HP since 1969, to more recent headline-grabbers such as mezzo Jamie Barton, who triumphed at Last Night of the Proms this year, and award-winning Icelandic pianist Víkingur Ólafsson. No wonder HarrisonParrott’s birthday bash (three concerts across a single day) was a starry affair, celebrating what co-founder Jasper Parrott called our “golden age of music”. There was new talent – saxophonist Jess Gillam kicked off the opening event one with an explosion of tone colours in Piazzolla’s unaccompanied Tango-Etude No 3; trumpeter Lucienne Renaudin Vary opened the second concert with a hazy, mellow performance of Duke Ellington’s In a Sentimental Mood. There was established talent, from Jörg Widmann’s breathtaking account of his own brilliantly irreverent Fantasie for solo clarinet to soprano Barbara Hannigan’s selection from Wolf’s Goethe Lieder, a masterclass in how to create musical drama with vowels and consonants, minutely supported by pianist Tamara Stefanovich. And there were offerings from the old guard: the London premiere, with the composer in attendance, of Harrison Birtwistle’s Keyboard Engine for two pianos – all hard edges and sharp jabs ricocheting between Stefanovich and Pierre-Laurent Aimard. There was also a messy if impassioned performance of Elgar’s Enigma Variations by the Philharmonia Orchestra under Ashkenazy. If you’re wondering how this could fit together into three conventional 21st-century programmes, rest assured that it didn’t. These were concerts on an older model – a 19th-century one – in which celebrity musicians would contribute their current party piece, generating marathon pick’n’mix concerts. Programming has since become a more sober, less flexible affair. What fun, then, to have Hannigan’s dark, dramatic Wolf preceded by Piazzolla’s Le Grand Tango played by accordionist Ksenija Sidorova and cellist Alban Gerhardt, the former teasing growls, purrs and crooning melodies from her instrument, while Gerhardt served up a joyous, gritty riot. And to hear the Prelude from Bach’s solo Cello Suite No 6 (featuring Gerhardt again, with luminous long lines and skidding figuration) followed by a set of violin duets performed with unforgettable panache by Patricia Kopatchinskaja and Pekka Kuusisto, who entered plucking and stomping towards each other across the stage in the world premiere of Péter Eötvös’s For Lydia, then trailing each other around the instrument’s upper reaches. Their selection of folksy Bartók duets was the highlight of the day: a whirlwind of thoroughly physical, irrepressible musicality. They were a hard act to follow. Birtwistle’s premiere could only sound like uncompromising modernism – the hopes of another era – in the wake of such relaxed, direct communication. And the juxtapositions in the Philharmonia’s closing extravaganza, four conductors taking the baton in turn, were no more flattering. Paavo Järvi led a gracious performance of Schubert’s Unfinished Symphony, unapologetically old-fashioned in its massive scale. The orchestra’s principal conductor designate Santtu-Matias Rouvali – expressive to his fingertips – produced an even bigger-boned Rosenkavalier Suite (albeit deliciously flexible with tempi), and Elim Chan delivered an extravagantly Romantic reading of Tchaikovsky’s Romeo and Juliet overture before Ashkenazy’s Elgar. But the orchestra’s vast late-Romantic sound remained throughout. Classical music’s future surely needs to be lighter on its feet.