The details revealed last week from a 2016 report by retired judge Richard Henriques that castigated the Metropolitan police over its “VIP sex ring” investigation beggared belief. That disbelief is now compounded by today’s ruling from the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC), which has exonerated all those involved. It is bad enough that a former high court judge can think senior police officers guilty of gross, and indeed criminal, misconduct, and their supervisors of “lamentable, inexcusable” neglect. That not one officer involved in “one of the most error-ridden investigations in history” has been held to account is worse. But that the IOPC, supposedly charged with monitoring the police, should emerge as their lackey is incredible. The exploitation by the Met and the Labour MP Tom Watson of fantasies about sex in high places from the hapless Carl Beech is no secret. The use of such accusations to destroy reputations and “convict” individuals without trial has become a trope of modern justice. What is special about the Henriques report is the glaring injustice of the police themselves publicising as “true” stories about well-known public figures, without evidence or investigation. When the enormity of what was meted out to Beech’s victims was known, the two politicians responsible for the Met, the then London mayor Boris Johnson and then home secretary Theresa May, did nothing. The police officer directly responsible was promoted, and Watson became deputy leader of the Labour party. Their superiors, Bernard Hogan-Howe and the current head of the Met, Cressida Dick, shrugged their shoulders. The IOPC sat on its hands. It is clear in retrospect that in 2014 the Met was eager to show itself immune to charges of favouring the mighty, at a time when accusations of sexual misconduct were running through public life like a virus. The best parallel was with accusations of communism in 1950s America under McCarthy. To be “named” was to be guilty and destroyed. All judicial caution was cast to the winds. Eventually the plainly sick Beech, who should have been shown the door on day one, was left taking the blame for police incompetence with a savage 18 years in jail. That is not all. What is increasingly clear is that fear of being thought soft on the elite also terrorised that elite. It is known that May at the Home Office was approached by people appalled at what was being done, not least to one of her predecessors in office, Leon Brittan, who was dying. It would have been in order for her to flag up her concern and call for a report. Instead she is reported as telling the BBC that it was “the tip of an iceberg”. As for the IOPC, its sweeping under the carpet of Henriques’ “illegality” in the Met’s mendacity and securing of search warrants is inexcusable. The assumption must be that it is in thrall to those it investigates on the public’s behalf. This means that no one is guarding the guardians. The IOPC is unfit for purpose and should be disbanded. • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist