Shakespeare’s Henriad franchise has been rebooted on strangely sentimental lines in this movie from director and co-writer David Michôd, letting down the decent lead performance from Timothée Chalamet as the titular monarch, Henry V. It isn’t a showreel moment for Robert Pattinson playing the French Dauphin, who reminded me of John Cleese in Monty Python and the Holy Grail: “I’m French! Why do you think I have this outrrrrageous accent, you silly king?” This film replaces Shakespeare’s text with more comprehensible dialogue in the Game-of-Thrones-lite style, neuters the story’s famous emotional betrayal and even glibly suggests a throwaway conspiracy-theory explanation for the casus belli between the English and French before Agincourt. Among other things, the sequence of plays – Henry IV Part 1, Henry IV Part 2, Henry V – follows the 15th-century life of Henry, Prince of Wales, who is initially a wastrel, a drinker and a gadabout known vulgarly as Hal in the taverns of Eastcheap in the City of London, under the unwholesome influence of the notorious bon vivant and petty chancer Sir John Falstaff. In the originals, Hal embraces his destiny with the death of his father Henry IV, coldly rejects his pathetic father figure Falstaff (“I know thee not old man,” he tells him) and becomes the nation’s warrior king. In this movie, Henry V’s growing-up process is wildly accelerated and he does not reject Falstaff – played by Joel Edgerton – and even retains him as his trusted, bearded adviser on the field of battle, a kind of Little John to his Robin Hood. All Falstaff’s fierce cynicism about honour and the absurdity of war has been junked, although this Falstaff has now acquired qualms about warfare that are centuries ahead of his time and strongly advises him against the war-criminal execution of prisoners (the sort of grisly event that is nonetheless not depicted on camera). There’s a new emphasis on one-on-one confrontation and trial by combat with much Bressonian clanging and banging as armoured knights whack each other. These and the battle sequences are plausibly filmed. Sean Harris has an interesting role as Henry’s attendant lord; there’s a great cameo from Thibault de Montalembert (Matthias, from Netflix’s Call My Agent) playing the careworn Charles VI of France, and Chalamet gives it his all as the pudding-bowl-hairstyled young king. But so much of the poetry and the sense of loss has gone from this decaffeinated version of the story. • The King is released in the UK and US on 11 October.