“Hurdles track” is a description you won’t hear very much in the build-up to Champions Day, but Ascot’s hurdles track is indeed the strip of ground most likely to be used for the round-course races on Saturday, including the £1m Champion Stakes itself. The official description is “inner Flat course”, though the course has never yet been used for Flat racing. That seems long odds-on to change on Saturday, because the round course Ascot uses for Flat racing is waterlogged in places and there is plenty more rain in the offing. One forecast predicts 20mm today alone. Meanwhile, the “inner Flat course” is good to soft, soft in places, having presumably remained unknown to watering cans all summer. Given what we know of British weather, the only surprise is that we have had eight Champions Days at Ascot without having to use the inner course before. But, since it clearly offers a drier surface than the regular Flat course, shouldn’t Champions Day be run on it every year? Opposition to that idea will come from anyone who owns or trains a mudlover. “He’s waited all year for his ground,” will be the cry. “Fast-ground horses don’t need the scales tilted in their favour!” Which is a fair point in relation to nearly all fixtures, but I submit that Champions Day was not created and millions of pounds were not poured into it just so Addeybb could have a nice pot to aim at in the autumn. On this Saturday, racing’s audience wants to see the best horses running at speed, not brave sons of Authorized slogging through the final furlong in 25 seconds. The other issue about the inner track is that we don’t yet know for sure how it will ride when used for Flat racing, for all that it will be presented with the usual skill and expertise by Ascot’s staff. It will be tighter than the outer track and the bends will be sharper, in a way that doesn’t really matter when your stamina-laden hurdlers are plodding around. But if the action is forced on to the inner track on Saturday and the jockeys speak highly of the layout, then serious consideration should be given to making it the default circuit for Champions Day. Better ground means better horses taking part and that should be the bottom line for this raceday. William Haggas, a fan of sending horses to race in Yorkshire, seems less keen on boxing them as far as Wales or Scotland. But it’s always worth a look when he does because his strike-rates show he doesn’t just send his forlorn hopes to those far-flung tracks. His 39% at Ffos Las is his best percentage at any turf track and Musselburgh comes second with 32%. It is to the Scottish track that Haggas ventures with Montatham (3.25), who is well drawn to take a handy early position in the seven-furlong handicap. The grey relished soft ground when making a late reappearance at Thirsk in August and looked paceless on much faster ground at Yarmouth last month. I’m sure the three-year-old can win a little race off this mark when conditions are right and he won’t get many better chances. He’s 9-2 because the market is interested in Tribal Warrior, two from two at the track but on good to firm. In the opening nursery, Not On Your Nellie (1.20) appeals at 2-1 for the Nigel Tinkler yard that has had another good year. She was nearest at the finish here on good to soft last month and the deeper ground can help her break her duck this time, with a tongue tie on to help. At Wolves, the money has come for Tucson (6.25), who has halved in price to 5-1 for the staying handicap. James Bethell’s three-year-old, a half-brother to Librisa Breeze, was frustrating in a few turf runs early in the season but has been gelded during his summer break and we can now hope to see something better from a horse who has become well treated. Musselburgh 1.20 Not On Your Nellie 1.50 Ollivander 2.20 Tarboosh 2.55 Jewel Maker 3.25 Montatham (nap) 4.00 Tamleek 4.30 Luna Magic Yarmouth 2.10 Freshwater Cliffs (nb) 2.45 Donnybrook 3.15 Society Lion 3.50 Dreamboat Dave 4.20 Lord Howard 4.55 Swiss Cheer 5.30 Stallone Wolverhampton 5.25 Precious Plum 5.55 Be Ahead 6.25 Tucson 6.55 Zafaranah 7.25 Untouchable Beauty 7.55 Scoffsman 8.25 Forbidden Dance Windsor Abandoned due to waterlogging.