“Did you hear that?” With those four words, Tyrone Mings set in motion a process that could have seen England walk off the pitch and abandon their match against Bulgaria on Monday night. In the end they did not, with action against the persistent racist abuse from the stands of Sofia’s Vasil Levski Stadium stopping short of the ultimate step in Uefa’s three-point protocol. But the way that Mings dealt with his experience, and the way his England teammates and coaches did too, might perhaps have a longer-term effect in the struggle against racism. Did you hear that Uefa? Did you hear that people at home? It was certainly not the kind of environment in which anyone should have to make their international debut. Mings, the Aston Villa centre-half, said he and his teammates had clocked racist chanting from sections of the Bulgarian support before the match had even started. Then, halfway through the first half, and amid a hail of monkey noises, not to mention Nazi salutes in the stands and a general sense that parts of the local crowd were there for the abuse and not the football, the game came to a halt. Warning messages were read to the crowd over the PA system before play restarted but it stopped again just before half-time. At the interval as many as 50 of the most abusive supporters left the ground. “I didn’t hear anything in the second half,” Mings said. “I can’t speak for everybody, but I can speak for myself. So I think fans were removed and if that was the case then I think the protocol has definitely worked. We didn’t want to be having these conversations but it was important we made a collective decision. We represent a lot of people and we have to not just make a stance for ourselves, but make it clear these things won’t be accepted “It didn’t affect my feelings. I think I’m quite lucky in that way because I don’t feel like it is a personal assault. I feel sorry for the people who have those views. But I also have a duty to represent people that don’t have a voice, so it didn’t hurt or harm my feelings one bit. It was obviously bigger than me and bigger than what I felt.” The considerate words and Mings’ composed demeanour, in the stadium afterwards and in passing his warning to the officials, were in keeping with a man whose measured and compassionate attitude on a number of social issues has been informed by challenging first-hand experience. Now 26 years of age and a £26m player following his summer transfer to Villa Park from Bournemouth, Mings spent part of his childhood living in a homeless shelter. There was one room for him, his mother and three sisters. At this time the youngster was also part of the Southampton academy set-up, only later to be dropped as a teenager. He had to build his career up from scratch, first by earning a football scholarship to a private school, then by playing non-league football and Yate Town and Chippenham Town before finally being picked up by Mick McCarthy’s Ipswich. As he climbed up the ladder, Mings also became known as someone who gave back, helping the homeless in his home town of Bath, setting up a football academy for kids across the south-west. His four-year stint at Bournemouth, which was blighted by injury, brought 10 league starts and only now is Mings able to begin his career as a Premier League player in earnest. He has quickly established himself as the fulcrum around which Villa’s defence depends and his early season form was enough to get him selected for England for their two matches in September. He did not play then but in making his bow against Bulgaria his play matched his performance off the pitch. Composure was the quality Mings brought most obviously to the field. Admittedly he was not against the most challenging of opponents, but he wasn’t threatened by the physical presence of the lone striker Ismail Isa, nor troubled by the movement – and more intensive pressing – of Isa’s second-half replacement, Galin Ivanov. Mings, always identified as comfortable with the ball at his feet, slotted well into this England side that look to build possession from the back. He even took it upon himself to push forward when the opportunity allowed, one second-half dribble taking him into the Bulgaria box. He was forced to turn back at that point but, sensibly, Mings kept possession. Having not anticipated a place in Monday’s XI, Mings had to take last-minute measures to get his family to the match when Gareth Southgate told him he would be earning his first cap. He paid for his family’s travel to Sofia and, despite the circumstances, Mings was in no doubt about what the moment meant to him. “It is the pinnacle of English football; everybody dreams of representing their country, everybody knows my journey. I was extremely proud and had my friends and family in the crowd, so I don’t think they will let it overshadow this. “I was absolutely happy they were here tonight and it will be a memory we will talk about for a long, long time – a good memory.”