Tax is a fundamental issue for any nation. It’s how we fund investment in public services and infrastructure and redistribute wealth. Throughout history the question of who makes decisions about tax has been synonymous with where power lies. And there’s no better example of Westminster’s power over us than local government’s measly ability to raise taxes. The “devolution revolution” that was started under George Osborne, and is now being reheated by Boris Johnson, was meant to give more control to our major city regions. Yet it has very little to say about which tax-raising powers should be handed over – instead, devolution has been more about granting flexibility over where public spending goes, rather than how much money there is to begin with. Labour, likewise, has been keener to talk about regional investment banks than about local taxes. The situation in Britain would be considered ridiculous overseas. In most large European nations local government has a wide range of powers over tax. The city of Frankfurt, for instance, levies a trade tax, a property tax, a tax on gambling and even a dog tax. It also receives a share of local income tax and VAT revenues. In Madrid, the city council gets a big chunk of funding from local property tax. It levies a business tax, a vehicle tax and a land-value tax and also receives a share of income tax and VAT – as well as taxes on alcohol, tobacco and fuel. Further afield, Tokyo’s metropolitan government oversees no fewer than 14 taxes. In Britain, meanwhile, there is council tax, but despite the name, local authorities have very little say over its design. Instead, central government dictates which households are in which tax band and how much they pay. Recent reforms mean that councils retain a proportion of the revenue from local business rates but, once again, decisions about who pays and at what rate are decided centrally. In fact, local government in the UK levies just 5% of total tax revenues – or £1 for every £19 levied by central government. In France, the equivalent figure is 14%, in Germany it’s 32% and in Sweden 36%. These figures show just how uniquely unbalanced our country is, with vast amounts of power hoarded in Westminster (and likewise in Holyrood in Scotland and the Senedd in Wales). This is not just a quirky feature of our democracy, it is deeply damaging. For starters, it is making us more unequal. This might seem counterintuitive – after all, you might think that giving local areas greater powers over taxing and spending will allow richer areas with larger tax bases to benefit at the expense of others. Yet multiple reviews of the evidence suggest that countries where local areas are given more power over taxes have lower levels of regional inequality, better public services, and higher levels of productivity to boot. Our hyper-centralised country, by contrast, has some of the highest levels of regional inequality in Europe. Second, it holds back local government from being bold or radical. Lots of the most exciting policies to tackle climate change, or inequality, for instance, are being developed locally. Think about Barcelona’s proposals for car-free superblocks, or Ontario’s universal basic income trial, or Seattle’s (ultimately unsuccessful) attempt to raise an “Amazon tax” on large employers. Each of these would be impossible for a British city or region to put into practice. In fact, the lack of tax powers encourages cash-strapped local authorities, which have lost almost 60p in the £1 from central government funding since the start of the decade, to pursue short-termist approaches to balancing the books, including selling off public assets and cutting services. These end up costing them, and the local population, more in the long term. If a local administration does decide to invest in cutting air pollution or increasing wages, local coffers may see little or no return on that investment because the benefits to the taxpayer (in terms of reduced hospital admissions, increased productivity or higher income-tax receipts, for instance) all flow directly to the exchequer in Whitehall. Finally, this state of affairs weakens our democracy. Turnout at local elections is shamefully low, but can we blame people for not bothering to vote when the big decisions about public spending are all made in Westminster? Since the 1970s, Britain has experimented with an increasingly centralised system of government. This has demonstrably failed. We need to roll back decades of centralisation and devolve substantial powers over tax to cities and counties, just like almost every other similar nation does. It would represent a major step towards tackling Britain’s huge inequalities and help empower local councils to tackle the major challenges of the 21st century. • Jack Hunter is a research fellow at IPPR North