Boris Johnson’s progress in getting his Brexit deal dominates the front pages, though most papers make clear it is not a done deal. The Times is perhaps the most optimistic with: “Final hurdle in sight as Johnson gets his deal”. The paper says “Boris Johnson flew back from Brussels with a Brexit deal last night and will spend the next 24 hours frantically trying to sell it to MPs before a historic Saturday sitting of the Commons.” Times front page. 18 October 2019 pic.twitter.com/Xlndxpknls The Telegraph says Johnson will deliver an ultimatum to MPs that “It’s my deal or no deal” ahead of the vote, “suggesting there would be no further Brexit extension”. The pro-Brexit, pro-PM paper says Johnson “faces a plot by a Remain alliance of opposition MPs and Tory rebels to make the deal conditional on a second referendum”. The front page of tomorrow’s Daily Telegraph: ‘It’s my deal or no deal’ #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/PsGSICZFtp The Guardian reports: “Johnson gets his Brexit deal – now it’s a numbers game”. The paper says that Johnson “is ‘very confident’ his Brexit deal will be approved by the House of Commons in a historic knife-edge vote tomorrow” despite the DUP’s refusal to give its backing. Guardian front page, Friday 18 October 2019: Johnson gets his Brexit deal – now it’s a numbers game pic.twitter.com/sLudja0uwL Some papers are sounding warnings to MPs to vote for the deal. Among the most vocal is the Daily Mail, which says: “Against all odds, Boris has won a new Brexit deal – yet tomorrow our reckless political class may derail it. So today the Mail says … He’s done his duty. Now MPs must do theirs”. Friday's @DailyMailUK #MailFrontPages pic.twitter.com/uUorMU1oug The Sun also has a strong message to “dithering MPs” – “Get real … take the deal!” The paper’s front page features an editorial in place of a news story, which begins: “Boris Johnson, against all odds and in defiance of his sneering critics, has pulled off a vastly improved deal. The Sun urges every MP: back it tomorrow and get Brexit done.” The paper says Johnson’s deal “is immeasurably better than Theresa May’s” and will allow Brexit to be delivered for “our divided, paralysed country”. Sun front page. 18 October 2019. pic.twitter.com/2wPFBparcb The Express leads on a poll, conducted for the paper, that found “65% of voters want Leave and Remain MPs to ‘compromise’ and back Boris Johnson’s deal”. The paper’s lead is: “Just do it! That’s the very loud and clear message from the British public to our parliament”. Daily Express front page. 18 October 2019 pic.twitter.com/1W6WlPNfYQ The i focuses on the steps that still need to be taken for Brexit to happen: “Johnson gets his EU deal … now for the tricky part,” saying the prime minister “faces huge challenge to win historic Commons vote tomorrow”. The i front page. 18 October 2019 pic.twitter.com/WYnUqJL1im The FT also focuses on the uncertainty, saying: “DUP veto threat leaves Johnson’s Brexit deal gamble in the balance”. “Boris Johnson’s hopes of leading Britain out of the EU on October 31 were hanging in the balance last night,” says the paper. The FT front page. 18 October 2019 pic.twitter.com/EIRFEv2Blm One can practically see the eye roll behind the headline of the Daily Mirror, which uses an ellipsis to devastating effect, saying the country is “On the brink of Brexit … once again”. The paper says Johnson faces an “uphill struggle” and a “desperate fight” to get his deal through parliament “despite his display of victory in Brussels yesterday”. Tomorrow's front page: On the brink of Brexit ... once again #tomorrowspaperstoday https://t.co/ktQTkpqCnl pic.twitter.com/lqJBgBUFNY