It was an occasion when Frank Lampard’s youthful Chelsea team, which featured four recent academy graduates, were placed up close and personal with the demands of a high‑pressure Champions League occasion. From the first whistle, it was plain that one slip could be the difference between something and nothing in terms of the result. And nothing would have seriously jeopardised Chelsea’s chances of progress out of Group H. This was the big test of the manager’s developing lineup, of recent levels that had seen them win five successive matches in all competitions, and it was one that they passed in glorious style. The resilience of their defending, especially in the first-half, was particularly noteworthy, with Fikayo Tomori – one of the homegrown products – earning top billing. A draw would have been a fine result but Chelsea pushed for more in the final 25 minutes as Ajax ran out of steam and ideas and, at the very end, they got it. Lampard could barely have scripted it better because it was two of his substitutes, Christian Pulisic and Michy Batshuayi – players who he has had to disappoint on a regular basis – who combined for the winner. Pulisic was electric after his introduction, all quick feet and direct running, and it was from his low cross that Batshuayi profited, banging a firm finish in off the underside of the crossbar. Ajax were down and out and they, remember, are a team who had not previously tasted defeat this season. As Lampard pointed out, they might have lost Matthijs de Ligt and Frenkie de Jong over the summer but there are still plenty of good players in their team. It was not only De Ligt and De Jong who carried them to last season’s Champions League semi-final. Batshuayi showed the hardiness of his mentality in scoring the goal because a little earlier, after a Pulisic shot had deflected through to him, he had blown a gilt-edged opportunity, blazing high when confronted by only the goalkeeper André Onana. Many strikers would have been affected by the lapse. Batshuayi was not. Chelsea had ridden their luck, with the Ajax winger Quincy Promes being denied a 35th-minute goal by a very close VAR offside decision and the midfielder Edson Álvarez hitting a post in the second half. But this was a well-judged away win with Lampard’s team, inspired by the impact of Pulisic, coming on strong in the closing stages. Pulisic has struggled for games since his £58m summer arrival from Borussia Dortmund and given his status as the bright young thing of football in the United States, there has been plenty of noise from across the Atlantic about his omissions. Lampard has had to blot that out and Pulisic made a statement here, although he was not the only Chelsea player to do so. Kurt Zouma, Jorginho and Mateo Kovacic were also outstanding. Ajax looked to attack, squeezing high and hunting in packs, and Lampard’s men had to show high levels of care in possession, which they did. Their defensive work was placed under immense scrutiny and the first half was marked by moments when Tomori distinguished himself, most notably with a saving tackle on Hakim Ziyech. César Azpilicueta also made a vital last-man challenge on Promes and he celebrated by clenching his fists. It was that kind of night. The tension simmered – the assistant coach Jody Morris was booked on the Chelsea bench after he overheated – and the first flashpoint came when Promes thought he had given Ajax the lead. Ziyech’s shot deflected off Tomori and looped up kindly to the far post where Promes tapped home. His first reaction was to look across at the assistant referee. Everybody did. Promes had feared that he was offside and off we went for a lengthy VAR consultation. When the first replays filtered through, he looked level. But when the micro-analysis started, the lines showed that he was in front of the last Chelsea defender by a matter of millimetres. Chelsea’s best moments of the first half were provided by Callum Hudson-Odoi, who bristled with menace on the left. His pace was a nightmare for Joël Veltman in particular, yet an end product was frustratingly absent. Hudson-Odoi went closest when he went for the near corner on 15 minutes after a slick one-two with Mason Mount, only for Onana to save. There were two other snatched finishes from him while Azpilicueta was guilty of flashing high in the 43rd minute, when he had an option in the middle. Ajax came within a whisker of the breakthrough in the 59th minute, when Álvarez directed a header from Promes’s corner towards the far corner. The upright came to Chelsea’s rescue. But Pulisic and Batshuayi would help to turn the tide. The former pulled a low shot wide on 81 minutes but ultimately the pair got together to make the difference. When Lampard last visited this stadium it was as Chelsea’s captain for the 2013 Europa League final win over Benfica. This was his sweetest moment as the club’s manager by a distance.