The breathtaking match between the hosts Japan and Gregor Townsend’s Scotland was effectively a knockout game with a little bit more bite. Held in the wake of a devastating typhoon, it brought a brief respite as Japan’s fans cheered and cried and coerced their beloved Brave Blossoms to a victory borne on raw emotion and bottled-up energy. The speed of ball and movement generated in attack by Jamie Joseph’s side was a joy to behold. It negated any need to throw bodies at breakdowns and kept players on their feet and in the game. With speed sometimes comes a lack in accuracy. Not with this Japan team. Their play was as precise as it was pacy. Passes went to hand, the players ran into space, the point of attack was changed to slow any momentum Scotland’s defensive line speed could generate. The fundamentals were sturdy and were respected. There has been a lot of talk about high tackles this tournament. I’ve also talked incessantly over the past few years about the abhorrence the breakdown has become. Scotland lost one of their own, Hamish Watson, as a result of one of those careless and illegal clear‑outs in the pool matches and he was missed last weekend. In Yokohama there were hardly any high shots and very few horizontal Japanese players off their feet at rucks. Why? Because of their alignment in their structures and their application to working hard at their basics. If you are collectively quick of thought, and clearly know your roles, you can react quicker, better and more skilfully. Watch the Japanese first phase – they were so good that they didn’t need to use blunt force to clear a defender because they got to the ruck so quickly and the ball was gone so rapidly. This Japan team show us the blueprint of what is possible and that the laws do not need to be ignored to play the modern game. Alain Rolland and World Rugby take note. Stop allowing sloppy technique. You’ve clamped down on the high tackle; now, after this World Cup, do the same for the breakdown. It will lead to smarter training across the game as technique and speed is honed, not heavy weights harnessed and hits heightened. The question now is can the first Asian side to make the knockout stage go any further when they face the very good South Africans, who beat them in Tokyo 41-7 in their last warm-up game, and are a team many class as one of the favourites to win the whole thing. It was hard to gauge real form from those pre-tournament match‑ups but the Boks were direct and uncompromising against Japan. For the home heroes to get into the final four they will have to pump that accelerator a little more and for a little longer. South Africa pulled apart the Japanese lineout last time and also went to the sky to pepper the back three and test their aerial and kicking skills. They didn’t pass those tests with flying colours and it is very likely Rassie Erasmus’s men will play to a similar tune this weekend. Carries around the edges, a kicking game to suffocate and turn, a set piece to try to crumble the Japanese ability to generate that first-phase foothold to move the Springboks around. The key sounds obvious, but possession will be everything. The top teams do not always need parity of possession to win and it has often been better for them to play without the ball than with it at certain times this tournament. But Japan will need the ball for whacking great periods to win this quarter-final. It’s possible – their penalty count needs to be tiny, and accuracy and adherence to their alignment in attack needs brilliance. They have already shown that twice – against Ireland and Scotland – and I’d love to see it again this Sunday in Tokyo. The other quarter-finals also all provide intrigue and interest. They are the best eight sides and each will have done their homework pre‑tournament on their likely knockout opponents. Those electronic folders will be reopened now and any recent action will have been integrated into their thinking before the final game plan is settled on. Each team’s core won’t be changed but the nuances the opposition (and the officials) bring will mean some tweaking is required. This will come in strategy and in selection. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales France, say, may well decide to play narrower and stop the Welsh line speed and interceptions. Or Australia could try to coax England into a less controlled game through changes in lineout formations, midfield kicks and perhaps targeting George Ford in defence. Selection plays its part too. Injuries permitting, no rotation here, with the best players suited to the opposition being picked. Come the semi-finals, and the mood might be more around pragmatism as the difference in the teams gets even slimmer, but this weekend I think they will all be bold and brave to make the next round. My hope alongside this is that no more red cards will be dished out to tilt the tussles too much. The odds on that aren’t great based on recent results, but for once I hope history holds firm as no quarter-final in a Rugby World Cup has ever featured a red card. Tackles low and drama high. Yes please.