Nationwide protests have paralysed Lebanon as demonstrators blocked major roads on a second day of rallies against the government’s handling of a severe economic crisis. The protests, the largest since 2015, could further destabilise a country whose economy is already on the verge of collapse and carries one of the highest debt loads in the world. Some of the protesters said they would remain on the streets until the government resigns. “We are here today to ask for our rights. The country is corrupt, the garbage is all over the streets and we are fed up with all this,” said Loris Obeid, a protester in central Beirut. The trigger for the protests was the news on Thursday that the government was planning, among other measures, to impose a tax on WhatsApp calls – a decision it later withdrew. Schools, banks and businesses shut down as the protests escalated and widened in scope to reach almost every city and province. Hundreds of people burned tyres on highways and intersections in suburbs of the capital, Beirut, and in northern and southern cities, sending up clouds of black smoke in scattered protests. The road to Beirut’s international airport was blocked by protesters, stranding passengers, who in some cases were seen dragging suitcases on foot to reach the airport. Tension has been building for months as the government searched for new ways to levy taxes to manage the country’s economic crisis and soaring debt. Protesters threw stones, shoes and water bottles at security forces and in some cases set fire to buildings and smashed shop windows. Two Syrian workers died on Thursday when they were trapped in a shop that was set on fire by rioters. Security forces said at least 60 of its members were injured in the clashes. Protesters were also hurt. Years of regional turmoil – worsened by an influx of 1.5 million Syrian refugees since 2011 – are catching up with Lebanon. The small Arab country on the Mediterranean has the third-highest debt level in the world – about £67bn – or 150% of its gross domestic product. International donors have been demanding that Lebanon implement economic changes in order to get loans and grants pledged at an economic conference in Paris in April 2018. International donors pledged $11bn for Lebanon but they sought to ensure the money was well spent in the corruption-plagued country. Despite tens of billions of dollars spent since the 15-year civil war ended in 1990, Lebanon still has crumbling infrastructure, including daily electricity cuts, piles of rubbish in the streets and often sporadic, limited water supplies from the state-owned water company.