Two English rugby players who died after taking heroin during a tour of Sri Lanka did not mean to purchase the drug, a coroner has said. Thomas Howard and Thomas Baty were found by members of the Clems Pirates team, part of the Durham City rugby football club, lying unresponsive on their beds on the morning of 13 May last year, after a night out. An inquest at Crook coroner’s court heard that the two men, who were “not habitual drug users”, had taken a substance known locally as “brown sugar”, a cheap version of heroin. The men, who were doing charity work during the tour, were childhood friends and had been working together for a workwear company owned by Howard. Pathologists said on Thursday that it seemed “highly likely” the cause of death in both cases was “opiate toxicity”. A coroner was told how the investigation conducted by authorities on the south Asian island “did not sit right” and contained various inconsistencies. It was suggested by a tuk-tuk driver, who took the men in the early hours of 13 May from the Cleopatra nightclub in the centre of Colombo back to their accommodation at the nearby Kingsbury Hotel, that they had asked for heroin. The inquest heard how the driver introduced them to a man, who supplied them with seven bags of brown sugar obtained from a drug dealer. DC Phil McElhone of Durham police, who investigated their deaths, said “something does not sit right” with the account of their deaths given by witnesses, and that the two rugby players may not have known what they were taking. He said that, as well as the issue of the men clearly not being drug users, there were inconsistencies in terms of timings, the volume of the drug and the amount the men paid. The coroner, Crispin Oliver, said the men purchased the drug on the way home from the nightclub. He said: “They had no prior knowledge of this substance. They would not have known that it was heroin. “I am satisfied that these were not drug users, I think this was a one-off occasion, it was certainly a mistake and it was certainly an accident.” Crispin added: “I hope this serves as a warning to people when they travel to far parts of the world that they have to be very careful about what they are encouraged to purchase and take.” The inquest heard how the men travelled to Sri Lanka with the rest of their team on 9 May and had taken part in a match with the Ceylonese rugby team on 12 May, before going out to the nightclub. Witnesses said Howard, 25, appeared to be “much changed in his demeanour” when he returned to the hotel and was seen stumbling around before going to bed. Baty, 26, stayed up a little longer and with teammates and “seemed a little bit drunk”. The men were found unresponsive in their rooms later that morning. During the inquest, Paul Baty, the father of Thomas Baty, said his son graduated with a law degree from Northumbria University. He said: “He enjoyed his friends, he enjoyed enjoying himself, he enjoyed rugby. “Even though he was a big fellow and seemed to be the heart and soul, he was actually very sensitive at heart.” Howard’s father, Robert, said of his son: “Thomas was a quiet lad. Once you got to know him, he was considerate, caring - he would look after you.” Oliver paid tribute to the men and praised both families for attending the inquest.