Last week we included a few examples of stadiums with open ends or buildings where terracing should be. You sent us so many great examples we decided to showcase them … “You just have to look at the 6,000-capacity Estadio Olímpico in Uruguay’s first division,” cheers Guillermo Sienra. “Home to Rampla Juniors Fútbol Club, it has an unbeatable view!” “Red Star FC in Paris has only three stands, with only one in use. Behind one of the goals, there is an apartment building,” writes Joseph Chapman. “I live just over the border from Gibraltar, and Victoria Stadium, home to all the league teams and Gibraltar national team, has no stands at either end,” points out Tom Thronicker. “One looks towards a bunch of flats and is loomed over by The Rock, while the other looks out on the Gibraltar International Airport runway. Planes landing and taking off are quite the distraction for unaware visiting teams, which leads to another question: is there any level of stadium located closer to an international airport?” “Mansfield Town’s Field Mill (currently called the One Call Stadium) is a three-sider in the sense that one of its touchline stands has been boarded up for 15 years after being condemned,” mails Mike Pollitt. “It’s covered in advertising hoardings and was last used in May 2004. It’s an odd sight as the rest of the ground is otherwise quite decent. Thinking about the ground’s history has made me think of another question: when it was redeveloped in 2000, the ends that traditionally housed the hardcore support and away fans were reversed. Has this happened elsewhere?” “I‘m surprised there’s been no mention of the Estadio Municipal de Braga,” writes a surprised Michael Holmes. “It has no stands at either end, with one being the rock wall of a former quarry. However, the stadium has won the Pritzker prize for architecture. “While on the subject of Portugal, in August I went to see Belenenses v Boavista at the Estadio Nacional in Lisbon, which has stands round one side and both ends ... but a big gap on the east side.” “You seem to have missed the end apparently graced by the longest bar at a ground in the world, Avaya Stadium, home of the San Jose Earthquakes,” offers Colin Richardson, who took this picture … “Sheffield United’s Bramall Lane used to be open at one end (until 1973),” offers Guy Cudmore. “It started as a cricket ground. Bramall Lane is one of only two English grounds which have hosted an FA Cup final, an England football international and a Test match (the other is The Oval). Bolton’s Burnden Park had a Normid superstore covering half of one end until the club moved to their new stadium in Horwich 1997. “No discussion of three-sided grounds can be complete without mentioning the County Ground in Northampton,” pipes up Stewart Robinson. “Until 1994 it was shared between Northampton Town and Northamptonshire County Cricket Club, with the two pitches alongside one another. Football spectators in the Abingdon Avenue stand had an unimpeded view across to the cricket pavilion, nearly 200 metres away.” @TheKnowledge_GU Any list of unusual stadiums should to include most of the Icelandic grounds -- I don't think there's any home pitches that have more than two stands. The Hásteinsvöllur in the Westman Islands is stunning. https://t.co/e7caV7F3hV @TheKnowledge_GU East Fife, like Dumbarton, also have three empty sides, Curiously, both grounds were designed and built by the same construction company. And both clubs play in black-and-gold. Spooky. And Andre Leme Lopes writes: “Laranjeiras Stadium of Fluminense Football Club was built to host the 1919 South American Championship. It originally had a full set of stands but, in 1961, renovation work in an adjacent street caused the demolition of one stand (and the capacity dropped from 25,000 to mere 8,000). It hasn’t been used for First Division matches since 2003. Nowadays, the only Brazilian First Division stadium with an open end is Independência Arena.” What an open end it is, though. “Has any side got a worse points/distance ratio than Carlisle to Plymouth?” asks Richard van der Wilshuizen. “One point in the last 10,000 miles seems about as poor a ratio as you can get in the UK.” We’re pretty sure Carlisle own that unwanted record for league games in the UK Richard but, globally, we can’t imagine any team has travelled further than Luch-Energiya Vladivostok for so little reward. Here’s Russel Yong: “From 2006 to 2008, Luch-Energiya Vladivostok were members of the Russian Premier League for the first and only time in their history. Being from the eastern extremity of Russia meant some epic long-distance travelling; their closest rivals were Siberian team Tom Tomsk, ‘only’ 3,465 miles from Vladivostok, while Spartak Nalchik’s home ground was an eye-watering 6,048 miles away. “Luch were famously decent at home and abysmal travellers, which made for some pretty poor away records, such as 0-0-3 (W-D-L) from three games v Zenit St Petersburg (5,984 miles), or 0 points for 35,904 miles travelled; 0-1-1 from two games v FC Rostov (5,901 miles), one point for 23,604 miles travelled; and 0-0-3 v CSKA Moscow (5,697 miles), 0 points for 34,182 miles travelled. “In 16 away games against the six Moscow teams (CSKA, Dynamo, FC Moscow, Lokomotiv, Spartak and Torpedo), Luch gained only three points, all from draws. If you calculate it based on the driving distance to/from each team’s home ground and Luch’s Dynamo Stadium (and given some fans didn’t think driving distance was an impediment, I don’t see why not), Luch travelled a staggering 182,052 miles to and from Moscow, 60,684 miles per point, the equivalent of going almost two and a half times around the Equator to get a draw, and going over three-quarters the distance to the Moon to snag a win.” “I seem to remember that Darren Anderton left a game, not due to injury, but because he lost a contact lens” wrote Chris Stanley in 2009. “Have any other players suffered a similar fate?” There are a few such examples. Perhaps the most famous was during the World Cup qualifier between Wales and Scotland in 1985, the match which tragically ended with the death of Jock Stein. As Wales mounted a series of attacks Jim Leighton, the Scotland goalkeeper, flapped at crosses, dropped shots and looked generally confused. His teammates were convinced he was concussed but in fact he wore contact lenses – a fact he had kept to himself for seven years – and one of them had been lost in the Ninian Park mud. He confessed the truth to Stein at half-time and was promptly replaced by Alan Rough. • For more from the font of nerdvana, click this thing here. “Vitória FC are 14th in the Portuguese league, with eight points from eight games,” notes David Valente. However, they have only scored once. What are the most points procured in a spell from the fewest goals scored?” @TheKnowledge_GU Reading about the two Liverpool fans confusing Gent with Genk, what's the furthest that a fan has ever ended up from the game s/he was supposed to be at - and indeed any footballer due to play - due to geographical confusion? After the rumours of Moyes going to Sunderland a few weeks ago, what the lowest level at which the former manager of league champions has managed? “Port Vale signed Will Atkinson on loan in 2007,” begins Rob Fielding. “This season he has returned on a short-term contract. The gap between his spells is 11 years and 11 months – a club record. Is this the longest gap between two spells at one club?” @TheKnowledge_GU Inter Miami’s 26,000 seater stadium is due to cost $966m USD (roughly £750m). At just shy of £29,000 per seat is this the most expensive stadium with the fewest seats? @TheKnowledge_GU the Louis Tomlinson video for "Back To You" features Doncaster's stadium. The single reached 8th in the charts, while the club's last position when it charted was 71st in the football league. Has there been a bigger gap between song & club featured in the video? Email your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.