Britain looks on track to avoid a recession despite mounting Brexit uncertainty after official figures showed an unexpectedly strong jump in economic growth over the summer. The Office for National Statistics said gross domestic product (GDP) had risen by 0.3% in the three months to August, beating the forecasts of City economists, helped by the strength of the services sector and a boom in TV and film production across the country. One of the two main definitions of recession in the UK is at least two quarters of negative economic growth. Judged by this yardstick, the UK was last in recession in 2008-09, when there were six consecutive quarters of negative growth. Some economists believe this definition of recession is flawed, since an economy would not be in recession if it contracted by 5% in the first quarter, expanded by 0.1% in each of the following two quarters and then contracted again by 5% in the fourth quarter. It would, however, be deemed to be in recession if it grew by 5% in each of the first and fourth quarters but contracted by 0.1% in each of the second and third quarters. An alternative – and tougher definition – is a full calendar year of negative output. Given the UK economy has grown on average by 2.5% over many decades, it is rare for gross domestic product (GDP) to fall on an annual basis. There have been only five such years since the end of the second world war: 1974, 1975, 1980, 1981 and 1991. The United States has its own method of assessing recession, with the National Bureau of Economic Research's business cycle-dating committee making a judgment. The NBER defines recession as "a significant decline in economic activity spread across the economy, lasting more than a few months, normally visible in real GDP, real income, employment, industrial production and wholesale-retail sales". Against a backdrop of mounting political chaos, economists said the latest snapshot showed that economic growth remained weak but that Britain was on track to avoid sliding into the first recession since the financial crisis. Ian Stewart, chief economist at the accountancy firm Deloitte, said: “The economy has regained some momentum but the underlying trend is towards softer growth. The headwinds from a major global slowdown and uncertainty at home point to weaker growth ahead.” In a sign of weakness in the economy, GDP contracted by 0.1% in August as activity in the dominant service sector stalled and factory output plunged as the Brexit deadline nears with little sign of a deal with Brussels. Gross domestic product (GDP) measures the total value of activity in the economy over a given period of time. Put simply, if GDP is up on the previous three months, the economy is growing; if it is down, it is contracting. Two or more consecutive quarters of contraction are considered to be a recession. GDP is the sum of all goods and services produced in the economy, including the service sector, manufacturing, construction, energy, agriculture and government. Several key activities are not counted, such as unpaid work in the home. The ONS uses three measures that should, in theory, add up to the same number. • The value of all goods and services produced – known as the output or production measure.• The value of the income generated from company profits and wages – known as the income measure.• The value of goods and services purchased by households, government, business (in terms of investment in machinery and buildings) and from overseas – known as the expenditure measure. Economists are concerned with the real rate of change of GDP, which accounts for how the economy is performing after inflation. Britain's government statistics body, the Office for National Statistics, produces GDP figures on a monthly basis about six weeks after the end of the month. It compares the change in GDP month on month, as well as over a three-month period. The ONS warns that changes on the month can prove volatile, preferring to assess economic performance over a three-month period as the wider period can smooth over irregularities. The most closely watched GDP figures are for the four quarters of the year; for the three months to March, June, September and December. The figures are usually revised in subsequent months as more data from businesses and the government becomes available. The ONS also calculates the size of the UK economy relative to the number of people living here. GDP per capita shows whether we are actually getting richer or poorer, by stripping out the impact of population changes. Richard Partington However, the ONS cautions that single month growth rates can paint an unreliable picture of economic strength, as they can be prone to revision as more data from the economy becomes available over time. Growth in both June and July was revised up by the ONS by 0.1 percentage points, lifting the three-month rate. The ONS said GDP would need to plunge by at least 1.5% in September for the economy to contract in the third quarter. Such falls are considered extreme and rare, with comparable drops recorded only twice in the past 20 years. Among the pockets of strength for the economy in the three months to August, the service sector grew by 0.4%, following a largely flat period of growth in the previous three months. The largest contribution to GDP growth was motion pictures, including TV and music, which the ONS said had been one of the best performing sectors over the last year and had grown at a notably faster rate than services as a whole. Factory output fell by 1.1% in the three months to June, in a sign of continuing gloom for manufacturers. The ONS said car production was gradually bouncing back from a slump in April when manufacturers brought forward their shutdowns around the original Brexit date as a precaution, although it warned the longer-term picture was for weakening growth in production. The construction industry barely grew in the three months to August, with output rising by 0.1% helped by the building of new homes, after a 0.9% slide in the three months to July. The improved performance for the economy at large comes after GDP plunged in the second quarter by 0.2%, stoking fears of the first recession in a decade. Economists regard two consecutive quarters of contraction as the definition of recession. Official growth figures for the third quarter are expected in early November.