Tomás Lavanini became the fifth player to be sent off in this World Cup as players remain slow to come to terms with the directive to tackle below the neck and shoulders, well below to ensure there is no contact with a ball-carrier’s head if the attacking player ducks into the tackle. Owen Farrell did, slightly, but the Leicester-bound Lavanini was so intent on putting in a big hit on the England captain that he got his angle wrong and led with his shoulder and head. It was surprising that Nigel Owens’s initial reaction was that it was not an act of foul play and it took a review for him to change his mind. On first glance in real time it looked as if the centre had dipped just before contact and that Lavanini had been trying to wrap his arms around him, but the replay revealed it as an explicit act of foul play with little in mitigation. Two other points: why, in this safety-conscious era, did Farrell not go off for a head-injury assessment (his own assessment that as he had not been hit on the top of the head he did not need to be checked did not cut it) and Maro Itoje was fortunate when he went highish in the opening half that his opponent remained upright. Billy Vunipola was playing his third match in three but failed to appear for the second half after having his left ankle treated twice and heavily bandaged. Vunipola started slowly, turned over in the opening minutes before dropping the ball, and this was one opponent Argentina were prepared to tackle low, taking his legs away with the second man looking to compete for the ball on the floor rather than get bounced into the middle of the following week. Vunipola’s departure meant that with Lewis Ludlam, a flanker, on the bench, Tom Curry had to switch to No 8. It made little difference with Argentina wearying after being pressed into virtual all-out defence: England looked to exploit the space their numerical advantage presented, especially from first-phase but also after they had used their heavyweights to bash their way over the gainline and as in their opening two games, they gave their opponents very little. The Pumas had promised a war but fled the battlefield all too quickly. Argentina have won two Tests since the start of 2018 and even before Lavanini’s dismissal it was not immediately apparent they had the arsenal to back up their gung-ho words. The decision to start at fly-half with Benjamin Urdapilleta was not vindicated. The 33-year old looked his age, slow to make up his mind, kicking haphazardly and unable to threaten England’s gainline. Their players are selected from virtually one side, the Jaguares, who in the past two years have made an impact in a weakened Super Rugby, restricting competition for places. They have barely turned up to this tournament. Part of the second half against France and the start against Tonga, but for the most part have looked short of what a tier one nation should be, the south’s version of Italy. It raises the question of whether emerging countries should be given a way into Test rugby’s two major championships or whether the current members should be able to carry on by self-appointed right rather than merit. Some countries are easy to define. South Africa, as they showed again against Italy on Friday, are brutally physical, bludgeoning opponents into submission, hitting opponents hard and again, although the question what it will do to themselves come the latter end of the tournament remains to be answered. New Zealand have the sharpness of an unused razor and the penetration of a stiletto; Japan have a limitless power supply and Wales attack through their defence, but England are more of a mosaic. They have power, using carriers to make a few metres at a time, sucking in defenders and creating space out wide, as they showed for George Ford’s try, but they can be explosive on the counterattack and Jones has gone back to two playmakers at 10 and 12 after flirting with Owen Farrell at fly-half. Agustín Creevy described England as boring, and they can be, but they can also be exhilarating. The issue if they make the semi-finals, where they would face the All Blacks or the Springboks, is how quick-witted they are: reaction times will need to be a bit quicker than they too often were here. England are through to the quarter-finals with one match to go, the one team who can finish the group stage with 20 points out of 20. France will join them if they defeat Tonga on Sunday, not quite a formality after what happened when the two sides met in 2011. The prize that awaits is a quarter-final against Wales or Australia, but topping the group would leave New Zealand as the probable quarter-final opponents. Not that Eddie Jones will be looking that far ahead. Each match has increased in difficulty and so the meeting with Les Bleus in Yokohama should be his side’s most testing yet and unlikely to be the frolic Twickenham witnessed in February. Not that you ever can tell with France, but England are gathering momentum and almost passing unnoticed, like a batsman who appears to be becalmed but the scoreboard reveals is nearing a century. It is how Jones wants it, the perfect start.