I had booked an August break with my son to Rome through a Tui store that used the tour operator Super Break. Tui agents called the evening before our departure to inform us Super Break had gone into administration but said our booking would be honoured. This was not quite true. Our prepaid transfer from the airport was cancelled without notice, leaving us a bus and underground journey and a mile’s walk to the hotel. The hotel then insisted we would have to pay again. Tui promised we would be refunded if we presented receipts at the store. Then I was told the claim would have to be approved by head office, then that I would have to pursue it through Abta. An ensuing complex automated maze finally led me to an address to post my claim. Two weeks on, I’ve heard nothing. We really stretched ourselves to do the trip as a present for my son’s 21st and had no financial cushion to deal with this. MS, Abingdon, Oxfordshire Confusingly Tui is both a tour operator and a travel agent. You booked through its travel agent arm, which means your contract was with Super Break. The company was therefore correct when it eventually directed you to Abta, which gives financial protection if a member company goes bust. When I contacted Abta it put you in touch with a claims handler who began processing your refund, before realising that as you’d booked a package holiday you’d have to start the claim yet again via Atol, which protects package-holiday customers. Many Thomas Cook customers will be in the same situation and should read the Abta instructions on where to send their claims depending on their contract. And always book with a credit card for extra protection. Tui says it has advised you on the necessary steps to take and it “apologises for the time it has taken”. If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions