Frankie Dettori expects to be swept up in the emotion of what is likely to be Enable’s final start in the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe at Longchamp on Sunday, regardless of whether the five-year-old becomes the first horse to win Europe’s showpiece race three times. Dettori was close to tears after Enable’s last appearance in Britain at York in August and knows that the mare’s outstanding career, which has yielded 12 wins from 13 starts, is almost certain to conclude after Sunday’s race. “It will be a sad day, because it could be the last day I ride her,” Dettori said. “I cried at York and there is every chance I will cry again on Sunday. We have been around the world and conquered the best races in Europe, so of course I’m attached to her, and I love her. That chapter could close on Sunday and she means the world to me, and if it does end, of course it will hit me hard.” Dettori missed the winning ride on Treve in the 2013 Arc after breaking an ankle in a fall at Nottingham racecourse a few days before the race and he has been taking no chances in the run-up to Sunday’s race. His last ride in public was aboard Lord North, the Cambridgeshire Handicap winner, at Newmarket last Saturday, although he has a handful of booked rides at Longchamp over the weekend before Enable’s big moment at 15.05 BST on Sunday afternoon. “It’s been a circus,” Dettori said of the buildup in recent days, but quite rightly so, because she is trying to do what has never been done before and scale a mountain that has not been scaled before. This, in racing terms, would be as big as Sir Steve Redgrave claiming five Olympic gold medals. There has been a media frenzy all over the world, because it is the biggest race. “I’d be lying if I said I wasn’t nervous. Of course I’m nervous. I get nervous from the night before, and I get quite obnoxious, so my family kind of run away from me. But it is part and parcel of riding the favourite in the Arc.” Enable is top-priced at 8-11, with Aidan O’Brien’s Japan, the winner of the International Stakes at York in August, next in the betting at 6-1. Sottsass, the French Derby winner, is a 7-1 shot while another O’Brien-trained runner, Magical, is alongside Charlie Appleby’s Ghaiyyath, the recent 14-length winner of a Group One event in Germany, on 12-1. “Everybody is going to turn up, and it will be hard-fought, so it’s really fingers crossed,” Dettori said. “I’ve got the expectation of the world on my shoulders, which is great. I’d rather be in that position than not, so I will try to enjoy it. “I’m not physically as good as I was at 25, but I guess what I have lost in my physique I’ve gained in experience and I’m enjoying it a lot more. John [Gosden, Enable’s trainer] is looking after me, and I’m very grateful to him that he is not flogging me up and down the country every day. “He is keeping me for when it is important, which has helped me find myself in the position I am today.” Last year’s Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe was the first at Longchamp following a €130m redevelopment programme and it left many racegoers disappointed amid reports of long queues for food, drinks and toilet facilities and shortages of beer and wine. The prospect of seeing Enable’s last race is still expected to tempt many thousands of British and Irish racing fans back to Paris this weekend however, in the hope that one of the most popular horses of recent decades will succeed where Treve failed four years ago, after two consecutive victories in the Arc. “I fear Japan,” Dettori added, “because he is a Juddmonte [International] winner that is also a three-year-old, so he will get weight from us. The Arc is really all about her, though. It would put the icing on the cake of her career and make her an immortal horse of our generation if it happens.”