I came to understand Australia through drinking milk at the beach. Beach milk. To me, it is more important than the pie, the pav or Vegemite. I grew up largely in south London, in compressed trains and compressed streets, and the whole idea of “Australia” was about as relatable as outer space. It was an untidy but necessary move here as a kid in the late 1980s, with far fewer anchors than I was ready for. My introduction to Australian life was the glorious red brick suburban panorama of Pascoe Vale. It seemed entirely alien and surreal to me; you had an abundance of dogs, an electric blue sky where the clouds should be, no building ever dared to grow beyond two storeys, and your grass was literally greener. A few days after arrival, shaken by jet lag and your baroque television aesthetics (Tuckerbag, Expo 88, Press Your Luck), I was entrusted to walk around the corner to the “milk bar” (whatever that was) to buy myself a treat. Through that plastic curtain, across that checkerboard lino, past the rows of those strange chocolate bars, sat three loudly humming fridges. A baritone glass and steel choir promising alien soft drinks and absurd ice-creams. It was on that warm April morning that I experienced my first Egg Flip-flavoured Big M. It felt like passing some kind of delicious test. An initiation. Outside the front of the milk bar, I spied a simple window sticker of the very same thing I was drinking: two lithe figures walking into the sunset surf, with a Big M in the foreground. “Why are they drinking milk at the beach? Should I be drinking milk at the beach?” My images of Australia had been the same as anybody else’s in England; blazing hot beaches, broad smiles and fruit for miles. Not just an escape, but escape itself. This adver-colonial imagination had been fully installed in me, but once I landed, it was immediately apparent that the peculiarities of Australian life had been well hidden. You didn’t like football and had invented your own form of it – understandable. Even as a white kid from London, it was noticeable how monocultural television was. But with respect to Robin Boyd, nothing had prepared me for The Australian Milkiness. Mentioning the advertising of beach milk to Australians over the years has invariably yielded an excellent false-bottom response. First, “you’re making it up, that sounds disgusting”, and then moments later, “oh, wait, I remember the ads”. From the late 1970s onward, television ad breaks saw milky wave after milky wave of beach-themed lactose bacchanalia. Brands with reach in their home states, including Big M, Farmers Union, Brownes, Breaka, Masters and Moove had all experimented with sunny scenes in their advertising by the time the 1990s came along. If you’re unfamiliar, it is exactly as it sounds. The ads took the quintessential carefree Australian beach scene and, well, added flavoured milk. At their strangest, they showed young, sexy, skinny – invariably white – teenagers splashing chocolate and strawberry milk at each other, spilling it down their tops. But mixed in with tradies gulping down iced coffee and the advent of low-fat milk for all the busy mums, it made its own kind of parochial sense. The story goes that beset by the onslaught of Coca-Cola’s ever-expanding products and the diminishing returns of dairy farmers, the flavoured milk beach party kicks off in earnest with the roaring successful launch of Big M in January 1978. Jan O’Connell’s book A Timeline of Australian Food and accompanying resource website explains that the launch was so successful, traditional soft drink companies went to war with the milk bars who were hosting the fridges they’d provided to keep the drinks cool. The dairy industry happily returned fire and replaced the fridges as new milk brands and old quickly followed suit in the 1980s advertising frenzy. We drink a lot of flavoured milk. A lot. Take as much as you think and double it a few times. A few years ago, we had figures suggesting Western Australians drank 19 litres per person per year. “Oh, that’s a lot,” you’d say, completely unaware that by the time you’ve opened your mouth, a South Australian has probably already drunk another one, on their way to 32 litres a year. To adapt to Australian life, beach milk was the anchor that made the most sense to me. The fact most Australians haven’t heard of it or find it implausibly disgusting makes it all the more perfect. • Christian McCrea writes on science fiction, film, video games, animation and the weird parts of popular culture. He is a lecturer in the School of Design at RMIT University