Bolivia’s presidential election result was on a knife-edge on Monday, after a sudden halt in release of presidential election returns led to confusion and protests, as opponents suggested officials were trying to help the current president, Evo Morales, avoid a runoff. Morales topped Sunday’s election, but the last released results showed him falling a few points short of the percentage needed to avoid the first runoff in his nearly 14 years in power. Nonetheless, he claimed an outright victory, saying that the uncounted votes would be enough to give an unprecedented fourth term. The uncertainty sparked fears among observers and diplomats about potential manipulation of the vote to avoid a risky second round, and of unrest that could follow in the landlocked nation, even as nearby Chile and Ecuador grapple with violence on the streets. “The region is convulsing. In Bolivia so far there have been tensions but we could go from tension to convulsion if Morales tries to force a victory in the first round,” said Bolivian political analyst Franklin Pareja. Bolivia’s top electoral authority stopped announcing new results at 7.45pm on Sunday, a point at which Morales had a lead of 45.3% to 38.2% over former president Carlos Mesa. As of Monday afternoon, it had not explained why it stopped releasing updated results. Mesa said there could be “manipulation of the vote to impede a second round” of voting that could imperil Morales’s hold on power. Under Bolivian law, Morales would need a 10-percentage point advantage over Mesa to avoid a December runoff in which opposition parties might unite against him. Morales declared victory on Sunday night and told supporters at the presidential palace that “the people again imposed their will”. A special electoral mission from the Organization of American States said it was closely monitoring the election and urged the supreme electoral tribunal to renew the release of results though the official count is not due for seven days. Being forced into a runoff would be “a sharp blow to Morales, whose political success has been impressive and who seemed confident of a first-round win,” said Michael Shifter, head of the Inter-American Dialogue, a Washington-based thinktank. “Morales’s failure to achieve a first-round victory reflects growing concern about a slowing economy, corruption scandals and his determination to pursue a fourth term in defiance of a national referendum and the Bolivian constitution. Many Bolivians are simply weary. If re-elected, Evo will be in office nearly two decades.” To avoid a runoff and win outright in Bolivia, Morales would have needed to get 50% of the votes plus one or have 40% and finish 10 percentage points ahead of the nearest challenger. Surrounded by nations reeling from economic crises, Bolivia under Morales remains a rare example of stability and growth. The economy has grown by an annual average of about 4.5%, well above the regional average, and the International Monetary Fund predicts it will grow at 4% this year. But Morales has also faced growing dissatisfaction, especially over his refusal to accept a referendum on limiting presidential terms. While Bolivians voted to maintain term limits in 2016, the country’s top court, which is seen by critics as friendly to the president, ruled that limits would violate Morales’s political rights as a citizen.