I am 31, and have been dating my boyfriend, J, for a year. I am developing deep feelings for him, but have an inkling that he is a sexually repressed homosexual. I do not want to end up falling in love with him, marrying – having children – only to find out that, although he may have loved me, we never truly shared a sexual attraction. Despite his tender and affectionate nature, I have never felt him to be sexually attracted to me. I often initiate sex (and am often ignored). In previous relationships, I have found myself fending off consistent unwanted advances, and any move on my part would have been taken up. When we do have sex he turns the lights off, and it’s always just before we go to sleep. When I raised the idea that he might not be sexually attracted to me, he flipped out, saying I lacked tact. He mentioned early on that he separates “sexual desire” or “sex” from “emotional connection”, which left me aghast: the feeling of being in love, for me, is deeply bound up with sexual and emotional intimacy. I am very troubled and need to know if he wants me. You have a hunch that something isn’t right, and that’s worth listening to: if you don’t feel desired in a sexual relationship it can be utterly demoralising (I get dozens of letters about this every week), and there’s no reason to put up with this if that’s what is happening, or if this is how the relationship makes you feel. However, before you do anything drastic, you may want to look at things a bit differently. I wonder where you learned that a man “wanting you” was defined by “consistent and often unwanted” advances rather than the “tender, affectionate and caring” man you are with at the moment? I consulted Murray Blacket, a sexual and relationship psychotherapist (cosrt.org.uk). “Your fear is that J doesn’t find you sexually attractive, and your defence is that loads of other men have, so you look for suggestions as to why that might be true: ie, he must be gay,” he said. “But people often make a judgment – ‘My boyfriend doesn’t fancy me, therefore he must be gay’ – instead of addressing the more difficult question of what’s going on in their sex life.” J may be gay, but Blacket put forward some other theories based on experiences with his patients. “J may be less sexually experienced than you – or the men you are used to. He may be shy, lacking in confidence or experience; or you may have mismatched libidoes, or ways of initiating sex. If in response, you are asking J: ‘Are you gay?’ or ‘Why don’t you fancy me?’ in response, that would feel like an attack for any man – but especially if he’s lacking in experience and already nervous.” Equally, if J isn’t making advances towards you in the way you’d like then, naturally enough, you are going to have questions about yourself. So, what do you do? You may feel it’s too much to go and see a relationship therapist at this stage, but if you’re serious about this man you do need to find a way for you both to be able to communicate. The longer I do this job, the more I see sex as just another form of communication, and the lack of it as a breakdown in communication between a couple. It’s rare to find a couple who can’t communicate, but have great sex. How often are you having sex and what do you class as sex? “So many couples [that I see] think that only penetrative sex is sex, or that a man with an erection who can penetrate a woman is the gold standard,” Blacket said. But the truth is, there are many other ways to have sex, feel wanted and desired. Blacket said that “although you may not be asking questions of J in the right way, they are good questions”. He suggested “not doing what I often see happen, which is that one person is unhappy and so they say to their partner, ‘You need to go and get this seen to.’” You both need to take responsibility for your part in it. Putting him on the defensive isn’t going to make him feel great. Remember: there are two of you in this relationship. • Send your problem to annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.