Californians are facing a second day of destruction as firefighters struggle to control a pair of fast-moving wildfires, including one that has forced the evacuation of about 50,000 residents in suburbs north of Los Angeles. Crews in LA county worked overnight to battle the Tick fire, which started on Thursday and has grown to char 4,300 acres, threatening 15,000 homes and businesses, officials said. Images on TV and social media showed flames shooting up residential hillsides, fanned by winds of up to 50mph. “This is the largest evacuation that we’ve had in Santa Clarita,” Kathryn Barger, a Los Angeles county supervisor, said on Friday. “This is being done to make sure that we protect not only life but property but also allow our firefighters and first responders to get up there to fight these fires.” Meanwhile, in northern California, the Kincade fire, which broke out late Wednesday night, continued to ravage the wine-growing region of Sonoma county. The fire has so far destroyed nearly 50 structures and forced the evacuation of 2,000 people in and around Geyserville, a small town and popular tourist destination. Both fires are only 5% contained. California’s governor, Gavin Newsom, on Friday declared a local emergency to assist with battling the blazes, but firefighters are facing extremely challenging weather conditions – including strong winds, low humidity and high temperatures of up to 90F. A meteorologist has described the statewide weather event as an “atmospheric hairdryer”. And the utility Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) has announced it plans power shutoffs across northern California over the weekend, when strong winds are expected to pick up. More than 2 million people are expected to be affected by the blackouts. The Tick fire has upended life in the suburban Santa Clarita Valley, about 40 miles (60 km) north of downtown Los Angeles, which has been used as the backdrop for many movies and television productions and is home to the Magic Mountain amusement park. The fire, which began in Tick Canyon, has spread “aggressively” in the last 24 hours. Local resident Charles Lindsey, 68, described “a wall of black smoke” and “2o to 30ft flames”. He spent hours trying to protect his home but was eventually forced to evacuate. Climate scientists had warned for several days before the wildfires broke out that this would be a week of especially intense fire weather across California. Smoke from the two fires is also disrupting life in two of the state’s biggest cities. A smokey haze drifting toward the Bay Area of San Francisco prompted warnings to residents to stay indoors, close windows and use masks. Los Angeles officials closed dozens of schools in the San Fernando Valley, just south of the blazes, because of fears over hazardous breathing conditions. Warnings that smoke could affect flights at San Francisco and San Jose international airports were also issued on Friday morning. Firefighters are reckoning with other blazes outside of the Tick and Kincade fires. A brush fire near San Diego, dubbed the Miller fire, started around 1pm and had consumed 10 acres by late afternoon, menacing homes and sending plumes of smoke into the air. The California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection’s live fire tracking tool identified more than 10 active fires on Friday. California’s largest utility company, Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E), is facing scrutiny over the origins of the Kincade fire. On Friday PG&E admitted its electrical equipment may have ignited the blaze. Strong winds earlier in the week had prompted PG&E to impose sweeping blackouts affecting a half-million people in northern and central California. Power was restored to most people by Thursday evening, PG&E said. However, PG&E said it didn’t turn off a 230,000-volt transmission line near Geyserville that malfunctioned minutes before the fire erupted. The utility reported finding a “broken jumper” wire on a transmission tower Wednesday night. Bill Johnson, the PG&E CEO, said it was too soon to know if the faulty equipment sparked the fire. He said the tower had been inspected four times in the past two years and appeared to have been in excellent condition. The embattled company, which filed for bankruptcy in January, is currently facing hundreds of lawsuits over its role in deadly wildfires in 2017 and 2018. Governor Newsom says only 6,700 PG&E customers remain without power after a widespread blackout the utility imposed to prevent deadly wildfires. But the company is planning a new and major shutdown that could hit 2 million people throughout the region starting Saturday night and last up to two days. Evacuees at a Santa Clarita shelter waited on Friday for news about when they can return home – if indeed their homes have survived. For some, fleeing wildfires has become an anxious routine. Brenda Taylor, 46, estimated that her family has had to evacuate eight or nine times in the last 20 years. “It has become the normal for us,” she said, as her two dogs ran in circles and barked outside an evacuation center in Santa Clarita. “They get really stressed.” She said this was one of the closest calls she has ever experienced. “The wind was very, very loud and aggressive,” she said. “You could see the flames. It looked like it was right there.” She said she’s grown accustomed to fleeing fires, adding that she grabbed photos and her children’s diplomas. “I’ve just gotten used to it. This is life out here.” Large wildfires require a cocktail of conditions, such as favorable wind speed and direction, fuel, terrain and a spark – and many agree the climate crisis is making those conditions more likely. Of the 20 largest wildfires in California’s recorded history, 15 have occurred since 2000, at a time when forests have become drier and warmer. Since 1970, temperatures in the west have increased by about double the global average, lengthening the western wildfire season by several months and drying out large tracts of forests, making them more fire-prone. Jeanne Weiss, 50, said she had “everything packed” and was ready to leave along with her four cat, who are safe. And while it was her first time evacuating, but she is concerned it won’t be her last. “With global warming, I do worry.” Agencies contributed reporting