Rorschach mask-wearing white supremacists are terrorising the Oklahoma town of Tulsa in this new take on Alan Moore’s cult graphic novel. Regina King plays the unflappable detective tasked with rooting out the violent racists, while Jeremy Irons is the imperious superhero Ozymandias. An absorbing, nihilistic universe unfolds.Monday 21 October, 9pm, Sky Atlantic New inquests are to be held for one of the worst tragedies in Ireland’s history, when 48 people were killed in Dublin’s Stardust nightclub on Valentine’s Day 1981. This podcast speaks to survivors and relatives of victims to examine how this disaster in a working-class area has gone unresolved.Podcast Mad Max meets Mean Girls in this post-apocalyptic take on high-school drama as we meet the cliques of Glendale, before and after nuclear disaster. Matthew Broderick stars as the principal in charge of a school full of murderous jocks, slasher nerds and killer cheerleaders all battling it out for supremacy. It’s the most extreme of popularity contests.From Thursday 24 October, Netflix It has been a long road of existential self-discovery for our alcoholic, one-time sitcom star and talking horse BoJack. Along with pin-sharp puns, this final season delivers a gut-wrenching, human core to this anthropomorphic universe. It is the perfect binge-watch.From Friday 25 October, Netflix After tackling simple yet delicious street foods in his Netflix series Ugly Delicious, Momofuku founder David Chang turns his attention to a food-based travel show, with each episode exploring a new place with a new guest. Chang’s starry gourmands include actor Seth Rogen and supermodel Chrissy Teigen, eating delicacies in mouth-watering, slow-motion high definition.From Wednesday 23 October, Netflix When an explosion on a building site in the fictional, run-down Welsh town of Glyngolau kills several teenagers, the repercussions are felt throughout. Sarah Lancashire gives a powerhouse performance as a grieving mother looking for answers.Thursday 24 October, 9pm, Channel 4 Steven Soderbergh exec-produces this true-crime documentary on the case of Clint Lorance, who is currently serving 19 years in Leavenworth prison for the murder of two local men while deployed in Afghanistan. As he continues to appeal his conviction, this series questions the ethics and rules of our wars.From Sunday 20 October, Starzplay Michael Douglas and Alan Arkin return as an ageing Hollywood actor and his longtime agent in this second season. Packed with wry gags and guest turns from the likes of Jane Seymour, who stars as Arkin’s long-lost love, it’s a feelgood companion piece to Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin’s raucous comedy Grace and Frankie.From Friday 25 October, Netflix Banned from film-making for 20 years, dissident Iranian director Jafar Panahi adopted a form of guerrilla filming for this award-winning “road movie”. He installed a videocam in a taxi, then took to the streets to record his passengers talking about their lives and opinions – and created a witty, highly amusing critique of Iran’s authorities.Saturday 19 October, 12.10am, BBC Two Oscar Wilde-quoting teen Miles Halter is obsessed with last words and seeking out a memorable life. So far, that means enrolling in a boarding school and getting a crush on his roommate’s best friend, Alaska. Based on John Green’s novel, this coming-of-age adaptation is perfectly pitched between teenage hijinks and a yearning emotional core.From Saturday 19 October, 10am, BBC Three