“One late tackle and it could be all over. Every player knows that,” says the 19-year-old striker. He falls silent for a second and peers down at his feet with an apprehensive look. “This game is all about luck. One good moment can make you and one bad moment can finish you.” “I remember playing for my local team in a tournament and I’d had a nightmare of a weekend. We had two games a day and I can’t remember completing a pass over the three days. The ball was bouncing off me, I was missing easy chances, nothing was working. Atlético Madrid were there, Rayo, Getafe, Real Madrid; all the top teams in the region. Somehow, even with me, we got to the final.” Standing up to re-enact the action, he says: “At 0-0, there were a couple of minutes left and I remember the ball just landing to me about 20 metres from the goal. I was that pissed off with my performance, I just thought ‘fuck it’ and whacked it. The ball flew into the stanchion and there was a massive pile-on – substitutes, coaches, everyone. I got approached by a scout straight after the game and here I am now. Incredible.” The conversation comes to a halt as the bus pulls into the stop outside the university. The young centre-forward, now signed to a club who play in La Liga, jumps off with four of his teammates for a class they attend every weekday after morning training sessions at the academy. Two days earlier, the youngsters had played a league game against Extremadura in Badajoz on Spain’s border with Portugal. After the five-hour journey, the academy players were told to leave the bus and stretch their legs with a walk around the town. The group of Under-19s, all sporting their official club tracksuits, must have thought they had stepped into a time machine when punters poured out of bars and on to the street to hurl abuse at them. The boys laughed off the insults as they stopped to smile for pictures with local hairdressers and shopkeepers. As coaches we thought the tour of the town was a good idea. We felt it gave the players some insight into where they were playing and what kind of game to expect in a few hours’ time. The reception in the town was just a lick of the lid compared to what happened when the team bus reached the stadium. Having waded through the bodies in the car park, the players walked into a dressing room that had no windows and no lights. The smell from a clogged toilet had been kindly left to greet us, making the stench of cigar smoke that pierced the air as the players took to the pitch a welcome relief. The stand was packed, the atmosphere was hostile and, of course, the delightful bunch from the bar were there in full voice. The home side used the conditions to their advantage, employing a direct approach on a narrow, rough pitch to frustrate the visitors. The Extremadura players eliminated the spaces and battled to a 1-0 win thanks to a header from a set piece. This is football. This is real football. The sounds of punched walls and kicked water bottles in the away dressing room were drowned out by the chanting and dancing of the home players joining the crowd above. “Listen to these dickheads – have they won the Champions League?” asked one player. “One chance. One fucking chance and they win 1-0!” This is football. The five-hour journey back to Madrid was completed in utter silence. On the pitch, the gulf between La Liga and where these young boys are right now is a big one. Off the pitch, it’s a million times bigger. Extremadura play in the second tier of Spanish football yet not all of their first-team players are able to survive on the money they make from football alone. Young players around Spain are more than conscious of the financial inequality in the game. Away days like these every fortnight serve as constant reminders of the fine margins between the top and second place. The way Spanish football is organised consistently pushes young players into uncomfortable scenarios, which helps to cushion the difficulties that may arise if they never reach the elite level. The importance of education is also drilled into players. Several of the Spain squad that won the European Under-21 Championship this summer are still continuing their degrees, even as their careers are take off. New Manchester City midfielder Rodrigo is completing his business and economics studies between dictating games in the Premier League. A few days after the defeat, the players are still in subdued spirits on the training pitch. Clips have been watched and errors have been critiqued before they are put through a session under the Madrid sun. Three of the Under-19 players are on the pitch beside us taking part in a session with the first team as they prepare to face Barcelona at the weekend. The manager’s voice rings out: “When Busquets receives it from here, he immediately looks to play to here. We have to be aware!” The envious teammates watch on, laughing at how surreal it is to see their mate take on the part of Gerard Piqué playing out from the back. As the budding prospects go to their various colleges and universities, mindful that the club will be informed if they fail to attend or even arrive late, the team’s top goalscorer looks back before the doors close. “I was Luis Suárez this morning,” he says. “Now I’ve got a three-hour business lecture.” So near, yet so far. This is football. • This article is from Caño Football• Follow Alex Clapham on Caño Football on Twitter