Do we seek any solace or answers when we look back on the divisions of another country? For the second time this year, a major institution takes on apartheid-era South Africa: its circumstances and its legacy. The RSC recently announced that John Kani’s incisive play Kunene and the King, reflecting on his country 25 years after its first democratic election, is to transfer to the West End. In the meantime, here is a report from the heart of apartheid. Athol Fugard, one of the most celebrated of the era’s dramatists, has described “Master Harold”… and the boys, first put on in 1982 but set in 1950, as the “most intensely personal” of his works. It’s a small-scale drama – three actors in one room for 90 minutes – with a long political reach, and is meticulously directed at the National by Roy Alexander Weise, who next month becomes (with Bryony Shanahan) the co-artistic director of the Royal Exchange in Manchester. In a tearoom in Port Elizabeth – vividly realised in Rajha Shakiry’s design with a faded Coca-Cola ad and a jukebox playing You’re the Cream in My Coffee – two black waiters (Hammed Animashaun and Lucian Msamati) first josh, then fondly reminisce and finally clash with the owner’s white schoolboy son (a blazered Anson Boon). The first half of the evening is cumbersome, but the eventual climax – which drew gasps on press night – is skewering. Boon, making his stage debut, begins by appearing shrill, too emphatic in speech and grimaces – Fugard is delivering an unsparing autoportrait of white entitlement – but he comes into his own as the extent and cause of his anxiety, an anxiety that adds fuel to his brutality, is made evident. Animashaun gradually, delicately reveals how taut and watchful his apparently slow character is. Msamati is remarkable: at once sharp and generous, direct and nimble. The opening and closing moments capture the play’s most original stroke. Animashaun and Msamati are seen practising the foxtrot in preparation for a ballroom dancing competition. Dancing enables them to imagine a life without their current constraints: one in which they are in control, in which there are “no accidents”, no collisions. At the end, elegiacally lit by the mighty Paule Constable, they take to the floor again, twinkle-toed and unencumbered. Macbeth – Shakespeare’s shortest tragedy – needs to go full throttle, as if on one breath Yaël Farber has talked of how her South African upbringing has given intensity to her work in the theatre. Mies Julie, her sultry version of Strindberg’s often performed play, which transported the action to South Africa, was one of the very few productions I have seen which made the play seem credible. Now Farber has collaborated in another translocation. Marina Carr’s bold and impressive new version of Federico García Lorca’s 1932 drama Blood Wedding at the Young Vic moves the action from Andalusia towards a rural Ireland such as may be glimpsed in the plays of JM Synge (Lorca was a fan) and subsequently satirised by Martin McDonagh. Pipe-smoking women with desert-island hair; iron bedsteads; outbursts of violence; harsh daily habits; “Is it yourself that’s in it, is it?” Yet also here is a rootless wild lyricism, both Iberian and Hibernian, shot through with Dalí dalliance and Catholic iconography. Carr offers “tears of basalt and obsidian” and invocations of a black Madonna. Susan Hilferty’s black bowl of a design is scythed by Natasha Chivers’s dramatic lighting. Thalissa Teixeira, a column of white, is the voice of the moon, delivering Isobel Waller-Bridge’s compositions with exquisite, hypnotic strength. The elements in Farber’s production are distinguished: there is an exciting symbolic horse – though he probably did not need to gallop around more than once – and strong performances, in particular by Olwen Fouéré as an adamantine matriarch and Aoife Duffin as an anguished bride. What’s missing is dynamism. The plot – an arranged marriage, a runaway bride, a deadly fight and what amounts to a lynching on a mountain – does not so much drive forward as move sacramentally. Bach, a pool of blood, a crucifix being lifted skywards. A production full of talent, arrested by its own beauty. “If it were done when ’tis done, then ’twere well it were done quickly.” Macbeth – Shakespeare’s shortest tragedy – needs to go full throttle, as if on one breath. Too much hanging around and you begin to wonder why the would-be king has gone into action so quickly. The witches’ prophecies should operate like an instant virus. Time may creep for the antihero, but it shouldn’t for the audience. Paul Miller’s production at Chichester Festival theatre moves at a magisterial pace. That is unexpected; Miller has been an exciting artistic head of the Orange Tree. The fault is not with John Simm, who was also Miller’s Hamlet at Sheffield nine years ago. He is thoughtful, contained, with something of a lethal civil servant about him; he hardly seems to flinch or quiver, and in moments of high emotion turns away or covers his face with his hands. It is an intelligent, if not galvanising performance, as is Dervla Kirwan’s velvety, insinuating Lady M. The most truly surprising moments – because unusually funny – are supplied by Harry Peacock as the Porter. The tragic flaw here is in large part a design fault. Macbeth is probably always less effective on a big stage: the vigour of Rupert Goold’s rocketing, blood-boltered 2007 production – the last time the play was put on at Chichester – was increased because it was put on in the smaller Minerva theatre. Here, Simon Daw’s design – black and grey, with a glass floor which cracked soon after press night – has the palette of a boutique hotel: more glacial than alarming. Crucially, the play’s action is often overwhelmed by Tim Reid’s gargantuan videos with their huge sweeps of threatening clouds. This briefly proves useful and effective when the witches conjure up their visions of the future, and show Banquo’s descendants stretching out to the crack of doom, but the chance to do something frightening with an advancing Birnam Wood is thrown away. That, of course, is par for the course nowadays: I am beginning to long for a Macbeth in which trees seem to be on the march and the witches look really haggard; a production in which the animate and the inanimate are magically entangled and ensnaring. These weird sisters are untidy in hippyish style, but quite fresh-faced and jolly fit: they race around the stage as if they were playing rounders. Star ratings (out of five)“Master Harold’…and the boys ★★★Blood Wedding ★★★Macbeth ★★ • “Master Harold”… and the boys is at the Lyttelton, London, until 17 December • Blood Wedding is at the Young Vic, London, until 2 November • Macbeth is at the Chichester Festival theatre until 26 October