Aaron Rodgers threw for 305 yards and three touchdowns, two of them to Aaron Jones on a big night for the Green Bay running back, and the Packers held off backup quarterback Matt Moore and the Kansas City Chiefs 31-24 on Sunday night. Jones had seven catches for 159 yards and added 67 on the ground a big chunk of them in the closing minutes, when the Packers (7-1) sealed the win. It was their first at Arrowhead Stadium since 2007. With reigning league MVP Patrick Mahomes out with a dislocated kneecap, Moore took the reins of the Chiefs’ high-powered offense and fared quite well. He threw for 267 yards with two touchdowns and no interceptions in the ex-high school coach’s first NFL start in more than two years. Unreal.@AaronRodgers12 magic on SNF! #GBvsKC | #GoPackGo pic.twitter.com/OzFFykBX0A After a shaky start by Moore, the journeyman quarterback and the rest of the Chiefs offense found a groove. They embarked on an 89-yard drive that ended with a make-it-rain 29-yard TD pass to Travis Kelce, then got a 30-yard pitch-and-catch to Mecole Hardman to tie the game. The Chiefs led 17-14 at half-time, raising some eyebrows across the league. Green Bay coach Matt LaFleur made a couple of adjustments, though, and Rodgers and Co began to move the ball once more. They used a 15-play drive that soaked up more than half the third quarter to get a tying field goal, then got the ball back when LeSean McCoy fumbled on the very next play. Five plays later, Rodgers conjured up more of his magic. With third down at the three, he dropped back and was flushed from the pocket. He rolled to his right and threw a blind pass to the back corner of the end zone, where Damien Williams somehow took the ball away from Chiefs linebacker Ben Niemann while tapping both feet inbounds. Rodgers was lying flat on his back, staring at the sky, as the official signaled touchdown. The Packers held on for victory and are now one game ahead of the Minnesota Vikings in the NFC North. The Chiefs still lead the AFC West.