Cambridge academics are calling for the reform of the university’s collegiate system after a don accused of sexually harassing 10 students was readmitted to his college less than two years after being permanently excluded. Dr Peter Hutchinson was banned from Trinity Hall two years ago following allegations he breached a ban preventing him from teaching undergraduates. This sanction was placed on him following an internal investigation into claims he sexually harassed students in 2014 and 2015. But the college has now said its earlier statement announcing Hutchinson would be “permanently withdrawing from college life” was “incorrect”. “Dr Hutchinson will continue to attend certain college events and to exercise his dining rights, but will not attend events primarily aimed at students or alumni except by agreement with the college,” the college added in a statement. Hutchinson automatically became a professor emeritus upon his retirement and would be able to enjoy the “rights and privileges” associated with this honour, it said. Cleodie Rickard, 23, was among the 10 students in August 2015 who detailed separate incidents of “inappropriate, sexual and sexist comments” that Hutchinson allegedly made in 2014 and 2015 in seminars, supervisions and other teaching sessions and social events at the college. “I am absolutely outraged and insulted that [the] college would believe this would pass us by and we would not act on the news,” she said. “I am incredibly disheartened that yet again, after a four-year process to get him removed, the forces of power and patronage win out over empty commitments to zero tolerance and support and safety for students of the college.” Rickard added that the college had not yet notified her of its decision and felt as if its reputational concerns outweighed any genuine concern for her wellbeing. Another complainant, Ellie Pyemont, tweeted that those who had experienced sexual misconduct while at Trinity Hall “have been treated appallingly”. “I’m sorry that the college ignored red flags & instead appear to have allowed ‘acquittal tea parties’ in their grounds after he was acquitted of sexually assaulting me in 2005.” The latest news comes after the University of Cambridge made efforts to improve its central procedures amid a recent scandal over how it has handled sexual harassment complaints. Human rights barrister Dr Charlotte Proudman, a junior research fellow at Queen’s College, called Hutchinson’s reinstatement a “slap in the face for survivors of sexual harassment”. She added: “The college has given fellows a licence to abuse their power with impunity. Women students are not safe in their own colleges! “Next time the college could be responsible for irreparable harm. We need urgent reform.” On Sunday more than 70 current and former Trinity Hall students, fellows and staff had signed a draft open letter calling for Hutchinson’s removal. It also calls for the college to “critically review” how it deals with cases of sexual harassment and assault and publish the results transparently as well as giving tutors training on how to support student victims. Dr Priyamvada Gopal, a reader at Cambridge’s English Faculty, said that there was more chance of a “predatory culture” flourishing in colleges because it could not be addressed by the university centrally. “Colleges often tend to act in ways that counter the central university’s efforts to address problems, including around sexual harassment,” she said. “It is time for the university to take a more proactive role in addressing collegiate culture and its abuses. Collegiate autonomy acts to cover a multitude of sins and this won’t wash in the long run.” “Without further reforms and clear safeguards, including external monitoring, the safety conditions of students vulnerable to sexual harassment will not improve.” Her views were echoed by Dr Tiffany Page, a University of Cambridge sociology lecturer, who said that students are being failed by colleges’ “lack of procedures for dealing with staff sexual misconduct”. “There is a complete lack of accountability for decisions made and students are not the priority at Trinity Hall,” she said. “Peter Hutchinson should be removed as an emeritus fellow through his misconduct and there should be policy in place to ensure this never happens again. “The spotlight needs to be shined on Cambridge colleges, which have so far managed to escape investigation into their treatment of students and accountability for preventing sexual misconduct and other forms of discrimination against their students.” When asked if there is any means by which University of Cambridge could intervene in the college’s decision, a spokeswoman said: “The colleges are all semi-autonomous. The college has made [its] decision. The central university is not involved.” Trinity Hall has been approached for further comment.