George Monbiot nails it (Why ‘the will of the people’ is a myth in British democracy, Journal, 24 October). The impasse of the last three years – and the Sturm und Drang that has accompanied it – is not just down to recalcitrant MPs or any one party (although some bear more responsibility than others). No, it’s the inevitable fallout of a system that sees us trudge to polling stations every once in a while to cast a vote based on sexed-up manifestoes promising the world. For some, it’s a vote with the gut rather than the heart or the head. For others, it’s simply about the candidate they hate the least, or a tactical vote. And then, with the exception of the politicos and the permanently engaged, once that deed is done, it’s back to day-to-day life, as if that’s somehow divorced from the act of voting. The Brexit vote is that travesty on steroids. That its political resolution has now been framed as an act of faith in democracy is ironic; it’s as far from true participatory democracy as you can get. This is democracy in name only.Colin MontgomeryEdinburgh • George Monbiot’s ideas for democracy deserve implementation. Two further advances must be made for this to happen. 1) All children, from the age of five, should enjoy lessons in citizenship. At the early stage this might be the teachers asking the children: Why am I here? Why are you here? Who pays me to be here to teach you? What is the point of learning for when you are older? Citizenship should continue almost as a “fun” lesson, or at least an enjoyable one, so that, if done well (and we have thousands of teachers who would do this to perfection), politics would generate the same excitement as sport, for example. 2) Sound information is grievously lacking to the public because the media (present company excluded) are more concerned with making money than imparting truth. Censorship would be abhorrent, but means and funds must be found to ensure that every citizen has the fullest understanding of the issues and the people they have the right to vote for. Full democracy depends on the right to vote and all the information needed for that choice to be meaningful.Dr Ian FlintoffOxford • George Monbiot’s critique of British democracy cites the experience of the Brazilian city of Porto Alegre, but he makes no reference to local government in the UK. Anyone looking to place “radical democratic reform” at the heart of a manifesto should surely seek to enhance the role and the resources of democratically elected councils and their members.Jeremy BeechamLabour, House of Lords • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition