Ireland have expressed concerns about the state of the pitch before Saturday’s decisive Pool A World Cup match with Samoa at the Fukuoka Hakatanomori Stadium. Greg Feek, the scrum coach, revealed World Rugby has given both teams “assurances” the surface remains safe, however. Large swathes of the turf were relaid following Italy’s win over Canada, and then again after France dispatched the USA. Joe Schmidt appeared frustrated at the Ireland captain’s run on Friday, however. The Ireland head coach spent several minutes examining problematic-looking strips of turf, showing several areas to Feek and Ireland’s head of operations, Ger Carmody. “They told us in an email, both teams know about it,” Feek said. “We knew they had to re-lay the pitch. So we just went out there, had an inspection and we’ve been given all the assurances by World Rugby that it’s safe to play on – that’s all we can ask for. “Obviously I don’t want to predict anything or cause any more controversy at this stage. We just try to back the players … trust that the pitch will do its job. We were trying to alleviate any concerns when we were out there, but then it’s just a matter of wait and see. The referee will be aware of it, and what’s key is the communication is there.” Asked whether scrummaging could prove to be the biggest problem, Feek replied: “That’s always my concern, no matter whether it’s training or on the match pitch. When it comes to a static isometric position where there’s a couple of big packs going at it you’re always going to be cautious and ask the questions. So we’ve just got to prepare our guys as best we can but make sure the scrums stay up, not just for safety but also for the match too.” The Ireland coach has made 11 changes from the side that beat Russia, as he did for that match after losing to Japan. The four players who remain are Tadhg Beirne, who moves from lock to flanker, the fly-half Johnny Sexton, Bundee Aki in the centre and the wing Keith Earls. The Irish must beat Samoa with a bonus point to guarantee a place in the quarter-finals. Scotland’s final Pool A game, against Japan on Sunday, remains under threat of cancellation because of Typhoon Hagibis. That would result in both teams being awarded two points, leaving Ireland unable to leapfrog Japan to top the pool, so even a bonus-point win over Samoa would then tee up a last-eight meeting with New Zealand. Ireland’s strongest grievance with the pitch centres on player safety, with very obvious joins in the sections of turf creating problems for footing or stray studs. The wing Earls, however, suggested the surface perhaps looks more problematic than it feels underfoot. “It doesn’t look great to be honest with you, but it’s flat and quite firm. It doesn’t feel too bad to run on. It’s been inspected and deemed playable and that’s the way it felt out there today. It’s going to be the same for both teams, and we’ll just have to get on with the job.”