Luigi Manzi must be spinning in his grave. One hundred and sixty-eight years after launching the first commercial sambuca, the reputation of this boisterous booze hit a new low this week. Footage went viral showing a group of posh blokes straight out of central casting using it to set each other’s hair on fire as part of a drinking game. That is very sambuca, you may think. From its 1970s height as an ingredient in dubious shooters such as the slippery nipple (sambuca and Irish cream liqueur), to its modern role as a cheap student union staple, this sweet, star anise-flavoured liqueur has become a byword for, if not outright stupidity, then the trend of drinking to get drunk. But could sambuca – like the highly gentrified gins of today – ever be classy? It has the glamorous history, at least. Thanks to the marketing nous of the Molinari brand, in the 1960s sambuca was emblematic of la dolce vita in its native Italy, and became a favourite with stars such as Anita Ekberg. It was common in bars on Rome’s fashionable Via Veneto, where the con la mosca or “with the fly” coffee-bean serving emerged. Chewing the beans took the edge off its sweetness. “I have a tot of sambuca in my espresso every morning, instead of sugar,” says Gip Dammone, the co-owner of Salvo’s Italian restaurant in Leeds, adding that many Italians do the same. “But I don’t really see people drinking sambuca after dinner. Everyone is drinking bitter digestifs such as Fernet-Branca.” However, it was never a mainstream choice of tipple. Even when Dammone was working in 1970s Salerno, sambuca was only moderately popular and he never saw anyone set it alight (which is reputedly to roast the coffee beans). “Sambuca is something Brits drink, really, isn’t it? But where we used to give sambuca away like water at Salvo’s, it has been overtaken by limoncello.” Will sambuca ever be reclaimed by hip bartenders? Jack Wakelin, the manager at Sheffield’s award-winning Public bar, thinks not. “Low-alcohol serves are on trend and another anise spirit, pastis, has had a small resurgence – it is delicious with soda and cucumber. But I can’t see that catching on with sambuca.” Why? We all have teenage memories, says Wakelin, of drinking “endless trays of £1 shots”, and deathly mornings after. “There are just too many war wounds,” he says.