On January 25, a bus carrying the North Korean hockey players crossed into South Korea at 9:21 in the morning. Roads were blocked off for miles to provide an uninterrupted ride, but that did not prevent a horde of news vans and helicopters documenting their path from above and alongside, creating a scene not unlike how American cameras infamously chased OJ Simpson’s white Bronco. After passing through a Customs, Immigration and Quarantine office in Paju, northwest of Seoul, it took about another three hours until the convoy arrived in Jincheon. Bundled up in navy parkas on a sun-filled, although briskly chilly and windy afternoon, the South Korean players lined up and stood waiting outside their training facility. Many were shivering cold in the 18-degree weather but were unable to put their hands in their pockets since they were holding small bouquets of yellow, blue and pink flowers that they had been instructed to give their new teammates upon their arrival. There was no excitement, no anticipation. “I was just thinking if they were going to come, then come quickly,” Han Do-hee said. After North Korea’s white bus pulled into the Jincheon training center parking lot, the team filed off slowly, led by their coach, Pak Chol-ho, a forty-eight-year-old with short black hair and the glint of a mustache on an otherwise unscathed tan complexion. His presence was disconcerting to some of the media, hearing rumors that he was a strict disciplinarian and could potentially challenge Murray’s authority. Coach Pak, who stood only a few inches taller than Murray, competed for the North Korean men’s national team in the late 1990s and later coached the men’s team. With such a pedigree, he did not seem like the type of proud competitor to just step aside for a twenty-nine-year-old female foreigner. Once the entire delegation of North Koreans came off the bus, each wearing long parkas swirled in white, red and blue stripes and reading DPR KOREA in large red letters on the back, they lined up across from the South Korean team. For a brief moment they stared into each other’s eyes, unsure of what to say, curious what the person standing in front of them was thinking. In the moments before the North Koreans arrived, Susie Jo worried that there’d be conflict between the two teams, and it did almost look as if they were two gangs ready to engage in battle. Finally, Sojung stepped forward with her flowers, followed by her teammates, and quietly they bowed and offered greetings of “Nice to meet you” or “Welcome.” Still, players like Dohee were nervous, even scared in the presence of North Koreans after previous icy interactions at World Championship tournaments. Palpably tense, the two sides stood across from each other for a few more moments. “It was just so weird and formal and everyone knew we were going to be on the nightly news and we have to put on this show, and there was all this planning of who was going to give them the flowers,” griped Randi. “It felt so fake.” Perhaps the only player not overcome with uncertainty was Grace. While back with her family in Colorado, Grace saw that unified team rumors were heating up again and texted Randi and Marissa, gauging their opinions. Her two older teammates were still wary to believe the news, but Grace was confident that a merger was going to happen. Throughout the week she sent them updates, increasing her conviction, but not theirs. On her plane ride back to South Korea, Grace was the only import not struck by fear. She couldn’t wait to see Marissa and Randi again to tell them that she was right all along. “Both of them texted me and were like, it’s not happening, no, you’re wrong,” Grace remembered. “I’m like, when we go back to Korea you’ll see. I was pretty happy to be right.” Now, face-to-face with the North Koreans, Grace became awestruck. “When they first got off the bus, my first reaction was like, ‘Oh, my God, they’re from North Korea,’ which is something not a regular person gets to see every day,” Grace said. “That was really cool.” To break the tension, journalists requested that the two teams take a picture. They bunched together uncomfortably like in an elementary school class photo and were told to shout, “We are one!” It was a moment of propaganda sent around the world, but at the time the players did not think much about it. “Before we introduced ourselves to each other, I was angry,” said Eom Su-yeon, who was rarely not flashing her dimples. “Not at the players, but at the government and the people who organized this. The North Koreans, I knew they weren’t bad people. I thought some probably didn’t want to come here, either.” Still unsure what to make of each other, the teams finally entered the training facility. It was time to get down to the real business at hand, at least in the minds of the South Korean players, if not anyone else in the country. Murray had arranged the locker room to ensure two South Korean player stalls sandwiched every one of the North Koreans’. The two sides began making informal introductions, resembling a speed-dating session. As Murray began taking note of the new additions, she realized there was an abundance of forwards—nine in total—and only two defenders and one goaltender. Murray had repeated her desire for defensive players to South Korean Olympic officials. In particular, she liked Kim Nong-gum and Won Cholsun, a defender who stayed on the ice after stopping a slap shot with her face during the April game at the World Championships. Neither was among the selected group. That was not the only glitch. Susie knew she was now going to have to translate Murray’s messages to twelve more teammates whom she assumed spoke no English, which could lead to twelve more sets of questions. Then Susie discovered the North Koreans didn’t even use the same hockey terms as the South Koreans. The locker room now not only had two teams, but essentially three languages. The South Koreans used mostly English terms for hockey vocabulary. While the North Koreans used Korean words, they were very direct in their meaning and not formed in a traditional hockey parlance. For example, if a North Korean wanted to say “pass,” they’d say something along the lines of “contact me,” which a South Korean could understand, but not in its context. As frustration mounted, Lee Ji-yoon, the team manager, along with the assistance of some South Korean players, rushed to print sheets of paper and created a makeshift dictionary with more than seventy entries, with the North Korean term for a word next to the English-style hockey word the South Koreans used, written in both English and Korean. Since it was more difficult for the North Koreans to learn a new English vocabulary, many of the South Korean players stuck individual notes on their lockers to study North Korean colloquialisms. Susie also simplified phrases, telling the North Koreans “five versus four” for a power play. “In the beginning it felt like a burden because I was busy with my own responsibilities,” Susie said. “When we first met, we were very divided and I didn’t feel any kind of sympathy or friendship. But after a while, watching the North Koreans trying to learn South Korean terms, I felt more of an urge to help them out. I started realizing the North Korean team is there because of their government, as well. Who knows if they are there if they want to be? I realized the North Korean players, they’re also kind, innocent and warm.” Throughout the day, members of the South Korean team realized they needed to take the lead to create chemistry. Dohee began making the occasional joke to lighten up the mood and the imports, reminded of the generosity of Minji, YeEun, Susie, Sojung and Ko Hye-in early on, felt the need to reciprocate. “I could definitely relate,” Marissa said. “I tried to put myself in their shoes. They’re coming into a team, the language is quite different. I was like, okay, make them feel welcome like the South Koreans did for you. Look where you’re at now, look at the relationships you’ve built. Try and instill that.” Earlier in the afternoon, Marissa had noted during the arrival ceremony that one North Korean player stood out from the group, because she was the only one who seemed unabashedly overtaken by joy. Later, Marissa learned her name was Kim Un-jong, she was the same age as her, twenty-five, and that she first began playing hockey at an outdoor rink near Taesongsan mountain in Pyongyang. “She was the most smiley,” Marissa said. “I was like, ooh, I like her.” That evening, when Marissa arrived early to a meeting with Grace, Un Jong was already there, sitting down, still flashing a radiant, huge grin. Marissa couldn’t resist any longer and pointed, then waved to Un Jong to come over and sit next to her, which she gladly did. “This was the first day so everyone was nervous, kind of shy, kind of timid, but this girl was so happy to be here and she couldn’t stop smiling,” Grace confirmed. After the final meeting, the South Koreans were excused but the North Koreans were told to remain for further lessons on the team’s playbook. After Marissa took in Un Jong, Grace asked Hyein, her roommate at Jincheon, to similarly engage other North Korean players. When Hyein wavered, Grace grabbed her hand and forced her to stay behind and introduce themselves to their new colleagues. “Just because I know how it kind of feels coming onto the team late,” Grace said. “I knew some people weren’t happy about my arrival, so I knew some people weren’t happy with the North Koreans’ arrival, too. I guess it was just trying to make them feel like it was fine.” For almost twelve hours, South Korean news media waited outside the training center for the first day’s orientation to end. They talked about how earlier in the afternoon, many of the faces that stepped off the North Korean bus showed no emotion. Now, there was a buoyancy in the North Korean players’ steps as they funneled back outside to head to the separate residency in Jincheon where they stayed for the next two weeks. As their bus pulled away, one videographer caught Un Jong smiling through the bus window, waving at the camera. Over the next four days, two North Korean players – Jin Ok and Choe Un-gyong – had birthdays. The team celebrated with cakes and even wiped vanilla icing on the birthday girls’ faces, then sang “Happy Birthday” as Ok and Un Gyong blew out their candles. The South Korean government and Olympic officials aggressively pushed out photos of the moment, a sign that the miracle of sport and peace was happening and that they were justified all along in forcing this never before seen mix of sports and politics. “This is exactly what the Olympic Games and Olympic spirit are about,” proclaimed Thomas Bach, president of the IOC. “You can see at the beginning that there may have been some skepticism among each other. These players arrived, and they got to know each other. They were training together, and a couple of days later, they were celebrating birthday[s] in such a way. If someone asks you, ‘What’s the Olympic spirit?’ This is it.”