Sporting perfection is uncommonly rare. Occasionally in tennis or golf someone such as Roger Federer or Tiger Woods will strike a ball so sweetly it feels as if a higher power is involved. In a team game such as rugby union, with so many different moving parts, it is even harder. For everything to click for 80 minutes is meant to be an impossible dream. Eddie Jones has been wrestling with this inherent challenge for much of his career. Three years ago he decided to address the subject with his players, using gymnastics as a case study. “We spoke about Nadia Comaneci,” he revealed. “No one thinks you can play the perfect game of rugby. Well, no one thought you could get 10 out of 10 in gymnastics. Why not aspire to play the perfect game? Imagine a game where England goes out and from the first to the 80th minute they have total control. What a great dream to have.” And lo, it has finally come to pass. Multiple former internationals, opponents and seasoned onlookers have described the semi-final victory against New Zealand on Saturday as the best English performance they have seen. All of them are right. To play this well in a World Cup knockout contest against a hitherto dominant All Black side was genuinely extraordinary. For Jones it justified everything he has been tirelessly working towards for four years. Even allowing for Japan’s famous pool win over South Africa in 2015, his supporting role in the Springboks’ 2007 World Cup triumph and Australia’s semi-final ambush of New Zealand in 2003, this was surely his finest hour. Comparing such achievements is for others – “We’re not historians, mate” – but England’s wizard of Oz now has a permanent seat in the tracksuited hall of fame. Because, make no mistake, this ranked among the most dominant World Cup displays by any British side in any sport. Some of us have long believed English rugby’s all‑time high came against Australia in Melbourne in June 2003, a few months before they won the World Cup. The resilience shown in defeating New Zealand in Wellington that same summer bore the same stamp of greatness and, on a couple of occasions, they have been spectacularly good in Dublin. Then there was 1936 when Prince Alexander Obolensky scored two tries in a 13-0 victory over New Zealand at Twickenham, England’s first success against the All Blacks. Eighty-three years on, even Obolensky has been overhauled. If Tom Curry does not get you, Sam Underhill will. Even if opponents can escape from Maro Itoje’s octopus-like clutches, they still have to shift the immovable Vunipola brothers and drain the warrior spirit of Owen Farrell. England have long had the ingredients of a fine side and, in the nick of time, it is all coming together. For that, Jones and his lieutenants John Mitchell, Steve Borthwick and Scott Wisemantel deserve as much credit as the players. Aspects of the gameplan on Saturday were so intensively choreographed they almost made Comaneci look underprepared. Asked to describe Borthwick’s strategic input, Itoje did not hesitate: “He has made a career of lineouts. He is the professor. If there was a PhD in lineouts he would be a double PhD.” Mitchell, for his part, has added an extra layer of defensive steel while it is sometimes overlooked how much England’s fortunes have perked up since Wisemantel was drafted in as an attack consultant in the middle of last year. The Eddie project had started to wobble and the squad had just trailed in fifth in the 2018 Six Nations. Although they lost the opening two Tests of their subsequent three-Test series to South Africa, it was a tour which marked a change in attitude. With Mitchell also jumping aboard that autumn, Jones has had more top-level experience at his elbow. As recently as March, even so, England were still allowing a huge lead to slip against Scotland, with their on-field leadership and discipline clearly a concern. And now? There is far more collective responsibility, with Ben Youngs and George Ford addressing the team huddle to stress the job remained incomplete even before Farrell finished his TV interview duties. While other teams have bowed to the crowd after matches, England have so far deliberately declined to do so. Within the squad it has been agreed they will not bow until their tournament is over and they are, literally, bowing out. It is another example of the collective calmness that was missing even six months ago. For Jones, amid all the hoopla, it is the absolute key to England’s new‑found control and authority. “You can create an environment [as a coach] but then it comes down to leadership on the field. I couldn’t be more effusive in my praise for the leadership of the team. They were outstanding, the way they kept driving the team forward.” There was also a clear understanding of precisely what it would take to beat the All Blacks. As Jones put it: “A Test match against New Zealand is like the start of a Formula One race. If you’re not ready to go you’ll get left behind. We had to come out of the blocks hard early and establish some physical and mental ascendancy. You don’t win the game there but it puts you in a good position.” The V-shaped response to the pre‑match haka was all part of the same mindset – Farrell and his side were in no mood to stand meekly in a line and give the All Blacks carte blanche to seize the psychological initiative. Along with England’s overwhelming dominance in the game’s first seven minutes, which included Manu Tuilagi’s second‑minute try, it seemed to ruffle New Zealand from the outset. Tactically the All Blacks were also wrongfooted, with Hansen conceding another specialist flanker would have been restored to their starting XV “if we had our time again”. Either way, the outcome would probably have been no different. It is not every day England wake up the next morning to the realisation they could conceivably have beaten New Zealand by 30 points, even with Farrell, Jonny May and one or two others limping. There is just one nagging question, notwithstanding the various bumps and sprains which will require further assessment over the next 24 hours. Have England peaked a week too soon? Perfection can be a harsh mistress and, in sport, what unfolds one weekend is not necessarily replicated the next. It is tough, even so, to unearth any areas where Jones’s side came up short against New Zealand, aside from the minor infractions which ruled out two potential tries and the lineout malfunction which gifted the All Blacks their solitary score. Hard, fast, aggressive, dynamic, dominant, smart, fit, relentless ... the oval-ball thesaurus took as much of a pounding on Saturday night as the All Blacks pack. There will be plenty of sore bodies for the next couple of days but, ultimately, their next challenge will be mental. “If you are in a World Cup final you will find something even if you have nothing,” said Itoje. “You dream of being involved in weeks like this.” England’s pursuit of absolute perfection has another 80 minutes still to go.