The stepson of a Slovakian woman who survived Auschwitz, only to be sent to a Soviet gulag, has branded the novelist Heather Morris’s “lurid and titillating” version of his stepmother’s story “appalling and extremely hurtful”. Morris’s global bestseller The Tattooist of Auschwitz is a novel based on the story of the Slovakian Jew Lale Sokolov, who told Morris how he fell in love with a woman he tattooed while he was in the concentration camp. That book has already drawn stinging condemnation from the Auschwitz Memorial, which said in a detailed report earlier this year that the book “contains numerous errors and information inconsistent with the facts, as well as exaggerations, misinterpretations and understatements”. One particular area of concern for the Memorial was a character in the novel called Cilka Klein, who has a sexual relationship with the head of the camp SS-Obersturmführer Johann Schwarzhuber – something the Memorial said the possibility of was “non-existent”. Now Morris’s sequel to The Tattooist of Auschwitz, Cilka’s Journey, has been denounced by George Kovach, stepson of Cecilia Kovachova, upon whose story the novel is based. The book claims to be both “based on the heartbreaking true story” of Kovachova/Klein and “a work of fiction”. Kovach has described the portrait of his stepmother as “appalling and extremely hurtful” in a letter from his lawyers to Morris’s American publishers. “It has nothing to do with the Cecilia that he knew, or her history as she recounted it to him,” says the letter, which goes on to list “two of the most egregious … errors” in the book: the “false” and “patently absurd” storyline that Cilka is “presented as being the mistress of not one but two high-ranking SS camp commanders”, and that Cilka “allegedly steals drugs from the Vorkuta camp hospital (supposedly to protect her reputation)”. “This gulag hospital had very few drugs for its prisoner patients. If this had been true, can you imagine the suffering and deaths that would have been on Cilka’s conscience?” say Kovach’s lawyers. “His stepmother, who later worked as a senior government accountant, had a reputation in Slovakia for incorruptibility. The idea that she would steal drugs from desperate patients would have devastated her.” Kovach’s father, Ivan Kovach, met Kovachova when they were prisoners in the Vorkuta gulag in northern Russia. Kovach told the Times of Israel that his father was arrested in Czechoslovakia in 1948. He and his mother escaped to the west, and he didn’t see his father again until he was an adult, when he also met Kovachova and learned of her story. Kovach said he met Morris last April, when she asked him to contribute pictures and an afterword to Cilka’s Journey. But after hearing her read extracts, he told her publishers that the novel might infringe on his rights. According to Kovach, Morris subsequently removed his father, Ivan Kovach, from the book, replacing him with the character of Alexandr. “I have not included the name of the man she (Cilka) met in Vorkuta and married, in order to protect the privacy of his descendants,” Morris writes in an afterword. But she left her portrait of Cilka in the novel. After hearing excerpts from the manuscript of Cilka’s Journey and reading The Tattooist of Auschwitz, Kovach told the Guardian, “I decided not to be associated with this project in any way. It was the characterisation of my stepmother in Tattooist as the sex slave of SS-Obersturmführer Schwarzhuber that appalled me. Of course, in Cilka’s Journey, she also makes Cecilia (Cilka) the sex slave of Anton Taube, another SS commander at Auschwitz.” Kovach admitted it is not “realistic to hope for the publication to be halted”. “What I would like is for them [Heather Morris and St Martin’s Press] to publicise that this work is 99% fiction and to apologise for the treatment of my stepmother,” he said. Ten per cent of the revenues should be donated to the Solzhenitsyn Fund or the Russian gulag organisation Memorial, he continued. “As I’ve said to them numerous times, I am not interested in any money for myself and I will not accept any money for this misbegotten project.” The Slovakian writer Peter Juscak interviewed Kovachova about her experiences, and said he met Morris twice when she was researching the novel: “At the second meeting I warned her that she did not know the story of Cilka … and her writing would be problematic. At that time she was already completing the novel about Cilka.” Morris’s UK publisher Bonnier Zaffre defended the novel: “Cilka’s Journey is a work of fiction, and it is based on the memories of survivors who knew Cilka at the time these events are described, in particular, Lale Sokolov, the Tattooist of Auschwitz, who regarded Cilka as ‘the bravest person’ he had ever met.” The publisher said Morris was a regular donor to many charities, and that conversations about making donations to the charities suggested by Kovach were “ongoing and under consideration”. “Heather is a fiction writer, not a historian,” the publisher said. “This is a novel based around real people and events, as are many other works of fiction.” In an introduction to Cilka’s Journey, Morris writes that the book is “based on what I learnt from the first-hand testimony of Lale Sokolov … from the testimony of others who knew [Kovachova], and from my own research”. “Although it weaves together facts and reportage with the experiences of women survivors of the Holocaust, and the experiences of women sent to the Soviet Gulag system at the end of the second world war, it is a novel and does not represent the entire facts of Cilka’s life,” she adds, ending with the hope “that further details about Cilka and those who once knew her will continue to come to light once the book is published”.