What were you hoping for?A good connection, some lols and a free meal. First impressions?Bit shy, but very warm. The fact he got up to give me a hug was a massive plus. What did you talk about?Chocolate bars, artificial intelligence, gay Twitter. He showed me a picture of his swollen neck when he got mumps. That was a highlight. Any awkward moments?When I told the waiter we’d already ordered when we hadn’t. Everyone looked a bit confused. Good table manners?10/10. Best thing about Chris?He had a great sense of humour, and an overwhelming love for Nadine Coyle. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yeah, he was great craic. Describe Chris in three words?Witty, warm, genuine. What do you think he made of you?He brought up the subject of fetishes, so I assume he was comfortable around me. Did you go on somewhere?For a pint at the pub around the corner. And... did you kiss?On the cheek. It was a rather rushed goodbye on a crowded bus. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Perhaps we would have carried on to a karaoke bar. Marks out of 10?Solid 7.5. Would you meet again?As mates, for sure. What were you hoping for?A 6ft 2in rugby-playing Irishman with good facial hair. First impressions?A 6ft 2in(ish) bold-shirted Brummie with good facial hair. What did you talk about?Hampstead Heath ponds, Snobs, Nadine Coyle’s accent, the art of poaching an egg and Rebekah Vardy. Any awkward moments?Not that I can recall. Good table manners?Joe was very good at keeping my wine topped up, and shared food impeccably. He did go to the toilet while we were still eating, though. Best thing about Joe?Enormously talkative, an easy laugh and very laid-back. Would you introduce him to your friends?I think they’d get on! Describe Joe in three words?Creative, warm, ambitious. What do you think he made of you?A bit obsessed with getting as much free food out of the Guardian as possible. Did you go on somewhere?To a pub for one more. And... did you kiss?A peck on the cheek on the bus. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I would have gotten more free food. Marks out of 10?7. Would you meet again?We have messaged but I don’t think there was a romantic vibe. • Joe and Chris ate at Brother Marcus, London N1.Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com