Your article (The sexy secrets hidden in great art, G2, 29 October) has Caravaggio “laying with” his pupil Cecco. Laying what? Eggs, the table? Clearly lying with, or just laying Cecco, to use the current vernacular, is what is intended. Perhaps it’s not strange for lying and laying to be confused so often, given the present political situation. In some areas of the press, being lied to and/or getting laid by eminent parliamentarians seem to be much the same thing, but then it is called being screwed.Terry MelvillePudsey, West Yorkshire • As parliament breaks up, I will miss reading about Classic Dom (Sketch, 30 October). Here in Welsh-speaking Wales “dom” is what my horses produce and I have been spreading on my kitchen garden ready for the next growing season (dictionary definition: pentwr o dom = heap of dung). I hope to see Classic Dom consigned to history by Christmas, but will be reminded of his exploits as I eat my leeks. Thank you, John Crace.Judith WainwrightPontfaen, Pembrokeshire • I cannot believe that your article about how climate change will affect voting (30 October) didn’t even mention the Labour party and the fact that they adopted the Green New Deal at their conference.Annie TunnicliffeLondon • England does not have the haka as its indigenous heritage (Verdict, 29 October) but if the World Cup team perform a morris dance before the final it might be worth a couple of tries before the South Africans recover their composure.David RobinsonKingston upon Thames, London • Hot priest costume for Halloween (Style, G2, 30 October)? Come to church and meet the real thing – wearing the costume properly and not back to front as in your photo.Canon Chris OxleyFoxton, Leicestershire • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition