Sean wasn’t always a monarchist. The history graduate student, who’s in his early 20s, grew up Catholic in central Massachusetts in what he described as “a pretty staunch Republican household”. But in college, a love of history, particularly the Roman Empire, ultimately drew him to monarchism and away from what he described as the “rah-rah American republicanism” of his childhood. “Most people tend to get more liberal in college,” he told me. While earning his undergraduate degree at a Catholic liberal arts school close to where he grew up, he explained: “I ended up looking into medieval political theory and getting more conservative. The monarchies I find most interesting and think we should replicate go back to the late Middle Ages.” Sean’s views shifted not only thanks to his medieval studies, but also after learning more about US foreign policy. “Having a background in history, I naturally gravitated toward monarchism because I felt that my national government wasn’t looking at issues of public welfare or national coherence or national unity,” he said. “Our political system has been irrevocably poisoned by political partisanship.” I connected with Sean through the message boards of r/monarchism, a growing and diverse community of monarchy-lovers on Reddit that boasts almost 10,000 members, and touts itself as “a forum for those who think monarchy is a noble and viable alternative to the crude and materialistic mob mentality of republicanism”. These message boards feature a glut of inspirational images of various monarchs: King George VI going down a slide, Swedish King Carl XVI Gustav, Prince William and his family, and Tsar Nicholas II. Monarchism is still active in around 40 countries, and whatever you may think of the practice, Sean’s analysis of the brokenness of our system is spot on. In the United States, the political atmosphere has been totally spoiled by radical divisiveness – a fact exacerbated by Donald Trump’s ascent into the Oval Office. The notion that something is deeply wrong with how our government works is inescapable, so it’s no surprise that people are searching for alternative ideologies. When you think of monarchy, you might think of an inbred Habsburg – the family’s distinctive jaw, how generations of rulers crippled by a variety of diseases due to their tendency to marry within the immediate family. But for Sean and other members of the subreddit, monarchism is not merely about having a supreme ruler and an inherited throne. Most members of the community deplore authoritarian regimes. They aren’t simply searching for order via a supreme leader, but a return to tradition. “A monarchy is based around the nation showing respect for its past, its people and the culture,” one Reddit user explained. I went full turncoat when I saw how moronically people were treating politics after 2016 and realized that our current system was breeding a bunch of nutjobs Of course, there are many different kinds of monarchists. There are the absolutists who tend to favor hereditary supreme rule, and there are those who think the ideal form of government is close to what Great Britain has right now (a democracy paired with a monarch who serves a ceremonial role as head of state). For many, monarchy offers up an alternative to other radical political factions. “I had a [real] disdain for liberalism and democracy in general,” an absolute monarchist from Germany told me on Reddit. “At first I actually identified with [Nazism] given my family’s history (cringe, I know) then I ditched that and was looking for something that really suited me and absolutism did just that, which led to monarchism by reading many works from respected authors.” For an American monarchist like Sean, his preferred system of government “is some manner of elective monarchy modeled to a degree after what you saw in the Holy Roman Empire”, he told me. “The individual governor of each of the 50 states could vote amongst themselves on a new monarch in the event of an emperor stepping down … One of the reasons that I, and many others, favor monarchy, has to do with the benefits that a single individual can have when it comes to matters of foreign policy, international relations, international trade, et cetera.” Others were drawn to monarchy more explicitly because of Trump. One self-identified American semi-constitutionalist explained: “I always had some monarchist sympathies, but I went full turncoat when I saw how moronically people were treating politics after 2016 and realized that our current system was breeding a bunch of nutjobs. After that I became convinced that a monarch or something is needed to keep politicians and the like in check.” *** “Historical amnesia,” Sean Yom, an associate professor of political science at Temple University told me, when I asked him what might possess someone to become a monarchist in 2019. “There’s a collective amnesia about how bad certain kinds of political systems really were.” Yom specifically studies contemporary Middle Eastern monarchies, and noted that many of the participants in the subreddit seemed to be “from fairly developed western countries where the notion of monarchism wrapped largely in warm historical overtones”. In 2018, the New York Times cited a study conducted by a professor at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania, which discovered “‘robust and quantitatively meaningful evidence’ that monarchies outperform other forms of government”, and provide nations with “stability that often translates into economic gains”. “I think it’s nostalgia,” Mauro Guillen, the Wharton professor who conducted the study, told me when I asked him why monarchy would appeal to a modern-day American or German. “They like the pomp and circumstance,” he said. “Maybe they’re traditionalists, and they like something that provides continuity.” He also pointed out that Hollywood, and specifically Disney, with its famous princesses, has been culturally influential when it comes to the public perception of a monarchical government. But the simple yearning for stability is a big reason why people who are not octogenarian royals are embracing this form of government. “When I was younger I thought monarchy was stupid and made no sense, like most children who were raised on republican (not the American political party) propaganda,” one Reddit user explained to me. “I can’t remember a specific moment when I thought for the first time, ‘monarchy is the best form of government,’ it was just a gradual change. Why am I a monarchist? I’m a monarchist because I believe that monarchy produces a stable government and unites a people, it produces leaders who were taught from birth to lead.”