It had been quiet. Too quiet. After more than two and a half days in a drug-induced coma, the Conservative party conference was slowly dying on its feet. One minister after another making a second-rate speech to a disengaged audience. Everyone in a state of denial that things could fall apart at any time. Geoffrey Clifton-Brown, the 66-year-old treasurer of the 1922 Committee of backbenchers, had merely been biding his time. You can just imagine how he did it: locked and loaded and buzzing with amphetamines, bursting into the international lounge with another guest. “Er, does your friend have a pass,” the security guard inquired. “Don’t you know who I am?” Geoff snapped. “You’ll never take me alive.” “Show me your pass.” “There will never be a border post here. I will not surrender.” In the life and death struggle that ensued, Psycho Geoff was finally overpowered and subdued. Police and paramedics were summoned, while a huge crowd of journalists looked on. It had been by far the most interesting thing that had happened throughout the entire conference. Thirty minutes later, Geoff was sent home. On the proviso he didn’t tell any other MPs, otherwise they’d all be getting tooled up. Anything to get away. Less than an hour after one of the party’s senior MPs had been brought to heel by a gang of coppers and kicked out, the afternoon session on law and order began in the main hall. Sometimes the political sketch can only be a transcription service. Last year’s conference break-out star, Geoffrey Cox, had been billed to speak but the attorney general has since been exiled for giving the government duff legal advice and the audience had to make do with the more mediocre talent of junior minister Kit Malthouse. “The 20,000 increase in police numbers will be the biggest expansion since …” the hapless Malthouse’s voice tailed away. Since the Tories had cut police numbers by 20,000 nine years ago. Priti Patel emerged to make her first conference speech as home secretary as if she was hosting a TV awards ceremony. All sparkly eyes and Colgate smiles. Ting! It was just a shame that she fought a losing battle with the autocue. Her dimness is a thing of wonder. Sentences died away, to be followed by long pauses. There were no gags because Priti doesn’t do gags. Not effective enough. She much prefers nooses. “Today, here in Manchester, the Conservative party takes its rightful place as the Party of Law and Order in Britain once again,” she began. Er … run that past us again, Priti. Psycho Geoff on his way home to the Cotswolds in the back of a police car under armed guard. The prime minister has been accused of groping two women at the same time and channelling public funds to a woman with whom he had an affair. The government judged by the supreme court to have acted unlawfully over prorogation. The full-on search to find a way of getting round the Benn Act. Mark Francois committing crimes against his own sanity. Right now, it was harder to find someone in the Tory party without serious form. And … smile. Patel carried on. She was going to clamp down on foreigners. Because the very idea of a home secretary with immigrant parents was totally unthinkable. And she’d be chucking out Sajid Javid. Not because he had Asian parents, but because he was a bit rubbish. “When it comes to the intelligence services … what can I say?” she continued. As it happened, nothing. Intelligence and Priti aren’t often found in the same sentence. The biggest irony lay in the subtext. The bottom line was there seemed to be no law that Patel would not break to get the UK out of the EU. Boris and the constitution could have a free pass. Brexit trumped everything. Whatever it took. Even starving out the Irish. The speech wasn’t about the rule of law: it was pure populism. She just about refrained from bringing back hanging but she left it open as a possibility. That could wait till next year. Come to think of it, maybe it was time to build some amphitheatres and feed remainers to the lions. There was no place for the north London metropolitan liberal elite, Priti insisted. Her smile still intact. That didn’t sound like good news for Boris or Dominic Cummings. Not that she cared. She ended her speech with a prayer to Margaret Thatcher. Where there is love, let me sow hatred. This drew the loudest applause of the entire conference. For all her faults, Thatcher would be turning in her grave. As she left the stage, the PA system played “She’s so Priti, oh so Priti … she’s va-cant.” Psycho Geoff meanwhile contemplated his first night in solitary.