When Gillian Darley told people she was writing a book about Essex, some responded by “muttering about white vans, fake tans and white stilettos”. Stereotypes about the county abound in the media, many crass and negative. Some of her interviewees were proud of their Essex background, but others “admitted shame at their place of birth”. I grew up in Romford and this sense of ambivalence about origins is familiar to me. As Darley points out, Romford was absorbed into the amorphous subtopian sprawl of London in 1965. However, like Ian Dury – the self-styled lord of Upminster, which is near Romford – I have always felt my roots were in Essex. The cultural stereotypes range from Harry Enfield’s foul-mouthed plasterer Loadsamoney (“I’ve got piles”) in the 1980s, the sitcom Birds of a Feather, about the adventures of Chigwell residents Sharon and Tracey, whose husbands are doing time for armed robbery, and Simon Heffer’s coinage in the 1990s of “Essex Man” (someone “young, industrious, mildly brutish and culturally barren”), to the reality TV show The Only Way is Essex, set in and around Brentwood, against “the backdrop of cars, bars and designer gear”. When Darley told people what she was writing, people 'muttered about white vans, fake tans and white stilettoes' Darley’s personal exploration is the ideal antidote to platitudes and prejudice; it is the celebration that the Essex diaspora has been waiting for: “This is an upbeat book about Essex, somewhere many people would prefer to overlook, or demean with a handful of tired clichés.” As Darley– who grew up on the Essex-Suffolk border – rightly says, there is something “uncharted and insoluble” about the region. This is a part of England filled with “intense energy, a mood of dynamism and optimism”, a place where many voted in the referendum for Brexit but which has long welcomed newcomers, both from across the North Sea and from the ever-growing metropolis of London – the “monstrous town” as Conrad terms it in The Heart of Darkness, which begins in a yacht moored in the Thames off Canvey Island. The county has also offered a fertile seedbed in which radical ideas can grow. There is a surprisingly rich utopian tradition in Essex, from the Puritans who sailed to the New World in the 17th century (“Essex Puritanism became the foundation stone of America’s economy and theology”) to the land colony established near Purleigh by Tolstoyan anarchists in 1896: “Activists and campaigners, many of them women, found Essex a convenient and, sometimes, fruitful launch-pad for changing society, as well as a discreet place to live in alternative fashion.” This is a well written mix of travelogue and memoir, filled with genuine feeling for Essex people and places – for instance, such entrepreneurs as Frank Crittall, who took advantage of the Great English Earthquake that shook Colchester in 1884 to sell his replacement metal window frames; and artists such as Grayson Perry, whose “A House for Essex” at Wrabness is “a cottage for Rapunzel, illustrated by Arthur Rackham”. Darley also goes beyond the more conventional attractions of picturesque towns like Saffron Walden, to highlight some of the county’s more Ballardian features, including the “inventive” concrete water tanks (now “barnacled” with phone aerials) that are such a feature of the “inescapably horizontal landscape”, and the “ghostly” disused airfields from the last war whose concrete runways are now used for illicit comings and goings, as well as car boot sales. Excellent Essex is a delightfully eclectic and heartfelt portrait of a much-maligned county. • Excellent Essex: In Praise of England’s Most Misunderstood County by Gillian Darley is published by Old Street (RRP £14.99) To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.