In my 20s and 30s, I was an insomniac. I would work with a fury all through the night, downing espresso shots and filing copy, even though I knew 11pm to 4am are the most important hours for skin repair. In this time, cell production can double – and cell turnover triple – if you’re in a deep, restful sleep. Meanwhile, my friends would slather on baby oil and sit in their gardens with foil to help reflect the burning rays of the sun, with a devil-may-care attitude towards skin health and serious sun damage. Not to mention the boozy nights! I entered my 40s last year, and those sleepless nights of the past were paying off. I’d met many personal goals in my career as a beauty journalist and influencer, and become a mother. I’d found a new confidence that left me centred. My relationship with beauty and skincare had changed too. It’s no longer about following trends, but finding my own rhythm and being happy and peaceful with that. My mindset has now shifted to ageless beauty, and a deeper understanding of skin health as self-care. As a result, I’ve developed a more respectful and holistic approach that acknowledges how skin changes with age. It’s the largest organ in the body and, as it ages, hormonal changes bring decreased oil production, depriving skin of natural moisture and protection. At the same time, collagen, a protein that provides skin with bouncy support, starts to naturally decline by 25. I have a darker skin tone and an oilier skin type, and both my melanin and oil act as a great preservative system. However, I’ve always been more concerned with radiance, skin texture and hyper-pigmentation, so I supplement skincare with exercise, a diet full of lots of colourful, antioxidant-rich fruits and vegetables, as well as meditation, laughter, joy and purpose – all of which makes you glow from the inside out. It’s about listening to your body and your skin, healing, nourishing and loving yourself. This newfound sense of groundedness and excitement isn’t rare in over-40s, and today the beauty industry reflects this and has completely changed for the better as far as over-40s are concerned. This group of women have serious spending power: in 2018, British 50- to 64-year-olds spent more than any other age group on cosmetic products. Fierce and fabulous, middle-aged women know their worth and are demanding to be seen and heard – and catered for by brands. This is reflected in beauty communities that cater to women over 40, with leading voices such as Caroline Hirons and Sali Hughes, and websites such as faboverfifty.com, all celebrating older women. We now live in a world where your worth as a woman doesn’t end once you hit the menopause. The older we get, the more experiences we have to share and grow from, such as being mothers, wives, businesswomen, daughters and friends. As a result, beauty becomes a celebration of who you are and how you feel, reflecting your power, identity and confidence. And the best way to approach beauty at this age is with a bespoke attitude – what works for you, specifically? After 40, 50, 60, 70 and even 80 years, you know who you are and what you need. My mother, at 72, has reinvented herself as a lifestyle influencer, updating her stories with all the food and lifestyle events she attends. I’ve taken up adult ballet, which has been wonderful, both spiritually and physically, and through it I have met so many strong, empowered women in their 50s, 60s and 70s who twirl around the world. When I see Mum living her best life on Instagram, or watch my fellow dancers plié, I know my future is exciting, glamorous and bright. There is so much to look forward to, and it’s beautiful. Beauty is ageless. Smart Clinical MD is a dermatologist-inspired line to help revolumise and resculpt skin as and when you need it. For a smart addition to your skincare routine, find out more here