Another dramatic day in the three-year long Brexit process, and another day of dramatic front pages. The Guardian’s splash is “Day the deal was doomed” with No 10 sources suggesting that “talks are in tatters”. “Boris Johnson’s Brexit plan appeared all but dead last night as the government admitted there was little prospect of a deal before 31 October after a day of furious recriminations,” it reports. Guardian front page, Wednesday 9 October 2019: Day the deal was doomed pic.twitter.com/4FSycFPPuX The Daily Telegraph is similarly pessimistic about prospects of an agreement – “Brexit deal now ‘essentially impossible’” – but lays the blame squarely at the feet of the EU, saying “Merkel’s insistence that Northern Ireland must stay aligned with EU is the death knell”, as Johnson allies “accused Angela Merkel of making a Brexit deal ‘essentially impossible’”. TELEGRAPH: Brexit deal now ‘essentially impossible’ #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/QBVjF5MeDp The i reports: “Brexit deal ‘impossible’ as EU leaders reject PM’s proposals”. The paper says Johnson has been accused “of playing ‘stupid blame game’”, while quoting UK officials who “insist Brussels has hardened its position as times runs out”. Wednesday's front page: Brexit deal 'impossible' as EU leaders reject PM's proposals #tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers #skypapers pic.twitter.com/LFrOPktz07 The FT focuses on the relationship between the PM and Irish leader Leo Varadkar, saying: “Johnson urges Varadkar to keep talking as Brexit deal hopes fade”. The paper reports that “Boris Johnson has urged Leo Varadkar to keep faith with talks on a possible Brexit deal, despite Downing Street fears that the prospects for an agreement before October 31 are all but dead”. FT: Johnson urges Varadkar to keep talking as Brexit deal hopes fade #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/VjXdSfYjgX The Metro’s front cover has a picture of the prime minister facing off against the German chancellor with the headline “We’re going around in Merkels”. The paper says that the “hope of a Brexit deal is more distant than ever”, with No 10 accusing Germany of “making impossible demands”, while the EU tells the UK to stop with its “‘stupid blame game’”. Wednesday's front page:WE'RE GOING ROUND IN MERKELS#tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers #skypapers pic.twitter.com/AKwaQcTCWI The Express reports “Brexit talks face collapse after Boris has bad-tempered phone call with German leader, blasting EU for making ‘impossible’ demands on Britain”. “That’s it then! PM’s angry clash spells end of deal,” is the paper’s headline. EXPRESS: That’s it then! PM’s angry clash spells end of deal #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/oUkPJ66ebg The Times is more hopeful, however, saying “Johnson gets last chance to keep Brexit deal alive”. The paper reports that a “vital meeting” between the PM and Irish leader Leo Varadkar could take place on Thursday, but does recognise Tuesday was not a good day for Johnson, saying he was “fighting to salvage his Brexit deal after an explosive row with Angela Merkel put talks on the brink of collapse”. TIMES: Johnson gets last chance to keep Brexit deal alive #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/LwMnz7hqpk The Mirror suggests Boris Johnson is to blame for breakdown in talks and has been “accused of sabotage”. The paper reports that the prime minister’s Brexit plan is now “on the verge of collapse” and that Donald Tusk had “taunted” Johnson, saying: “You don’t want a deal”. The Mirror also devotes half of its front page to the response of Clare Stokes, wife of Ben Stokes, to claims that the cricketer assaulted her at an awards night under the headline: “Ben and I were just messing about…” Several other papers also have the story on their fronts. Tomorrow's front page: Ben and I were just messing about#tomorrowspaperstoday Ben Stokes and wife Clare put on united front to deny 'throttling' photo claims https://t.co/6haDovbLap pic.twitter.com/ojFMHgTKqw The Sun has a small story on Johnson’s Brexit woes, under the headline: “Boris in last-gasp Brex talk with Irish”. But it’s main story is “Cha cha chaps”, about the ITV decision to feature a male couple on the new series of Dancing on Ice, a move the paper says will “make telly history”. Tomorrow's front page: 'ITV chiefs have paired up two male dancers - beating Strictly to make telly history' https://t.co/uEbHoZUA27 pic.twitter.com/fEBsyAVp25 The Mail shifts its focus from Brexit and leads on what it has labelled the “dementia care scandal”, as 356,000 signed a petition urging Johnson to “fix a broken system that forces countless pensioners to sell their homes to fund crippling care costs”. MAIL: The roar No10 cannot ignore #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/qR5F7HDiX7