The epigraph to Karnezis’s celebrated short story collection, Little Infamies (2003), quoted CP Cavafy: unforeseen disaster “suddenly, violently, descends upon us ... sweeps us away”. Somewhere between novel and novella, We Are Made of Earth is Karnezis’s most perfect exposition of this theme. A dinghy full of refugees capsizes. A desperate man who can’t swim grasps a doctor; won’t let go. Enraged, the doctor frees himself, before impulsively ripping off the man’s life jacket, flinging it out of reach. Everyone drowns except him and a boy he elects to save. Though when the boy says, “The life-jacket. I saw you”, and latches on to him like a nemesis, the doctor regrets his compassion. The theme of the compulsive crime, committed by a civilised person for reasons beyond his comprehension, drives the story. The doctor, Mokdad, and the lad, Jamil, reach a small Greek island, where “from among the trees an Asian elephant was shyly looking at them”. The creature belongs to a circus whose owner, Damianos, and wife, Olga the elephant keeper, offer them hospitality. If we expect the circus to provide an element of the carnivalesque, we are mistaken. The elephant is displaced, stranded, forsaken, like everyone else. Damianos, whose business has failed, faces bankruptcy on the mainland if he leaves the island: the elephant is his sole, precious commodity. Mokdad will abuse Damianos’s hospitality. Conflicted, guilt-stained, mired in equivocation, he seeks an inaccessible atonement, inspiring the reader’s painful pity. Who is meant by “we” in We Are Made of Earth? The word encompasses all mortals in the continuum of creaturely life: refugees, islanders, elephant, birds – and ourselves, the readers. Karnezis’s novel has the universalising succinctness, moral complexity and ironic force of the greatest novellas. Disaster looms in the seed ofevery phrase – and yet its tone is neutral, distanced, and the dark narrative is spellbinding. The doctor is a decent, damaged man. Olga, also good-hearted and wounded, punishes her elephant. Just as at sea the doctor “wondered whether anyone had seen what he had done”, so Olga, thrusting a sharp stick into tender flesh in a paroxysm of rage, cannot “explain to herself why she had done it. She would tell no one.” Secret visceral action betrays the spirit of all we are. We break a taboo. Then the taboo breaks us. • Stevie Davies’s Arrest Me, for I Have Run Away is published by Parthian. We are Made of Earth by Panos Karnezis is published by Myriad (£8.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Free UK p&p on all online orders over £15.