An urban legend went around town during the peak of a drought when I was a child. The story was someone had pulled up their floor during a home renovation and discovered an old newspaper clipping predicting the drought and the date it would finally break. Depending on who was telling the story, it was someone’s neighbour, their cousin or their grandmother who had found the century-old article. But the date set for drenching rain came and went. The same magical thinking has happened in recent years, too: rumours of impending drought-breakers have swirled around many times. Most of the time if the grey clouds appear, they don’t linger. I live in Orange, in the central west of New South Wales, where the council has just introduced strict level-five water restrictions. It means the town’s total water storage has fallen to 30%. The local council suggests three-minute showers, shallow baths and only using washing machines when there’s a full load. Lawns cannot be watered and gardens only once a week for an hour in the evening. There’s no washing cars at home, no water features and no filling kids’ pools. Varying degrees of restrictions are in place in other nearby regional towns, including Bathurst and Dubbo. Announcing the latest rules, the Orange mayor, Reg Kidd, said: “Orange residents have some of the lowest rates of water use in the country. We’re used to this and that’s how we’ll get through this drought.” It is not the first time we’ve learned to capture water in whatever way we can: showering with buckets at our feet or scooping out children’s bath water for the garden. Memories of droughts mark time through my childhood. My dad – a stock agent – would abruptly halt conversations at the dinner table to listen to the weather on the 7pm news. After work, dust settles in the lines on his face and hands, and tints his snowy hair. A few teachers at my high school had to start coming into town to shower when the tanks on their properties ran dry during the millennium drought. My mum, a dedicated gardener, has fought to keep trees on my parents’ farm alive through droughts and harsh summers, lugging heavy containers from their rainwater tank to whichever plant was closest to death. A horticulturalist once told me that if you look closely at trees around the region, you can see the ghosts of droughts in the branches and foliage that were growing at those times. This drought is often referred to by farmers as the worst in living memory, as they hand-feed their animals or consider selling off their valuable breeding stock or think about leaving the land. Growing up being constantly reminded that water is finite and rain is unreliable is in the back of my mind wherever I go. In Sydney this year I watched a man hose the footpath in front of a harbourside mansion, my mouth hanging open thinking of the crunchy brown paddocks back home. At the shops, I think about how much water is needed to produce meat, vegetables and crops, and the water needed for storing and transporting food. Driving on bumpy country roads, I think about the water needed to fix them and to build more. Looking out my window at the new homes going up in my neighbourhood, I think about the water needed for construction and housing for a growing population. Water is everywhere but increasingly it’s nowhere. It’s strange to me that we know water is a life-giver in many ways, but recycled drinking water is still mostly taboo. It seems to take a lot for restrictions to be enforced in major cities, where the effects of drought are out of sight out of mind. Having lived in a city for a little over a decade before returning home, I’ve seen that people are not really aware that what’s going down the bathroom drain, or being hosed on to cars, or poured into pools is a precious resource. Why don’t we all have limits on our water use all the time, even when dams are full? Perhaps using water like it lasts forever is just a different kind of magical thinking. Stephanie Gardiner is a journalist based in regional New South Wales