The high-street lender NatWest is to offer counselling sessions for gambling addicts inside branches as part of a groundbreaking pilot scheme that could be rolled out across the country. People who think they have a gambling problem will be able to make appointments to see experts from the charity GamCare in 13 branches of NatWest, even if they are not customers of the bank. NatWest, part of state-owned Royal Bank of Scotland, said the trial would begin in London and the south-east, the Midlands and east of England, and the service could be introduced in more of its 700 branches. It is also joining other lenders such as Monzo, Barclays and Starling by allowing customers to block gambling transactions on their bank accounts or credit cards through its mobile app. There are about 340,000 adult problem gamblers in Britain, 0.7% of the population, according to industry regulator the Gambling Commission, with a further 550,000 people suffering moderate harm as a result of gambling. Studies have shown that the addiction costs the UK economy hundreds of millions of pounds and is associated with an elevated risk of suicide. But a national self-exclusion scheme designed to help addicts bar themselves from betting has suffered from teething problems, while campaigners have complained that addiction services are underfunded and not widely available. NatWest said it wanted to help tackle the problem by using floorspace in branches to offer advice in a discreet environment. “Some customers might be uncomfortable going to an addiction centre,” said NatWest’s head of lending, Phil Sheehy. “This is an accessible and neutral environment.” “We want to look at what we can do to help people who may be struggling with a gambling addiction, which can have a significant effect financially.” Nicky Morgan, the secretary of state for digital, culture media and sport, urged more banks to consider launching partnerships with gambling charities to help customers cope with addiction problems. “The government has been clear to all businesses that have connections to gambling, including bookmakers, major high-street banks and social media platforms, that they must be socially responsible and use the power of technology and data to help people manage their spending and protect them from gambling related harm,” said Morgan. “I will closely monitor NatWest’s progress and I urge others in the banking sector to follow suit for the good of their customers.” Banks typically already ask customers about their spending habits if they identify erratic or dangerous patterns such as heavy losses with bookmakers or online casinos. Mike Kenward, the development director of GamCare, said the charity would also help to train NatWest staff to support customers who want help to stop betting. The bank is also offering separate specialist vulnerability training to 600 staff. “The relationship between problem gambling and financial problems is well established, although not enough is known about it,” said Kenwood. “Banks are in a phenomenal position to support people affected by problem gambling. What people need when they’re trying to make a big change in their life is the tools to help them when their motivation is at its lowest. It gives an additional layer of protection.” He said the offer from NatWest of space in its branches would increase the charity’s ability to reach vulnerable people, with the number of counselling locations increasing from four to 10 in London alone as a result of the pilot scheme. GamCare listed nine locations where its services would be available: Camden, Stratford, Lewisham, Ealing, Wood Green, Twickenham and Ilford in London, Margate in Kent and Haywards Heath in West Sussex. A further four are still to be confirmed. GamCare operates the National Gambling HelpLine on freephone 0808-8020 133 or via web chat at www.gamcare.org.uk 