Brexmas, Brelection, call it what you will, Wednesday’s papers all look ahead to a festive snap election with turkeys, a Grinch and even a New Year’s Leave party. Also, please note that, although I will not be referring to who won the Great British Bake Off final, you will unavoidably get an idea if you look at the front pages below. The Guardian carries a large picture of a packed Commons and casts the election vote in terms of Brexit. The headline is “Parliament breaks deadlock with December 12 election.” It notes that the national poll could be the most unpredictable in a generation and that nearly half of Labour MPs either abstained or were absent for the vote. Guardian front page, Wednesday 30 October 2019: Parliament breaks deadlock with December 12 election pic.twitter.com/kjJm4AIoXf Metro goes with a cheery “Jingle polls!” for its headline and says it is the first December election in almost a century. Wednesday's front page:JINGLE POLLS!#tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers #skypapers pic.twitter.com/IsGFcuPp2W The Daily Mail strikes a more sinister tone, with a cartoon Boris Johnson dressed as Santa and a green-skinned Jeremy Corbyn riding a sleigh. The paper focuses on the threat the Brexit party and the Lib Dems pose to the Tory vote, with the headline: “Don’t let the Grinch steal your Christmas.” But the copy is more upbeat, reporting that Johnson has promised voters a new Parliament for Christmas after dithering by opposition parties. The Daily Mirror says “It’s time to stuff the turkey”, and superimposes the head of the PM on the animal. It says voters will “get the chance to axe reckless Boris Johnson” after MPs agreed a 12 December vote. Tomorrow's front page: It's time to stuff the turkey #tomorrowspaperstoday https://t.co/tSSWj6aNRW pic.twitter.com/SxYAwocQw5 The Daily Telegraph chooses a picture in which Corbyn and his shadow cabinet resemble Christmas carollers, above the simple headline: “Christmas election.” Columnist Sherelle Jacobs says it’s payback time for a pathetic Parliament, while the Matt cartoon suggests the election will put paid to the season of goodwill. Tomorrow’s Telegraph front page: “Christmas Election”#TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/s2FpdA1aR8 The Sun skips Christmas and heads straight for “New Year’s Leave” and says Johnson now has the chance to secure a mandate to get a Brexit deal done before the end of 2019. It pitches 1 January as “the first day of the rest of our lives”. The Express chooses a Churchillian picture of Johnson and predicts in its headline that 12 December will be the day “when Britain will vote … once and for all ... to deliver Brexit.” It says the move came after Corbyn “caved in and dropped his resistance”. Here is tomorrow's @Daily_Express #frontpage: - Britain to go to the polls on December 12 for #generalelection- Underdog David wins #GBBO - The day I played a trick on the Queen#TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/bHevPHH73a The Times is less confident of the outcome, saying the prime minister has gambled on voters backing him to secure Brexit. It says he justified the decision by saying further Brexit delays were “seriously damaging the national interest”. The FT casts the election as a way to break the paralysis over Brexit and refers in its headline to Johnson’s overtures to the Tory MPs who had the whip withdrawn last month for disobeying him. “MPs back December 12 election as Johnson recalls exiled rebels.” Just published: front page of the Financial Times, UK edition, Wednesday 30 October https://t.co/HzyIwUSXFH pic.twitter.com/pYSVn426u3 The i begins its election countdown timer – 43 days – and carries front page links to two opinion pieces saying the vote will be harder to predict than ever, and that the race will be won and lost on social media. Wednesday's front page: Countdown begins with 43 days to Christmas election #tomorrowspaperstoday #skypapers #bbcpapers pic.twitter.com/nTiwdfvW2z