Swansea moved to the top of the Championship table with a hard-fought win over Charlton at the Valley. After Jonathan Leko’s snapshot had given Lee Bowyer’s men an early lead, the Swans came back strongly and equalised through Yan Dhanda on 17 minutes. André Ayew then scored the winner midway through the second period, poking in after a flick-on by Joe Rodon from Matt Grimes’ corner. Leko has been the subject of unwanted attention in recent days after it was revealed he was allegedly racially abused by a Leeds player during Saturday’s game. However, the West Brom loanee’s mind seemed firmly on the job in hand as he picked up the loose ball following a cross from Adam Matthews and drilled his effort superbly into the top corner. Despite the early setback, Swansea looked bright going forward and just after the quarter-hour mark their positive play reaped its rewards. Kyle Naughton fed the ball inside to Ayew and after further measured passes around the box to Borja Bastón and Jay Fulton, Dhanda eventually pulled the trigger, with his deflected effort trickling agonisingly beyond Dillon Phillips for his first goal for more than a year. Bristol City’s manager, Lee Johnson, hailed his side’s character and resilience after they clawed their way back to earn a precious point at Brentford. Andreas Weimann’s late goal made it three draws in a row and nine games unbeaten for the Robins in the Championship. Johnson said: “We didn’t start aggressively enough in terms of our press and we were underloaded at times, so at half-time we tried a tactical change in midfield to try to get a foothold.” It worked late on when Weimann popped up in the 87th minute to head Jack Hunt’s cross back across goal for the late leveller that cancelled out Josh Dasilva’s superb curled opener. Callum McManaman scored a late equaliser as Luton stretched Millwall’s winless run to seven Championship games with a 1-1 draw at Kenilworth Road. It had looked like the visitors were going to pick up their first victory since 17 August when Tom Bradshaw scored his third goal of the campaign on the hour mark. But Town kept going and eventually earned a point with four minutes remaining thanks to McManaman’s first strike since netting for Wigan in November 2018. Tom Lawrence returned to the Derby starting XI just over a week after he was charged with drink-driving as the Rams were denied victory late on in a 2-2 draw at Barnsley. The Wales international and Mason Bennett, who came off the bench for the last few minutes, were charged following an incident on 24 September. Aapo Halme gave Barnsley a 13th-minute lead. Chris Martin’s third goal in as many matches pulled the Rams level after 34 minutes, before Tom Huddlestone netted from the spot in the closing stages of the half. But Cauley Woodrow popped up with the winner in stoppage time to earn the lowly hosts a valuable point. The names of Lawrence and Bennett were booed by a section of Derby fans as the teams were read out ahead of kick-off, and the former received similar treatment from some home supporters when in possession during the match. A pitch invader ran on to the field and slid along the turf next to where Lawrence was receiving treatment for a knock midway through the second half, but the intruder was eventually caught by stewards and escorted from the stadium.