Britain is ageing badly. Or at least without paying due care and attention to a demographic revolution that may be more destabilising than is generally understood. The fact that we are living longer is common knowledge. According to a study this month by the Office for National Statistics, the proportion of people aged 85 and over will almost double during the course of the next 25 years. By 2030, one in five people (21.8%) will be aged 65 or over. This creates most obviously a huge healthcare challenge. Successive governments have abjectly failed to deal with the crisis in social care provision. The Johnson government has shamefully kicked the issue further into the long grass. This has been a collective dereliction of duty by Westminster. The social care debacle is at least well chronicled. An important report published by the Resolution Foundation on Monday highlighted another, less well understood, dimension to ageing in Britain. In a period when polarisation and division has gripped our body politic to such a disturbing degree, it should give pause for thought. According to the thinktank’s research, some parts of the UK are ageing twice as fast in the 21st century as others. The area of Britain with the oldest typical age is North Norfolk (53.8 years). The youngest is Oxford (29 years). Coastal and rural areas in particular are experiencing rapidly ageing populations. The drivers of this divergence are various, from booming student populations in places such as Nottingham and Newcastle, to higher birth rates in areas such as Barking and Dagenham. More generally, the study’s findings suggest an ongoing drift of young people from smaller towns and rural areas to large towns and cities, which have benefited from the lion’s share of economic growth in the post-industrial era. The Centre for Towns has estimated that since 1981, towns have lost more than 1 million under-25s and gained 2 million pensioners. A virtuous circle has been created in prospering urban centres: these cities and large towns, usually boasting at least one major university, attract well-qualified young people, who in turn lure in further investment. In Manchester, which has enjoyed a 21st-century revival through a service and IT-driven economy, regeneration in the city centre focused almost exclusively on flats for young professionals attracted by prospects unavailable in their home towns. Manchester has got younger. Places such as Wigan, 15 miles away, have become older. The trend risks stretching to breaking point social services in some of the country’s poorest local authorities, which are faced with falling budgets and a bigger care bill. There is also a danger that demographic divergence will entrench cultural and political divides that are already a feature of the political landscape. In the Brexit referendum, England’s ageing smaller towns voted overwhelmingly to leave. London, Manchester and Leeds (just) voted to remain. It is surely unhealthy for the national conversation that an unbalanced economy is skewing the age profile of communities. Britain does not need a new geography of ageing to add to our multiplying social divides.