A fact-filled profile of the snowboard champion Katie Ormerod and a thrilling basketball match report have been revealed as the winners of the inaugural Guardian and Football School Young Sportswriters of the Year award. The winner of the category for writers aged seven to nine, eight-year-old Caleb Waterhouse, wrote about Ormerod, who attended his primary school in West Yorkshire. In the category for ages 10 to 12, Billy Taylor, 12, wrote about the time he saw an NBA game in Los Angeles. Hundreds of students entered the competition, whose judges included the Guardian columnist and former England footballer Eni Aluko and the World Cup-winning footballer Per Mertesacker. “Caleb wrote a moving article that shows he’s learnt a valuable lesson from Katie to stay active and positive, even in disappointing situations,” Aluko said. “The standard was so impressive, it was a hard to choose a winner,” Mertesacker added. “It was a pleasure to read these pieces!” The competition asked entrants to write either a match report of a sporting event, or a profile of an athlete of their choice, at a maximum of 600 words. Football was the most popular sport covered. The most popular individual athletes profiled were Cristiano Ronaldo, Kylian Mbappé and Raheem Sterling. In the older category, those who wrote about Sterling all mentioned his work in tackling racism and challenging the media to change their message around young black players. Our entrants saw him as a role model and an exciting voice for their generation. Other writers praised Mo Salah and James McClean for using their platform to make a stand for their beliefs. Some of the young writers explored their interest in coaching and management with fascinating explanations of the tactics and leadership skills of Wally Downes (AFC Wimbledon) and Marcelo Bielsa (Leeds United). Match reports were not limited to Champions League or Premier League level, with plenty covering Football League, non-league and school matches. The emotional engagement and memories that sport creates were captured in moving articles describing matches with family members who later died. One nine-year-old writer, a runner-up in the younger age group, paid tribute to Leicester City’s owner Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha, who died after his helicopter crashed outside the club’s King Power Stadium last October. The judges thought he wrote with impressive maturity and empathy. Some of the best entrants sought a personal connection with their subjects: the mascot who held hands with Davinson Sánchez before Spurs played Fulham and the Everton fan who met André Gomes and couldn’t forget how lovely he smelled. Another author complained that his dad’s half-time Bovril stank (food and drink, many of the writers taught us, are a critical part of the sport-going experience). The second most popular sport was athletics, closely followed by gymnastics. Even after their retirement, Jessica Ennis-Hill and Dame Tanni Grey-Thompson remain inspiring figures, while Dina Asher-Smith, Max Whitlock and Claudia Fragapane featured. The entries spanned sport’s broad spectrum and included Gaelic football, synchronised swimming, equestrian, ski jumping and darts. Women’s sport featured highly among our entrants, with Lucy Bronze and Alex Scott the most popular footballers. American sports also proved popular, with more entries on basketball and wrestling than cricket and tennis. There were some outstanding turns of phrase that impressed the judges. We enjoyed descriptions of Liverpool’s full-back Andy Robertson as “the salt in the crisps, if it’s not there it’s not very good”, and the non-league goalkeeper who was attacked by a French bulldog called Pie during a game. “We were blown away by the number of entrants, the different sports covered and the high standards that were set,” said the Football School author and judge Ben Lyttleton. “The enthusiasm and breadth of knowledge each writer showed in their articles was tremendous. There is no doubt that the future of sports writing is bright.” Marcus Christenson, football editor at the Guardian and the Observer, said: “There was such a vibrancy and youthful exuberance in the writing, a confirmation if needed that children really are superb at expressing themselves when given a chance, especially if they are writing about their favourite subject.” The Guardian and Football School Young Sportswriters of the Year award will be held again next year. Football School is a book series for seven-to-12-year-olds that opens up the curriculum through football. The latest in the series, Football School Season 4, is out now. It contains chapters on the links between football and classical music, spitting, magic, timekeeping, the International Space Station, etymology and much more.