If the rules of University Challenge are as constant as the North Star, so is the format. Every series since time immemorial has featured an array of questionable knitwear, a student who can correctly identify Tchaikovsky’s Fifth Symphony in E Minor but go blank at George Michael’s Faith, and a seemingly endless barrage of Oxford and Cambridge teams. While the predictability of contestants floundering in the face of pop music will forever prove entertaining, the domination of various Oxbridge colleges is anything but. And dominate they do: across the show’s 48 series finals, only 10 have been between two non-Oxbridge institutions, most recently Manchester’s victory over UCL in 2013. Last series, 11 of the 28 teams were Oxbridge colleges. Thankfully, due to clever match scheduling, it has been 32 years since we’ve had a single institution final (Oxford-only finals occurred in 1965, 1972 and 1987, and Cambridge-only finals in 1970, 1973, 1978). So, fingers on buzzers: is it time we stopped Oxbridge colleges competing individually? The rule itself dates back to the show’s inception in 1962. ITV, who first aired the show, explained that “The colleges of the Universities of London, Oxford and Cambridge enter as individual colleges rather than under the university’s umbrella title, because they operate as autonomous teaching institutions.” Essentially, as teaching happens within colleges, Oxbridge are entitled to multiple teams, whereas other collegiate universities (such as Durham, Kent and York) are only entitled to one, as their college system is purely pastoral. Clearly, it makes sense that the Universities of London qualify as separate teams: UCL and SOAS are standalone institutions encompassing thousands of students. The same cannot be said for Oxbridge colleges, as evidenced in episode seven of the current series, when Manchester University, representing around 40,000 students, were pitted against Jesus College Oxford, representing a mere 550 students. Furthermore, the teaching over pastoral distinction conveniently overlooks the fact that Oxbridge students actually do receive teaching outside their college, particularly at Masters and PhD level. Ian Wang, captain of this year’s Corpus Christi Cambridge team finds the rule hard to justify: “There’s not really a legitimate reasoning for it, as far as I can see, other than ‘We think Oxford and Cambridge are special.’” Concerns about diversity on University Challenge are hardly new: every series brings with it a lament about the persistence of the all-white, all-male team. While behind the scenes, producers have confirmed they are committed to redressing the gender imbalance in the questions asked, on screen things remain largely the same. When the show has so far to go on representation, focusing on diversity of institutions might feel like it is missing the point. Harry Prance, captain of this year’s Courtauld team, felt that while the diversity of contestants remained a problem, the Oxbridge multiple team rule “seems like the kind of issue that annoys one neek at Imperial who thinks they just missed out on the team and could ‘actually have got into the quarter finals this year thank you very much.’” However, Wang believes that the two issues go hand in hand, as “Oxford and Cambridge tend to be far less racially, socioeconomically and gender diverse than other universities.” Given that almost all that has changed in the 50-odd years the show has been on air is the theme tune, it is hardly surprising that the appetite for such a revolution is small. An oft-repeated concern is that, if Oxford and Cambridge are limited to one team each, this team will be so intelligent it will win every series, crushing the foolish redbricks and half-witted former polytechnics in its path. This is clearly daft: implicit in that defence is an arrogant and snobbish view that people who go to Oxbridge are simply smarter, something only a cursory glance at the Conservative Party Conference swiftly disproves. And, while Oxbridge have historically been victorious, as Joe Boyle, captain of Edinburgh’s 2016 team pointed out, “Any university with multiple teams is always more likely to win.” It is easy to dismiss these quizzing concerns as niche. However, Boyle notes that the show’s role as “the main pop-culture depiction of UK further education,” brings with it a certain amount of responsibility. Wang echoes this, telling me that University Challenge, rightly or wrongly, is “viewed by many people as the pinnacle of academic excellence […] and as a representation of the very best of university students. “If every year there are a dozen or so Oxbridge colleges, what the general public will take away from that is that the best and smartest students all go to Oxbridge, regardless of whether or not that’s actually true, and that plays a role in preserving the status quo that Oxbridge students deserve more power, prestige and money,” he says. The BBC confirmed that they select the 28 teams who appear on the show from the roughly 130 who apply through a combination of general knowledge testing and interviews to ensure the contestants are both smart and telegenic. This suggests that the problem of Oxbridge’s dominance isn’t down to a lack of institutions applying, but rather what producers think makes for good TV. Emily Goddard, who appeared on the 2016 Edinburgh team, reckons that, “If people like an Oxford-Cambridge college rivalry match and the viewing figures are higher, I suspect we’ll see them for a long time.” Back in 1975, the Manchester University team (featuring a young David Aaronovitch) protested Oxbridge’s multiple team allowance, along with the show’s ban on polytechnics, by answering every question with the name of a famous revolutionary: Trotsky, Lenin, Karl Marx and Che Guevara. The chances of another Manchester-style protest happening any time soon seem slim. But we can still hope for a future where, to quote famous contestant Ted Loveday, Oxford and Cambridge are hapax legomenon, the Greek term for ‘said only once’.