Behailu Kebede did everything correctly. He woke to the beeping of a smoke alarm in his flat in Grenfell Tower just before 1am and saw light white smoke coming from the Hotpoint fridge-freezer in his kitchen. He dialled 999, asking the operator to send someone quickly. He knocked on his neighbours’ doors, alerting them to the fire, before turning off the mains electricity switch at the fuse box in the hallway of his flat and leaving his home for the last time, closing the door behind him. Within 30 minutes of his 999 call, flames reached the roof of the 24-storey building in west London, with devastating consequences. How an ordinary kitchen fire failed to be contained, and how a modern building could have been “engulfed by flames and destroyed”, is the question at the heart of the Grenfell Tower Inquiry Phase 1 report, released on Wednesday. The report sets out details of what happened on the night, charting the actions of emergency services, the local authority and the deceased. It unequivocally exonerates Mr Kebede, someone who has been harassed by both tabloid and reputable news outlets in false narratives. Bereaved family members, who waited more than two years for the 4kg, 838-page document from Martin Moore-Bick, tell me it is better than anything they could have expected. Grenfell United, the survivors and bereaved group, hailed “a strong report with a forensic examination of the events of the night and clear recommendations that if implemented will save lives. [These] findings give us some confidence that our journey towards truth has finally begun.” Among many findings, perhaps the most important conclusion is that the tower was not compliant with building regulations, despite being signed off by Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea’s (RBKC) own building control department. The report found that external walls “did not resist spread of fire. They promoted it.” This sets the stage for phase 2 of the inquiry, which will look at materials and construction in more detail, opening up pathways to prosecutions. In the view of Grenfell United, RBKC and Kensington and Chelsea Tenant Management Organisation (KCTMO) still “have serious questions to answer ... as do each of the corporates involved including Arconic, Celotex and Rydon among others ... [it] adds to our determination to see criminal charges brought against those responsible for turning our homes into a ‘death trap’”. All of this will be further investigated, but for now the report is a vindication of the experiences of survivors on the night. One unexpected early finding was that ACM cladding panels with a polyethylene core were the major cause of the fire spreading upwards through the cladding and then horizontally via the architectural crown, fuelled by other combustibles. This went further than many expected, as did Moore-Bick’s dismissal of attempts by corporate groups to delay or prevent findings that might count against them, such as the “fanciful” claim by Whirlpool – the manufacturer of the Hotpoint fridge-freezer – that the fire could have been started by a cigarette. While reports earlier this week may have given the impression that criticism was reserved solely for the London fire brigade (LFB), police and ambulance services were also criticised for failing to adhere to joint protocols. RBKC’s emergency plan depended on information provided by KCTMO, whose own emergency plan was 15 years out of date: neither plan reflected changes to the building after its 2015-16 refurbishment. There were no procedures for evacuating disabled residents, no floor plans of the building, and KCTMO’s chief executive, Robert Black, played “an essentially passive role and failed to display effective leadership”. Grenfell United says these findings are hugely important: “This is just the beginning. RBKC and KCTMO were at the centre of the refurbishment project and we are confident much more will be exposed in phase 2.” As for the London fire brigade, the report goes to great lengths to distinguish between the actions of firefighters on the night, and the policies, procedures and equipment they relied on. Moore-Bick commends the bravery of individual firefighters who risked their lives in the burning building, at the same time as finding “significant systemic and operational failings”. Yet it is damning. LFB’s preparation and planning were found to be “gravely inadequate”. Incident commanders were not trained to evacuate buildings and could therefore not conceive of changing the strategy: this was a major breach of national guidance. “Stay put” should have been revoked earlier – “I have little doubt that fewer people would have died if the order to evacuate had been given by 02.00,” said Moore-Bick. There was heavy criticism of LFB control room policies, practice and training, especially as many of the mistakes made at the 2009 Lakanal House fire in south London were repeated. “Despite changes in policy, similar shortcomings were displayed by the control room when responding to callers from Grenfell Tower.” This repetition of failure should be a huge worry to us all, and Moore-Bick expressed grave concern. It is hard to see how Dany Cotton, LFB commissioner, can continue in her role any longer, given the finding that “the commissioner’s evidence that she would not change anything about the response of the LFB on the night, even with the benefit of hindsight, only serves to demonstrate that the LFB is an institution at risk of not learning the lessons of the Grenfell Tower fire”. In the days after the report was leaked, a new false narrative emerged that was as dangerous to our understanding of what went wrong at Grenfell as the untrue claims putting the blame on Behailu Kebede: firefighters were now being scapegoated so the government could be let off the hook. But the purpose of all inquiries is to find out what happened, who is responsible, and what can be learned to prevent future deaths. Mistakes need to be called out because people died, but this is not the same as blame. Bereaved family members I have spoken to feel let down by this fresh theory. “Senior officers in the LFB must stop hiding behind the bravery of their frontline firefighters,” said Grenfell United. The report does not attack individual firefighters, but calls out “systemic” failings of policy, procedures, communications, equipment and training. This should be welcome news to anyone with an interest in seeing the LFB and national fire services properly funded and resourced, and decades of cuts reversed. The LFB needs to listen, or history risks repeating itself. The key question now is when these recommendations will be implemented. There is no time for complacency. Until there is change, thousands are still at risk from dangerous materials and poor procedures. While it is positive that the prime minister immediately accepted all of Moore-Bick’s recommendations, there needs to be a timetable for legislation, proper scrutiny and new funding. The charity Inquest is calling for a national oversight mechanism, “to ensure official recommendations from inquiries and inquests are systematically followed up. The lasting legacy of Grenfell must be structural change.” This report is a significant moment. It is a reckoning that, if acted upon, will set the stage for years to come and is a significant step towards justice. But for now it is only words. The government must put it into action. For Grenfell United, “there is still a long road ahead for justice and change. For the 72 people that we lost, who are for ever in our hearts, we will not stop until change comes.” • Seraphima Kennedy is is a writer and academic researcher