Jamie Joseph, Japan’s head coach, talked about planning for the Ireland game over two years ago. Eddie Jones took England on tour to Italy in July and August to have a dry run for the big show in Japan and the red rose also played short turnaround fixtures to replicate what they would face in the real thing. Planning doesn’t often get the headlines but it is crucial to deliver the foundations of the performances you want and with seven games for the final four in various destinations at various times of the day, you need to have done more than just your due diligence. Now we are beginning to get to the pointy end of group exits and the knockouts, comfort gained from confidence that the route planned is the right one is crucial. It’s an area of high performance I love. You rarely hear coaches after a great victory talking poetically about how they managed their weekly schedule but they, along with the ever expanding backroom staff, will have spent an inordinate amount of time on the detail. It’s an expanding field within elite sport and while we often read how British Cycling and other Olympic sports have used this side of medal hunting, in rugby it’s become a fast accelerating tool to maximise. You need to get big and mini peaks right both for teams and players. The change in the Premiership – with play offs replacing first past the post – began to embed this deeper in the English game. Peaking all the time isn’t possible but at the right time – that’s the art with the science. Sports medicine and science departments are all common in the top teams and even 10 years ago, that wasn’t the case. Normally a keen physio with an eye on technology or a conditioner ahead of the curve covered it but now it is deep and detailed. Big-ticket understanding of flights, accommodation and recovery facilities as well as tournament venues will all have been recced and on the docket in detail. Underneath that the jet lag protocols will be in place and by now, normal circadian service should have been resumed. Travel within a country, especially in Japan, needs to be orchestrated perfectly. Leave training a few minutes later than you wanted in the floating world of Tokyo and you could easily double your travel time, causing a domino effect for the rest of your day. A game week needs to have the right balance of exertion and workload for everyone to match the goals for a particular game. Within all that are the smaller parts of planning around the types of meals and nutrition to help aid sleep, energy and recovery, the balance between coach and player-led meetings and time together and time off as well as the local nuances that could significantly knock you off the road you have planned to travel. Research and then application of humidity strategy will have been actioned. Sweat can be analysed as well as players regularly given osmolarity testing and weighing in and out to make sure they are hydrated. Saline drips would give all players the best chance of getting their essential minerals back and hydration up but that would be breaking Wada rules, so a slower method is needed to get the players back to their best. Games still seem to be affected by humidity and slippery match balls. Interestingly, and as an aside I genuinely wonder how much of that is the use of brand new match balls. Unused balls will have a waxy layer and most ground staff around the world know that, so normally those balls are thrown in the washing machine and then kicked and passed around a bit before they reach the match. In planning, you always assume nothing but I do wonder if this simple practice has slipped the net thus far. A phrase coined first by a 19th-century Prussian military commander – “no plan survives first contact with the enemy” – is true to the extent that a planning structure that can bend in the breeze has to be in place but not to the point that you level it all after an unexpected loss or a performance that dipped to depths you didn’t see coming. Unless the major supporting beams of your planning are wrong or even not present then the mantra “plan your work and work your plan” still needs to be applied. Of course teams along their road to winning have had some pot holes to navigate around in those stratagems. The All Blacks’ 2011 fly-half decimation – where injury took their first three and led to their fourth choice being brought in and kicking the winning penalty in the final – was just one example. It provided threats to their goals but their overarching plans were in place and they stuck to their frameworks and protocols. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales If Rassie Erasmus’s Springboks, Michael Cheika’s Australia or Joe Schmidt’s Ireland lift the Webb Ellis Cup then they will do what no other team has done in Rugby World Cup history by winning without a 100% tournament record. In fact in all the other major team sports of football, cricket, hockey, baseball and basketball in both men and women’s – men’s rugby stands alone as the only World Cup where every champion has had a 100% winning record. Often teams throw the baby out with the bath water after a debilitating loss but for Australia, South Africa or Ireland, if they are to buck that unbeaten trend, then they need to sway but not snap the blueprints they have put in place.