The V-shaped formation England went for in Yokohama, which emulated France’s response in the 2011 World Cup final at Eden Park, set the tone for their dominant semi-final victory over the All Blacks. Sure, several players stepped over the halfway line and World Rugby probably feels duty-bound to fine England for breaching this rule, having done likewise with France eight years ago. It must also be acknowledged that officials were only doing their job in attempting to instruct England prop Joe Marler, and others, to move back behind the line. Those players knew exactly what they were doing. From a spectator perspective, though, England added to the theatre without overstepping the boundaries of decency. They made their point, and then backed it up. Their response enhanced pre-match tension and heightened expectation for those at the venue, and those watching around the world. While the All Blacks are adamant England’s actions during the haka had no material impact on the performance or outcome, their alignment immediately signalled intent to meet the three-time world champions head on – and they did exactly that. Haka in all forms is often misunderstood or misrepresented globally so it is important to appreciate its many purposes within New Zealand culture. At weddings, funerals, and to mark many other significant occasions and events, haka is often performed as a sign of respect. It carries deep meaning throughout New Zealand, with hundreds of schools and towns crafting their own unique versions that embody their people, history and surroundings. This is true for the All Blacks and other New Zealand sports teams, too. Haka is about more than they alone. The ritual allows the team to connect with each other before engaging in brutal physical battles, and sets the challenge for what’s to come in the 80 minutes. When performed with pride, haka forms a special source of inspiration. Equally, then, why should the opposition be confined in the way they connect in the face of this challenge? England’s response said “challenge laid down, challenge accepted”. Such a message should be embraced. As long as the opposition do not turn their backs or respond in a way which seeks only to cause offence, teams should be able to react as they see fit, rather than being forced to stand in military fashion behind the line. This was not anywhere near the infamous scene from 1997 when opposing English and New Zealand hookers Richard Cockerill and Norm Hewitt clashed in their gripping face-to-face standoff during the haka. Rugby has too many high-powered twitchy sponsors to allow similar incidents these days but I’m sure the vast majority of observers welcomed England’s response on this occasion. Former England fly-half Stuart Barnes took it too far when he said every team should also have their own pre-game dance, Michael Jackson, or bob shuffle. Haka is no passing pop song but, rather, a deep-rooted tradition that deserves the utmost respect. It is not, however, beyond the scope of being challenged. In fact, haka is at its best when exactly this occurs. When New Zealand squares off against its Pacific neighbours we see Samoa’s Siva Tau, Tonga’s Sipi Tau and Fiji’s Cibi often performed in unison, in direct opposition, to the haka. The same is true when any number of New Zealand first XV rugby teams clash. Haka plays a major role in these embedded rivalries, with the packed stands performing their challenge alongside players on the pitch. Atmospheres created by these haka send shivers down the spine. England, clearly, do not share that same indigenous heritage. They and others should, however, be well within their rights to respond as they did in Yokohama. It sure beats the lame attempts to drown out the haka with songs, some of which have no connection to the countries in question.