Wonders never cease. The Royal Institute of British Architects has just given a prize to a street. Not to a vainglorious skyscraper, or an “iconic” bunker museum or a luxury pad in a field, but a living, breathing street. This street is not just a street but a “council street”. Norwich council’s chief executive, Laura McGillivray, claims no higher ambition than that “new social housing should be a fabulous place to live”. She did not seek some architectural “statement”, just a neighbourhood like the thousands that – at least in the private sector – have retained their popularity among Britons who have had choice in the matter for some three centuries. I have championed streets all my life and find it painful to hear Goldsmith Street’s new residents say why they so like it. “The place just seems safe … To see my little girl playing outside the front door made me cry … We made instant friends across the street … I feel like I don’t rent it, I own it.” Why should such sentiments be surprising from council tenants? Goldsmith Street is composed of 105 flats and houses, with no visible separation between the public and the limited number of private-tenure properties. Traffic is not banned but demoted. The estate is high-density and among the most energy-efficient in the country. Even letterboxes stand detached to prevent drafts. The architects, Mikhail Riches and Cathy Hawley, stress the social impact of their design, such as “placing front doors opposite front doors”, aligning facades with street views and having private yards and balconies overlooking public spaces. This was hailed by the Stirling prize chair Julia Barfield as a “modest masterpiece” – as if it was new. The language used by Riches and Hawley comes straight from the 1960s American sociologist Jane Jacobs, and her epic The Death and Life of Great American Cities. She meticulously analysed the streets of Greenwich Village in New York, noting how their layouts enabled them to be “self-policing” and secure. They were overlooked from end to end by front rooms, doorsteps and stoops, “semi-private domains”. People were thus empowered and responsible for their surroundings. The built form itself created a sense of community. If Jacobs had been a medical expert, her analysis would have translated into professional practice. Architects knew better and treated it as nostalgic rubbish. Her message ran counter to Corbusian orthodoxy, in which public architecture was about scale and social control. Jacobs relegated architects to virtual conservationists. Students were duly taught to evict neighbourhoods, demolish streets and stack people high, where they would be dependent on a distant council. Public-sector architecture was about social disruption. It has been that way for half a century. The resulting devastation of British cities has long been charted, from 1950s east London, studied by Willmott and Young, to Lynsey Hanley’s masterful “intimate history” of Birmingham’s estates. By the early 70s, high-rise towers were out of favour, following the collapse of Ronan Point in Canning Town, east London. But council architecture’s response was a new grandiosity, with slab estates such as London’s now-demolished Heygate. Crime-ridden balconies and corridors replaced broken-down lifts. Jacobs’ role of a street as policed space, promoting friendship and easing loneliness, was simply denied. Architecture was about slamming concrete on steel with a glib metaphor about a “streets in the sky” – the quickest way to a Stirling prize. The return of the street is exciting. In Liverpool, a council long dedicated to demolishing its historic legacy was recently forced to retain the Victorian Welsh streets area – so run down it was used as a film set – and restore it to its original purpose: housing local people. Streets are returning to life in Birmingham’s Jewellery quarter, Manchester’s northern quarter and London’s Hackney, Bow and Bermondsey. Leeds’ remarkable back-to-backs are also being restored. New, as opposed to reinstated, streets have so far been hard to come by. The consultancy Create Streets has been leading the charge. It proposed a traditional grid for the Mount Pleasant site in Islington, north London, but was inexcusably blocked by Boris Johnson as mayor, in favour of conventional blocks of flats, actually at lower residential densities. The Olympic legacy authority at Stratford rejected extending the streets of Hackney Wick across their site in favour of towers set round a park. It preferred vanity to community. The customary claim that cities need to build high to cram in more people is simply untrue. Except at Hong Kong densities, towers rarely house more people than “high-density low-rise”. London’s new council estates in the 1960 and 70s housed fewer, not more, people than what they replaced. Most of London’s highest densities remain in the Victorian seven-storey terraces of Kensington and Bayswater. But planning should never pursue density at the expense of community. Community should be the sole arbiter of urban renewal. Without it, cities default to Blade Runner. The fashion for high-rise urban living has passed from public housing to towers of luxury flats. These are sold not to families – let along neighbourhoods – but to transient single people and overseas investors seeking anonymous bolt-holes. Such ugly structures do nothing to house people or promote communities. They are social excrescences. Norwich offers what the Create Streets chief, Nicholas Boys Smith, hails as “walkable, gentle density”. Its message is not just that the public sector can, at last, take some initiative in local housing. It is that an age of architectural brutalism is at long last passing. One more civilised and sensitive to the stress of urban living is taking its place. • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist. His new book, A Short History of London, is published this week by Penguin