Name: Horti-couture. Age: Arriving next week. Appearance: Alan Titchmarsh grinning in a pair of trainers he appears to have stolen from a teenager. No, really, what does it look like? No, really, Alan Titchmarsh grinning in a pair of trainers he appears to have stolen from a teenager. That is literally what horti-couture is. There’s a photo of it and everything. This needs to be unpacked. OK. Adidas is about to launch something called the Gardening Club: “A range of apparel, accessories and footwear that is inspired by lawn-based activities, resulting in horti-couture that can move effortlessly from the lawn to the streets.” Oh, so it’s an advertising slogan. That’s right. And Alan Titchmarsh is its baffled, semi-ironic poster boy. What do the Gardening Club trainers look like? Officially, they are functional shoes featuring “earth-tone colourways”. Unofficially, but far more accurately, like something unstylish retirees wear on walking holidays. They come from Adidas Consortium, which sells small batches of experimental shoes that cost £50 more than normal, usually because they’ve been co-designed with a rapper. Can I check the date? Because you think it’s April Fools’ Day, right? Because you think an idea this jokey can only come in the form of an aggressive corporate prank, right? Because ever since you saw those dishwasher pods full of whisky, you have started to fear you’re beginning to lose your grip of reality? Precisely that. Tough luck. This is real, and the official product shots include a photo of a shoe hanging from a watering can, and they cost £143. Good Lord. But it’s worth it. After all, these trainers are a clarion call to all the like-minded avant-gardeners out there. I hate that. Did you make it up? No, it’s a direct lift from the press release. Give me a break. Hang on. Are we being a little hasty here? So they’re trainers aimed at older people. What’s the problem? Aren’t older people allowed to make nice cutting-edge fashion choices? Are you being slightly ageist here? No, because older people have plenty of choice when it comes to high-end functional footwear, but they don’t come with sneering, hipster advertising campaigns that sound like they’ve been invented by a bunch of 23-year-olds, who haven’t seen a tree in a decade. Oh, OK. Fair enough. Still, anything to encourage more people to interact with the outdoors in the age of Extinction Rebellion, right? Three hundred million pairs of shoes are thrown into landfills annually. Do say: “Adidas has made a line of shoes for lawn-based activity!” Don’t say: “Wasn’t football already a lawn-based activity?”