England have insisted Billy Vunipola is “very likely” to start their World Cup quarter-final against Australia on Saturday. Eddie Jones will make a final call on the No 8 after Wednesday session but his assistant John Mitchell expressed considerable confidence he would be available in what would be a major boost for England. Vunipola suffered a twisted ankle 10 days ago in England’s pool-stage victory over Argentina and he would not have been risked by Jones for the cancelled match against France last weekend. On Saturday he was unable to take a full part in training, restricted to working alongside Jack Nowell, who was absent from Tuesday’s session and is unlikely to feature against the Wallabies. On Tuesday however, he took to the training field along with fellow back-rowers Lewis Ludlam, Tom Curry and Sam Underhill and did not require any strapping to his left ankle. “Billy is progressing really well,” said Mitchell. “He has trained again today so we are very confident in progression each day.” Asked to rate the chances of Vunipola, who is the only player to start all 12 of England’s Tests this year, facing Australia, Mitchell said: “Very likely.” England trained in front of the Australian rugby league legend Ricky Stuart, who has joined the camp this week. Stuart has played for Australia in both codes and has just coached the Canberra Raiders to the NRL final. Michael Cheika, who also knows Stuart well, had said that it would be “weird” for England’s players to have an Australian coach behind enemy lines in the week they play the Wallabies in a World Cup quarter-final. “One of the great things I believe Eddie [Jones] does in our environment is very much a learning environment,” said Mitchell. “We like to learn off others and that’s the great opportunity we have. That comes about through Eddie allowing them to come into our environment.” With Nowell set to miss out against Australia, Jonathan Joseph is expected to come into the matchday 23. Joseph is close friends with the England footballer Tyrone Mings, who was subjected to racist abuse when making his international debut against Bulgaria on Monday. “I haven’t spoke [to Tyrone] but I have seen bits of it and read up on it,” said Bath star Joseph. “It’s not great what happened out in Bulgaria. But from what I have heard they were very professional about it and at the same time trying to stand up for what is right as well. “We are fortunate in the sport we are in to not see any of that stuff happen to us. You just hope things will get better for them. On a personal level I am delighted that he has got his first cap. It could have been in better circumstances, but I’m happy to see a mate do so well.” Meanwhile, Willi Heinz revealed that the idea to tape up the ends of his fingers to combat the difficult handling conditions at the World Cup came from a Japanese scrum-half, who has been invited along to train with England a number of times. Genki Okoshi, who plays for Suntory Sungoliaths, where Jones still works as a consultant, took part in Tuesday’s session and Heinz said: “I’ve quite liked it actually. Just something to try out, and it seems to give a little more grip on the end of the fingers, which is good. I’ve noticed a few other players doing it as well, so I think I will persevere with that for now. “We had a young Japanese nine training with us – a cracking young lad. I was having a chat with him before training a couple of weeks back, gave it a crack and I’m still doing it.”