Four of the eight candidates who will compete for the right to take on Magnus Carlsen for his global crown are now decided, and the chances for elite grandmasters who have yet to qualify are shrinking. Fide’s 160-player Grand Swiss in the Isle of Man starting on 10 October is the last-chance saloon for several eminent players. Ekaterinburg will stage the candidates in March-April 2020, followed by the title match itself later in the year. Monaco, Vienna and St Petersburg are rumoured to be among the contenders to host the 14-game championship series for which the bidding closes in March, but Stavanger withdrew after Carlsen stated that the only Norwegian venue he might accept would be his home city of Oslo. The world No 2, Fabiano Caruana, the defeated 2018 challenger, is qualified for the candidates, as are Teimour Radjabov of Azerbaijan and China’s world No 3, Ding Liren, as finalists in the World Cup. The World Cup final went to speed tie-breaks on Friday and its outcome was a major upset as Radjabov, after one win each in classical and four draws in rapid and blitz, crushed the Chinese grandmaster in both 5/3 blitz games for a 6-4 match victory. Radjabov, 32, has played little in recent years after he finished a dismal last with 14 draws and four losses in the 2013 candidates in London. At an interview a few days ago he stated that he might not take up his candidates place, in the knowledge that his rivals would regard him as a must-win game against the tournament bunny. This may well change after his dramatic World Cup success, and it will be remembered that, aged 15, he defeated Garry Kasparov at Linares 2003. Despite his overall defeat, Ding’s only game win was the best of the match, played in the style of the AlphaZero computer as he said in his interview: “My h4-h5-h6 was a trademark of AlphaZero, putting the pawn to control the squares in front of the enemy king and then attack on the other side of the board”. Radjabov’s own best win was in the final blitz game. France’s Maxime Vachier-Lagrave defeated China’s Yu Yangyi 3-1 in the third place play-off, improved his candidates chances, and won the fastest game of the finals with Black in just 24 moves despite an early queen swap. The fourth candidates qualifier is Anish Giri from the Netherlands, who is highly likely to be awarded the place based on a year’s average rating. Giri has gained notoriety as an excessive drawist after halving nearly two-thirds of his classical games since the start of 2018, but that statistic is eclipsed by Radjabov, who has drawn around 80% in the same period. The 160-player 11-round Fide/Chess.com Isle of Man Grand Swiss has just one qualifying place available, for the top player excluding Carlsen and Caruana, who will both compete at the Comis Hotel, just outside Douglas. It will be the opportunity for the former world champion Vishy Anand, the 2015 challenger Sergey Karjakin, Wesley So of the US, and Armenia’s Levon Aronian. Rising talents like Vladislav Artemiev, Wei Yu and Alireza Firouzja will also be in the hunt. There are still two qualifiers to come from the Fide Grand Prix, where the front runners are Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi and Vachier-Lagrave. Russia’s Alex Grischuk and the Azerbaijani Shak Mamedyarov are also in contention, although they have both played two of the three required events whereas the two frontrunners have Hamburg in November and Tel Aviv in December to improve their overall scores. Their advantage is fragile because the Grand Prix is a knockout event where an early defeat will be catastrophic. The final place is an organiser’s wildcard, which now has stronger restrictions on who can be chosen. The wildcard must have competed in two of the World Cup, Grand Prix and Grand Swiss, which excludes Anand, and must be ranked in the top 10 in a 12-month rating average, which excludes Karjakin and makes Aronian borderline. Nepomniachtchi or Grischuk will clearly be awarded the wildcard if either fails to qualify from the Grand Prix, but what if both are safe? It would probably be a choice between Vachier-Lagrave, who was third in the World Cup, and Mamedyarov, a near-miss in the Grand Prix. Caruana, who lost to Carlsen in 2018, qualified for the candidates as the defeated challenger and, while remaining world No 2, has kept a lower profile this year as he awaits his main target, Ekaterinburg. History is on the American’s side. Ever since it was launched in 1950, the candidates has sparked specialists, players who could produce their very best form at this event. Vassily Smyslov was world champion for only one year, but he won two high class candidates in 1953 and 1956 and, decades later, reached the candidates final at age 63 before losing to Kasparov. Other candidates specialists were Paul Keres, Efim Geller, Tigran Petrosian and Viktor Korchnoi, while in modern times Anand won in 2007 when the candidates doubled as the world championship, and again in 2014 at a time when he was being urged to retire. For Caruana, a second candidates victory would be a glittering prize with an opportunity to win the crown at his second attempt, as Smyslov, Spassky and Anand all did. 3639 1 Ra4! is the only way. If Kf5 2 Bd3, or Kh5 2 Bf7, or Kf4 2 Rf7, or Kh3 2 Bf1, or Kf3 2 Bd5, or Kh4 2 Rh7 (by Karl Skogsenden, 1970).