This is a result that may prove pivotal for Manchester United, Liverpool and Manchester City. For Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s team confidence is boosted after ending Jürgen Klopp’s leaders perfect league record, while Pep Guardiola’s champions look at the table and see the gap to Liverpool is six points. Yet United’s fourth draw of the season came close to going down as a memorable victory before Adam Lallana’s late equaliser, the substitute sending the travelling support delirious. Their counterparts had enjoyed the same emotion for much of the match, half-time here being greeted by United players sprinting for the dressing room while Liverpool’s slouched off. The differing body language was indicative of what had just unfolded. Towards the end of the first half two VAR decisions went the way of United, to the chagrin of Klopp. If it was correct to rule that Sadio Mané had handled the ball before beating David de Gea, the decision that Victor Lindelöf’s challenge on Divock Origi should not be enough to rule out Marcus Rashford’s goal was closer. Solskjær and his men had earned the break, though. As United entered this 203rd showdown between English football’s great foes the prevailing question was: could the Norwegian conjure some magic to halt the Liverpool juggernaut. Liverpool’s perfect eight wins had gathered them 24 points, with the fewest goals conceded in the division – six. Against this, United’s record was alarming: two wins, nine points, and a paltry nine goals to sit just above the drop zone. The answer to the poser was clear. Solskjær was not going to die wondering as his innovative 3‑4‑1‑2 indicated. If De Gea’s inclusion was a surprise – his manager had said the goalkeeper was unavailable – the fielding of a back three, maintained despite Axel Tuanzebe’s injury in the warm-up, was bold as this was its first use this season for United. Andreas Pereira was deployed as the “1” in the formation, Solskjær ordering him to operate behind Daniel James and Rashford and hassle Fabinho, Joël Matip and Virgil van Dijk whenever Liverpool had possession. It worked. Pereira’s role was United in microcosm: quick across the pitch, and muscular in the challenge. A moment midway through the opening half summed the ploy up. Rashford engaged Van Dijk in a race down United’s right. As the two reached the ball, the slighter Rashford bounced the Uefa player of the year to the turf, turned, and zipped the ball infield. Liverpool scrambled and recovered but the narrative was set. The script was possible because of many United players performing to their potential for the first time in a long time. Fred’s inclusion in the XI is these days seen as a near shock because of his poor displays in his two years at the club. There is a view at Old Trafford that Alexis Sánchez’s failure here derived from him lacking the nerve required to wear United colours. Fred, too, could be accused of the same and this third consecutive start was only because of Paul Pogba’s injury. This display, though, countered the notion. Whether in the tackle, passing, or taking up position, the Brazilian impressed. As did Rashford. The finish from James’s pinpoint cross was the No 10 at his best, for a first United goal since 14 September. Klopp was an unhappy figure throughout, though. The second half had him continuing to berate Jonathan Moss, the fourth official, for perceived injustices. Yet the truth was that beyond the VAR controversy his side were being outplayed. Matip received a rollicking from the manager for poor awareness, followed up moments later by hooking a ball, Sunday League-style, into the heavens. The sight of Klopp turning away from the game in disappointment had become a leitmotif of the afternoon. Andy Robertson invoked his ire by booting a pass straight out for a United throw. As Liverpool stared at a first league loss in more than 10 months, Klopp brought on Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain for Origi and shifted his side to a quasi 4-2-4 that had Jordan Henderson on the right. To have Liverpool’s one-paced captain as an auxiliary winger summed up the job United were doing on them. By the close Solskjær’s men could be disappointed but proud. What fascinates now are the implications of this result in the coming weeks.