It seems like a ridiculously ambitious idea. A dance-theatre hybrid based not on a set of characters nor a plot, but a place. Where the star of the show is a few square metres of land somewhere in the east of England, and the action spans 8,000 years. The ambition belongs to choreographer Jonathan Goddard and director Lily McLeish. The pair had worked together a few times and found themselves musing on an idea: could you create a narrative that was vertical rather than horizontal, tracking the inhabitants of a single space over time, from ancient past to distant future? To realise their idea, Goddard, an award-winning dancer and movement director (he recently performed with Natalia Osipova in The Mother), brought in playwright Eve Leigh, author of often experimental plays including The Trick (although briefly better known earlier this year for being one of the neighbours who heard Boris Johnson arguing with his girlfriend Carrie Symonds in Camberwell). Leigh was asked to write a “play for dance” that would serve as the score. While there are plenty of choreographers who use text in their work, as well as theatre with a strong physical element, a script written specifically for dance is a much rarer thing. One of the themes of the play is people trying to solve the mysteries of the past – while she was writing, Leigh had a note above her desk: “Any banality can become a mystery given enough time” – and the script is suitably sphinx-like. Some scenes have straightforward dialogue, some no speech at all, leaping from a pub argument in the 1990s to a woman giving birth in the 18th century to a flooded field 20 years in the future. There’s plenty of room for interpretation. A sample scene: “1552. The fen is frozen. Time for an ice-skating competition!” It’s exactly the kind of playful provocation that Goddard and McLeish wanted as a vehicle for the four performers – Clemmie Sveaas, Chris Akrill, Jonathan Savage and Hannah Kidd – all impressive dancers who have moved into acting, and limberly straddle those two worlds. Coming at a script with a dancer’s mindset means delving much deeper into simple stage directions. One note in the play reads: “There is so much joy.” Rather than have everyone skip around smiling, Goddard and the dancers turn words into movement that works on a visceral level instead of a representative one; getting the audience to feel joy, rather than see it. Scenes leap from a pub argument in the 1990s to a woman giving birth in the 18th century For director McLeish (a frequent collaborator with Katie Mitchell), dance is a medium that plays with the tension between naturalism and abstraction, and it’s also a way to fast-forward the long process of sitting round a table doing endless text analysis and backstories. “It was really refreshing to be able to work almost immediately on creating movement,” says McLeish. “With dancers, the movement coexists with the text. I love the fact that any small improvisation task becomes this amazingly beautiful movement piece.” When Goddard first started working as a movement director (at the National Theatre and the RSC among others) the ways of the theatre took a bit of getting used to. “There’s so much talking going on!” he laughs. “When I first started working with actors I used to get headaches by the end of the day.” But there’s a lot he’s learned that he wants to bring into dance. Such as the way directors are so focused on the audience’s experience. Or to put it bluntly, wanting people to understand what’s going on. “This is a generalisation,” he says, “but I think choreographers see themselves as artists. The way an artist puts a painting on a wall and says you get it, or you don’t. Whereas a director sees themselves as a communicator, I think.” There’ll still be plenty of ambiguity to chew on in While You Are Here, inevitable considering the scale of the topic. What is the ultimate effect of compressing eight millennia into less than 80 minutes? For me, the effect is that I feel like I am a tiny part of a much bigger puzzle “I feel like one of the huge challenges that we’re facing as a culture is this idea of imagining geological time,” says Leigh. “That feels really important in terms of dealing with the climate crisis. This is by no means about the crisis,” she adds, “but it’s about the fact that there was an Earth before humans and humans can disappear.” Seeing humanity unfold over the centuries certainly gives some perspective. “The huge traumas of our lives, they’re the same dramas that people have been facing for hundreds of years, and will be facing, to the extent we have a future,” says Leigh. “I think it shows human resilience,” says Goddard. “And the pure emotions – joy, pain – that we conduct though our bodies.” “For me, the effect is that I feel like I am a tiny part of a much much bigger puzzle and that feels strangely comforting,” says McLeish. “I also find it satisfying to watch the space’s story move at a much slower pace than humans. It reminds me that we are only brief visitors in a much longer story.” While You Are Here is at Jerwood DanceHouse, Ipswich, on 11 October and the Place, London, 15-16 October