Donald De La Haye just wanted to make YouTube videos. In 2017, as kicker for the football team at Central Florida University, De La Haye had steadily racked up YouTube subscribers by making quirky, day-in-the-life videos about his experience as a student athlete. Once he had about 25,000 subscribers, he started selling ad space on his videos, making about $2,000 a month. “Nothing crazy,” he said. “Enough to eat and send some money back home to my parents.” At least until his university told him he was violating rules laid out by the National Collegiate Athletic Association, or NCAA, which governs athletics at roughly 1,120 colleges and universities through a byzantine set of regulations. According to the NCAA, De La Haye had broken the rules meant to protect the amateur nature of college sports by using his position as an athlete to make money off his image. They gave him an ultimatum: take down the videos and cease their production or be deemed ineligible as an athlete and forego his scholarship to college. “I just did what I felt in my heart,” said De La Haye. “I didn’t want to conform. I felt like stifling my creativity was the opposite of what a university should be doing.” De La Haye chose to keep making videos, lost his scholarship and left school. Thanks to a landmark bill signed last week by the California governor, Gavin Newsom – a law which both critics and supporters say could fundamentally reshape college athletics – student athletes may one day not have to choose between a college education and the ability to earn money by using their name or image. The so-called Fair Pay to Play Act, to take effect in 2023, would make it illegal for California colleges to deny student athletes the right to profit from the use of their names, images or likenesses, clearing the way for them to negotiate with video game publishers for the use of their avatars, get paid to sponsor summer camps, or land endorsement deals with apparel or sports drink companies. The act does not allow colleges to pay their athletes. In a characteristic display of celebrity hobnobbing and California cool, Newsom signed the bill while taping an interview hosted by the NBA superstar LeBron James, who has described the law as a game changer. Everyone is California- call your politicians and tell them to support SB 206! This law is a GAME CHANGER. College athletes can responsibly get paid for what they do and the billions they create. “The gig is up,” said Newsom, who attended California’s Santa Clara University on a partial baseball scholarship. “Billions and billions of dollars – $14-plus billion – goes to these universities, goes to these colleges. Billion-plus revenue to the NCAA themselves. And the actual product, the people who are putting their lives on the line, putting everything on the line, are getting nothing.” Athletic scholarships are highly coveted by young athletes, because they cover college tuition and represent a chance to someday play at the professional level. But critics say athletes must dedicate long hours to their sports at the expense of studying, and risk life and limb – earning nothing, while universities rake in billions. “It’s a $14bn industry and college athletes work 40 to 50 hours a week. They put their health and safety at risk for the profit of a multibillion industry, and they’re not afforded the same economic rights as everyone else,” said Tim Nevius, a one-time NCAA investigator who became an advocate for college athletes after he came to see the system as exploitative. Today Nevius represents college athletes in legal matters, helps them navigate the NCAA’s complex rule book and campaigns for the rights of student-athletes. As the Guardian reported in September, the highest-paid state employee in 39 of the 50 US states is a college football or basketball coach, who can earn additional money from radio appearances and endorsement deals. Clemson, a public university in South Carolina whose football team has recently won two national championships, this year inked a 10-year contract extension with its head football coach, Dabo Swinney, for a record $93m. “The fact is that college athletics is a professional enterprise in every way except that the athletes aren’t getting paid,” Nevius said. An ad by produced by the College Athlete Advocacy Initiative, an advocacy group Nevius founded, depicts college athletes as faceless victims in a system that exploits them for profit and tells them to “shut up and dribble”. The NCAA argues that it wants to maintain a level playing field, protect equal access to sports, and preserve the amateur nature of college athletics. Nevius argues its motivation comes down to something else. “Two words. Power and money,” he said. “That’s the entire reason they’re trying to obstruct progress. It’s as simple as that. Their arguments are completely bogus, unfounded and based on fear-mongering.” The chorus calling for revamping NCAA regulations has been building for years. In 2009, Ed O’Bannon, a former basketball player, sued the NCAA after he noticed a digital version himself on a video game for which he wasn’t paid. The suit resulted in a modest victory for O’Bannon and other athletes. A US district judge and an appeals court agreed with O’Bannon that the NCAA had violated federal antitrust law by not allowing student-athletes to profit from their likenesses in broadcasts and video games. As a result, NCAA member schools can now provide athletes with a stipend to cover the full cost of attendance. But that amount is capped at $500 a month, which some argue is a meager sum. And in 2014, after a star basketball player from Connecticut told media that he often went to bed hungry, the NCAA swiftly lifted restrictions on how much teams could feed players. The Fair Pay to Play Act takes O’Bannon’s victory a step further and says that California schools must abide by the act even if it’s in conflict with NCAA rules. Newsom signed the bill over the loud objections of the NCAA board of governors, who argued in a letter that the bill would “upend” college athletics by creating an unfair playing field and threatened to bar California schools from competing in future competitions. “It would erase the critical distinction between college and professional athletics and, because it gives those schools an unfair recruiting advantage, would result in them eventually being unable to compete in NCAA competitions,” the letter read. The NCAA isn’t the only voice of opposition to the new law. The PAC-12, a collegiate athletic conference that includes four California schools and in 2011 inked a 12-year, $3bn television deal with the TV networks Fox and ESPN, said in a statement that the law would lead to the “professionalization of college sports”. And the San Diego State athletic director, John David Wicker, said during a press conference this week that the new law unwisely placed California schools at odds with the NCAA and could hurt student athletes and their colleges if they were kept out of competition for being out of compliance with NCAA regulations. Wicker also said he took exception to the notion that student athletes don’t get anything in return for their play. Universities cover healthcare, he said, pay for travel expenses and cover tuition so athletes leave college-debt free – no small feat amid growing concerns that too many students leave school with debt they will struggle to repay. California’s legislation passed the state legislature unanimously and has inspired a slew of similar efforts by lawmakers across the country, including in Colorado, Illinois, Florida and Kentucky. And Sports Illustrated reports that the US representative Anthony Gonzalez, an Ohio Republican and former receiver at Ohio State and in the NFL, plans to propose a national law that would give college athletes the opportunity to make endorsement money.