Never mind whisky fumes – here is a notion to truly addle your mind: edible cocktail capsules, bearing a remarkable resemblance to those quick-dissolve pods you bung in the dishwasher. Tempted? Nor am I. This genius invention comes to us courtesy of the Glenlivet. Its tagline, “Original by Tradition”, is nearly as puzzling as its decision to enclose its whisky in a transparent casing (made of seaweed, apparently), to avoid the need for glasses. I wasn’t aware that glasses were so hard to come by; in fact, lots of whisky brands actually supply them. Johnnie Walker Gold Label gift packs come with two tumblers; last year, the Macallan offered a limited-edition duo engraved to your specifications. Gorgeous art deco whisky glasses are for sale all over the internet, and no seaweed was harmed in their making. “No ice. No stirrer. No glass. We’re redefining how whisky can be enjoyed,” the brand tweeted as it launched its Capsule Collection. I’m not convinced it is enjoyment that they are redefining. Warm whisky squirted straight into your mouth, with no time to swirl or sniff, to enjoy colours, aromas and flavours, has as much to do with enjoyment as Willy Wonka’s chewing gum in Charlie and the Chocolate Factory – or possibly less, since the gum that turned spoilt Violet violet was supposed to contain a three-course meal. Perhaps the Glenlivet’s next set of capsules could incorporate a salty snack and an aspirin in each handy pod. And who is to say that they will be consumed as intended? “Guys, I don’t know how to tell you this,” tweeted one user: “Teens are going to put these in their butts.” It quickly became a running joke on the site. Perhaps the wild-eyed Dr Frankenstein behind these monsters will point out that teens, in the country that says “butts” (the US is the Glenlivet’s primary market), are forbidden to drink alcohol. To which it is reasonable to respond: who said anything about drinking? Multinationals such as Pernod Ricard (which owns the Glenlivet) are fixated on novelty, which has nothing to do with the slow enjoyment of good whisky. If we want people to drink responsibly, it isn’t enough to put anodyne health warnings on websites and bottles. What is needed is an education in appreciation, and that doesn’t come in a consumable capsule.