One of the small things that separates baby boomers from younger generations is an irrational hatred for Halloween. “It’s American!” “It’s cultural imperialism!” “It celebrates the occult!” “It encourages small children to ask strangers for lollies!” (they may have a point on the last one). In response, I try to point out that many traditions, which were once foreign, become localised through the passage of time and small adaptations, and Australian culture is all the richer for it. It was in this spirit of adaptation that in recent years, I’ve begun to carve fruit rather than pumpkins. It’s also because, like most dads, I am a natural tightarse. In North America, pumpkins are cheap and plentiful in October. In Australia, farmers need to use special tricks to force them to grow outside their normal season, so they’re not cheap at all and you can’t even eat the insides (seeds don’t count). When you are forced to pay $15 for a 5kg inedible pumpkin, it’s a bad equation. There are some squashes and pumpkins that are in season in Australia in October, like the Queensland blue, but they’re just not as good for carving as the classic giant Atlantic pumpkin. Butternut pumpkins, which are also in season right now, are almost impossible to cut open, let alone carve. Interesting enough, the pumpkin was not even the first thing to be carved. Halloween has its origins in the Celtic traditions of Britain and Ireland, according to Carole Cusack, professor of religious studies at the University of Sydney, and until the discovery of the New World, they didn’t have pumpkins. “They mostly carved small things, like turnips,” Cusack says. In fact, the origin story of the jack-o’-lantern is a Christian morality tale of a man called Jack who, to cut a long story short, cheats the devil numerous times but ends up doomed to walk the Earth in the afterlife with a turnip lit by a hot coal, cast out of hell by the devil. Pumpkins only came on the scene after the Halloween tradition was brought to America. “Turnips are a lot harder to carve than pumpkins because they’re very hard and not hollow,” Cusack says. So with the pumpkin itself an adaptation, there’s no need to stick to an impractical, American tradition. How do the alternatives fare? The pineapple I bought was $4 – this was at Harris Farm so check out Aldi or your local grocers for a cheaper one. You need to get the ones that still have tops (technically called a crown) for full effect. Cut off the top, use a knife to cut out the flesh and a spoon to scrape it out, then carve a face in there. Its flesh is delicious … try walking around saying that in a creepy Halloween voice. Verdict: Scary and easy! 10/10 Everyone likes eating rockmelon. They’re also easy to carve and cheap at $2 each (Harris Farm) but they lack some of the pizazz of the pineapple and end up looking like George Costanza if he were a jack-o’-lantern. Verdict: Not quite a rockstar. 6/10 $4 for a large one. Papayas are like U2, a lot of people hate them for reasons I don’t quite understand. Even if you don’t like eating the insides, the strength of a papaya is that it’s really easy to carve out being both soft and firm. It also looks cool once lit up because the skin is semi-translucent and glows from the candlelight. You need to buy a decent-sized one to have room to fit the candle. Verdict: Eerie and excellent. 8/10 $3 each. This carving is inspired by the Kakamora in the Disney film Moana. The film based the Kakamora on the mythical Solomon Islands creatures but took a few artistic liberties along the way, so there’s a chance these might end up in the problematic basket at some point – the film also had a mixed reception among Polynesian communities. They’re not easy to make because coconut shells are impossible to carve. Only try this if you are comfortable with power tools. If you want to take the risk, take a drill-mounted circular saw, clamp the coconut down on a workbench and drill out the eyes, perhaps a pair of nostrils. Then saw the top of the coconut off. I found a stiff box saw was best. Then grab your hot glue gun and stick on the other accoutrements like hands, legs and teeth. Power tools, children and cultural appropriation might not be the best mix, on reflection.Verdict: Halloween cancelled. 2/10 I have used whole watermelons in previous years but this year I was looking at paying $25 for an 8kg one, which was the smallest I could find. In years past I have found it at Aldi for 99c a kilo. Watermelon is a childhood favourite, so it’s great if you’re hosting an after-school Halloween party. It’s easy to hollow out and carve and looks pretty good lit up at night. The only downside is that it doesn’t last well in the heat – the skin tends to melt, another problem which they don’t seem to have in most of North America at this time of year. Verdict: big and beautiful, like a Trump wall. 7/10