Passion counts for a lot in the theatre. That is proved by this fiercely political piece written by Sabrina Mahfouz, and performed by her and three colleagues, which lives up exactly to its title. A mix of gig and lecture and running just over an hour, it is driven by a strong anti-imperialist urge and informs even as it entertains. Mahfouz, an admired poet who has dual Egyptian-British nationality, admits this is a highly condensed account of the way water has been used by Britain in the Middle East to exert commercial and colonialist control. We get snapshot histories of various countries and protectorates including Bahrain, which was pivotal to British trade routes, Iraq whose borders were determined by the Sykes-Picot agreement of 1916 and where neighbouring Kuwait became vital for the transport of oil, and the UAE, which is a world leader in ecologically destructive desalination. The charge sheet mounts up but it is spiced with wit and humour. The history is interspersed with scenes where Mahfouz is security vetted by a spy chief (a suitably intense David Mumeni) for a possible job and, when questioned about her Muslim faith, reveals that she is more interested “in raving than religion”. Laura Hanna also puts across the songs, including an operatic account of a Jordanian female plumber, with great verve and cheekily suggests that shagging in the shower is one way of aiding water conservation in Dubai. Kareem Samara, meanwhile, supplies a strong percussive musical thread. The show packs rather too much into a short space, even taking us back to tales of Sumerian gods and goddesses. No one would pretend it is objective. But it is highly original in form, staged with great animation by Stef O’Driscoll in the Theatre Upstairs and full of impassioned concern. When we are reminded that, in 2018, 40 Yemeni boys were killed by a bomb made by a British arms manufacturer, the show reaches out from the sins of the imperialist past to embrace the horrors of the violent present. At the Royal Court, London, until 16 November.