Ed Woodward is a big dog, and big dogs know to throw money at a problem. Identifying that problem can prove tricky though. After watching Manchester United score 19 goals in their last 19 games, Old Trafford’s master fixer has formulated a crisis management plan, and will start to enact it in January whether or not Ole Gunnar Solskjær remains in the tiny broom cupboard at the back of Sir Alex Ferguson’s office. Woodward is ready to trump his own world record fee for a defender by forking out £90m for Napoli’s Kalidou Koulibaly, and has earmarked Declan Rice as the man to fortify United’s creaking midfield. No matter that West Ham have seen Woodward coming and let it be known they will demand £100m for their prized asset. Or that Solskjær has made clear his desire for a striker. When there is a crisis engulfing the house, lock the back door Ed. Paulo Dybala had the audacity to turn his nose up at a move to Manchester United during the summer, and Woodward is not a man you get to say “no” to twice. Daniel Levy puts value before pride but Tottenham’s hopes of reviving a transfer for the Juventus forward don’t look good. “It wasn’t an easy summer,” Dybala told Corriere della Sera. “Hearing your name linked to every team and every place, where you don’t want to go, isn’t a nice thing.” Mauricio Pochettino may have more luck persuading Youcef Atal to join if he can convince Levy that Nice’s 23-year-old Algerian is the man to fill a Kieran Trippier-shaped hole on the right side of Tottenham’s defence. Reports in Spain suggest Real Madrid have joined Tottenham, Manchester United and Liverpool in the race for James Maddison. Bernabéu suits are scouring Europe for new talent as they look to refresh an ageing midfield and have pinpointed the Leicester City dynamo as an £80m target. Steve Bruce loves a rugged centre-half as much as Mike Ashley loves a bargain so a move for Nottingham Forest’s Joe Worrall would excite everyone, except perhaps the Newcastle fans. The 22-year-old’s contract is up at the end of the season and he could be available for a knock-down fee. Chelsea have named their price for Michy Batshuayi amid interest from Crystal Palace, and its name is £22m. Manchester City want Dinamo Zagreb’s Antonio Marin after the young winger impressed against their under-19 side. Arsenal are keeping tabs on Celtic’s 16-year-old Karamoko Dembélé but face competition from Juventus and Borussia Dortmund. Le Parisien reports that Lyon have put Arsène Wenger on a shortlist of two to replace Sylvinho as manager after his fellow former Gunner got the axe this week. Wenger’s rival for the job is Laurent Blanc. And José Mourinho is keen to be the new top man at Tottenham if Pochettino gets the sack. Maybe it’s time for another letter.