If recent tradition is to be believed England have selected wisely for Saturday’s Rugby World Cup finale. The last three tournament winners have all named unchanged XVs for the final and Eddie Jones has now done likewise. Injuries aside, it was always going to be tough to look beyond the side which flattened New Zealand in the semi-final. There is also the encouraging little stat that no World Cup winner, to date, has ever lost a game en route. England are so far unbeaten on their Japanese odyssey while South Africa lost to New Zealand in their opening pool game. Completely irrelevant or a trusty barometer? We will find out soon enough. Jones, either way, could hardly have sounded more sure that England will rise to the ultimate challenge. There is wishful thinking and then there is the natural confidence generated by reaching the business end of the world’s biggest rugby tournament unbeaten and in tip-top shape. As the head coach put it: “We’ve got good tactical clarity about how we want to play, we’re fit, we’re enjoying the tournament – the only sadness is that it is about to end.” It is certainly a boost that tight-head prop Kyle Sinckler has been cleared to start after limping off early in the second-half against the All Blacks last weekend. By retaining George Ford at fly-half Jones has also effectively put the Springboks on notice that England feel they have the tactical variation to outflank the powerful South African pack and a kicking game capable of putting significant aerial pressure on the opposing back three, Above all, it is a team-sheet designed to show South Africa that England are not scared of them. “We want to play with no fear on Saturday,” said Jones. “We know South Africa aren’t going to give us the game and they are going to come hard. We’ve got to meet their physicality but we are looking forward to that and being able to impose our game on them. “We can definitely play better, there’s no doubt about it. The players know that. I have been so impressed by their preparation throughout the tournament and particularly this week. There’s a steeliness about them but also a nice relaxed feeling because they know they’ve done the work. We’ve spent four years getting ready for this occasion. That’s why the players and I can be relaxed.” The chosen XV, interestingly, is almost an exact replica of the one which kicked off the tournament against Tonga in mid-September, with only the fit-again Mako Vunipola for Joe Marler at loose-head prop altering the symmetry. As recently as 18 months ago Jones was still agonising over whether to keep faith with elder statesmen such as Dylan Hartley, Chris Robshaw, Mike Brown and Ben Te’o. It says everything about how far the squad have subsequently come that the side’s fifth-place finish in the 2018 Six Nations feels several decades ago. Jones has never made any secret of the fact that peaking on the 2nd November 2019 was always his priority. If he has been slightly fortunate that both Vunipolas, Manu Tuilagi and Anthony Watson have all recovered from long-term injuries in the nick of time, the players concerned have all worked incredibly hard to make it happen. “This time last year I couldn’t lift my heel off the floor and I could barely walk without a limp,” said Watson, reflecting on the emotion he felt when England clinched their final place. Now it is simply a question of whether England can subdue a Springbok side bolstered by the return on the wing of the electric Cheslin Kolbe, the only change to the side that beat Wales in the semi-final, and cope with the scale of the occasion. “We have to go out there and take the game to South Africa,” cautioned Jones, who will be taking charge of England for the 50th Test. “Our only concern is whether we can play better than the previous week. For us that simple approach has worked. It frees us up and allows us to play with discipline but also freedom. That’s why we feel like we are ready to go on Saturday. “There has been no higher expectation than within the team. We started out [in early 2016] wanting to be the best team in the world. Three weeks ago, we were hopeless, I was going to get the sack, Owen couldn’t kick a goal. So we don’t tend to listen to the external noise. The boys know what’s ahead of them, everyone knows what’s at stake.”