“Today’s news is tomorrow’s fish and chip papers” is a saying long used to soothe celebrities facing scandal, but increasingly it’s one that could just as easily describe British politics. In this era of Brexit-mania, a headline declaring major breaking news is barely published before a new turn of events makes it instantly out of date. But as the nation – and the media – prepares for what will be the most febrile election campaign in a generation, it means some of the most serious issues facing the country are being forgotten. I’d call it a kind of political amnesia. Millions of families endure turmoil at the hands of government polices – yet as the years pass, those policies barely get a mention in news reports any more. To see this amnesia in action, look at the bedroom tax. It was a minor detail that the ‘spare rooms' in questions were often filled with hospital-style beds or medicine Introduced in 2013, it was the most controversial of the so-called welfare reforms of the coalition era, punishing hundreds of thousands of the poorest social housing tenants – many of them disabled – for having a spare room in their home. It was a minor detail that the “spare rooms” in question were often filled with hospital-style beds or boxes of medicine, or that there were generally no smaller properties for families to move into. Flick through news reports from that time and outraged concern dominates the headlines. “Bedroom tax nightmare is worse than Afghanistan, says war veteran reduced to living on £5 a day,” said the Daily Record in 2013. “Foster carers hit by bedroom tax,” reported ITN in the same year. Six years later the policy has hit the headlines again. This time it was when the European court of human rights (ECHR) ruled that a domestic violence survivor had suffered a violation of her rights by being penalised through the bedroom tax. The mum, known only as “A” for her protection, lives in a three-bedroom home specially adapted by police to contain a panic room to protect her and her 11-year-old son from her violent ex-partner. But the government claimed she only needed two rooms, and promptly docked her housing benefit. The case exemplifies the absurd cruelty of a policy that meant a domestic violence survivor was expected to take in a complete stranger as a lodger in order to be exempt from the cut, or to risk her life by moving out and leaving behind the expensive adaptations that had already been built. Consider that three years before this month’s judgment, Labour claimed that the government had already spent more public money fighting this case than it would have cost to scrap the tax for the victims of domestic violence it affects. But the case also shows just how quickly concern for such policies is erased from the public consciousness. Anyone who read about the panic room story this month could have been forgiven for thinking that the bedroom tax was no longer active. Soon enough, working-class families being evicted becomes old news. It’s not that the public don’t care, but that there is only so much attention to be spared. In many ways this is the natural byproduct of a political era that has seen monumental social and economic change in just a few years. But it is exacerbated by a media that, with notable exceptions, too often focuses on the Westminster melodrama while ignoring the people whose lives are the casualties of it. The bedroom tax is far from the only policy receiving this treatment. It is standard practice for an issue to produce a wave of angry concern from commentators and the public alike, only to subsequently disappear without a trace. Think of the homeless people dying on our streets, or the disabled people put through “fit for work” tests. This climate has freed up ministers to cause scandalous levels of damage, safe in the knowledge that they won’t be held accountable for their actions. For voters, it means politicians can carry on pushing them into crisis without anybody caring. It’s generally understood that the challenge for Labour during this Christmas election will be pushing the conversation away from being solely about Brexit and towards the daily issues facing voters. This is rightly seen as politically prudent. But it’s also a much-needed prescription for a more healthy politics. Ask a voter if she’s struggling to afford food because of the bedroom tax, or launch an attack on universal credit, and it sends a message: you matter. As an election looms, politicians and press alike must shift the focus on to Britain’s forgotten scandals. That nobody is looking any more does not mean it’s not still happening. • Frances Ryan is a Guardian columnist