The zombie apocalypse comes to the Midlands in this gore-filled comedy about two pairs of friends who find themselves escaping the carnage on a painfully slow canal boat from an infected Birmingham to the supposed safe haven of London. Zombie invasions may be a well-trodden premise but the writer and director, Adam Miller, uses meta-references to his advantage, turning the 30-minute show into a crossover between a wry sitcom and a fast-paced first-person shooter. Ammar Kalia It’s festival week for the contestants and there is a global spin on the bakes to come. While a signature bake evokes celebrations from around the world, there is also a deep-fried Italian technical to summon up, and, for the showstopper, a fabulous Indonesian celebration cake, which will really prove the bakers’ mettle. Ali Catterall After last week’s flashbacks brought belated clarity to the CCTV-heavy thriller, some personal peril cranks up the tension for tonight’s finale. But can the fugitive soldier Shaun (Callum Turner) and obdurate cop Rachel (Holliday Grainger) outsmart a shadowy cabal literally designed to control the narrative? Graeme Virtue Fred Siriex continues his competition of pairing top chefs with the task of recreating the nation’s favourite snacks. This week, it’s playground staple Monster Munch, which is deconstructed by the Michelin-starred chef Matt Worswick and Tristan Welch to often catastrophic results. Who will get the finger-licking glory? AK This legal comedy is superb: laced with the right amounts of misanthropy and sentimentalism and unafraid of a textbook set-piece such as, tonight, a bungled speech. The relationship between Katherine Parkinson’s barrister and Will Sharpe’s bewildered pupil, meanwhile, is thawing nicely. Jack Seale The Glaswegian rapper Darren McGarvey, AKA Loki, ends his insightful and impeccably researched series in Aberdeen, once the oil-rich wealthy centre of the country and now facing a homelessness crisis. McGarvey interviews locals with unflinching compassion. AK The Big Sleep (Howard Hawks, 1946), 11.05am, TCM Movies This classic adaptation of Raymond Chandler’s thriller has Humphrey Bogart as the quintessential Marlowe: an honourable private eye trying to make sense of a plot that stumped even the director, Howard Hawks. He ploughs on to the bitter end in a dark world lit by crackling dialogue and Lauren Bacall. Paul Howlett Rugby World Cup: South Africa v Canada, 10.45am, ITV4. A Pool B clash live from Japan. International women’s football: Portugal v England 7pm, BBC Four. Women’s friendly clash from Estádio do Bonfim. Rugby World Cup: Argentina v USA 5.15am, ITV4. A head-to-head from Pool C.