There is no doubt in my mind that the midfield trio of George Ford, Owen Farrell and Manu Tuilagi is the best available to England if they have front-foot ball. That is going to be a big if in the latter stages of the tournament and I would urge caution against taking as read that this is now England’s first-choice combination. It is a midfield who can carry out a gameplan very well and if they click it will be a good day at the office for England against Argentina. But would Eddie Jones really opt for those three against the power and the physicality of the All Blacks or South Africa? That is the only reason I would question it. They would have expected front-foot ball against Tonga and the USA and they will back themselves to have it against Argentina but you are far from guaranteed it if and when you reach the knockout stages. With that in mind, maybe you need the extra ballast of a Farrell, Tuilagi, Henry Slade or Jonathan Joseph combination. I just wonder if Jones will feel the need to sacrifice a bit of ball-handling for some extra size in his backs. The selection makes perfect sense for the Pumas, however. In terms of being able to play on top of teams and manipulate space, especially when kicking is such a big factor at the World Cup, the current 10-12 combination is the best they have. Look at the first half of Argentina against France. One team wanted to play rugby and Argentina wanted a good old arm-wrestle. When France were able to keep the ball alive and get some continuity they looked untouchable. But if you want to have one-off runners into their guards, playing off nine, Argentina will relish it. They will fly out of the line, hitting on suspicion and being extremely physical. That is the trap England can’t fall into. I don’t doubt England’s physicality – there are not many more powerful teams than them. Tonga came with the threat of physicality and England more than matched them. But Argentina in the build-up have tried to seduce England away from their gameplan and into an arm-wrestle. They will feed off the emotion of the occasion and will enjoy being underdogs so England must keep their control, keep their discipline and dictate the speed and tempo of the match. Fitness and speed are two of Jones’s buzzwords. When we talk about fitness though, it means different things to different people. Argentina will think about fitness in terms of a team who can scrummage and maul effectively but for England we’re talking about playing a high-tempo game and I just don’t think Argentina will be able to live with it. As much as both teams have talked about how important the battle between the forwards will be, I expect that to be more of a decisive factor. I also expect Ford and Farrell to continue to implement England’s kicking game-plan. I look at the amount of handling errors there have been due to the conditions. There should not be as many with this match, England’s first outdoors, but when conditions are difficult the key is keeping things simple. For the All Blacks, that is still catch and pass and so while there were plenty of handling errors from them against Canada, there were also some amazing passages of play. For England, keeping things simple means kick-chase. Discipline will also be important for England because Benjamín Urdapilleta is a lethal kicker. I played with him at Harlequins for a few years and he was a lovely footballer. He was understudy to Nick Evans and unfortunate not to get more game-time but the year he left he went to Oyonnax and was player of the season in the Top 14. He is a passionate guy, he’s a small chap, physically similar to Ford, but he will never shirk his responsibility. He has to be respected. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales Ultimately though, England should have too much strength in depth. With Mako Vunipola, Jack Nowell and Slade coming back it may seem amazing that they still have all 31 players fit. There is some luck involved but it just goes to show what happens when you do not have the national set-up and the Premiership pulling the players in different directions. England have the greatest player pool, the richest union in the world and resources to die for. The only thing that ever gets in the way of the English game is politics. I get why, but wouldn’t it be amazing if there was collaboration for the greater good of the national side?