Let me tell you a story. A few years ago, months after this riven old island voted to leave the European Union, and days after an ex-reality TV host became the leader of the free world, a writer happened to win an award. In her speech she thanks this country which has been her home for half her life. She thanks it for valuing her book, for valuing her at this historic moment in time. And she means it. This validation means the world to her. It comes from a country, Scotland, that is not exactly hers but in which she has settled. In which she has produced a mixed-race baby and become a writer. Afterwards she is whisked away for photos, handshakes, congratulations, the heady stuff of success. Only the following day does she discover what else happened that night. Following her speech, the head of the organisation returned to the stage and made an off-the-cuff comment about this award really ticking “all the boxes”. It was nothing really, just a lighthearted joke, more at the expense of funders and their infuriating rules than the writer who happens to be Indian, English, bisexual, a woman, the daughter of first-generation immigrants. The comment is nothing special. It is about as standard as organisations headed up by straight, white, middle-class men The comment is nothing special. It is in fact about as standard as organisations headed up by straight, white, middle-class men. And it is certainly not intended to cause offence. It is wellmeant, perhaps even an attempt to celebrate the differences that are elsewhere, beyond the warm and welcoming world of literature, threatening to tear us apart. The only unusual aspect of all this is that the following day, the head of the organisation issues a heartfelt apology to the writer. She accepts it unreservedly, touched and a bit embarrassed. She thinks perhaps things are changing. No one has ever apologised before. But, in the quiet place of things unsaid, she also feels humiliated, because there she was foolishly thinking she had won a prize for writing a good book. She feels like an imposter, because what if ticking boxes is why she won? Ashamed, because those boxes have stalked her for much of her life. She has history with those boxes, and much of it is not happy. She feels like an outsider, which she is, but in this moment it is less a badge of honour and more like swallow-me-up stigma. The shine has been taken off her success. She feels like an idiot for even caring. Still, she doesn’t want to appear overly sensitive, humourless or ungrateful. So, just like all the other times, she says nothing. Nods along when people tell her that it didn’t mean anything. Keeps on writing. This should not be the end of the story. My story. It should be the beginning: the necessarily uncomfortable place from which discussions about diversity and inclusion spring. What happens when we reduce the genuine pursuit of diversity to a box-ticking exercise is what happened to me. It is what happens, in all sorts of subtle and unspoken ways, all the time. When did you last hear someone complaining that diversity is all well and good in principle but it is quality that matters most? What did you say? The very meaning of this word has been wrested from our hands and reshaped into some hollow liberal posture. So for the Lionel Shrivers of the world, publishers who commit to diversity are not committed to enriching, enlivening, and prising open the culture. They are merely “drunk on virtue”. Such arguments should be deeply offensive to anyone in the business of words. They not only presuppose that equality and quality are mutually exclusive, but that diversity is actually dangerous. Why? Because it results in a diluting rather than sparking of excellence. It means that those of us who fall under diversity’s wide umbrella have been held back, not because of discrimination and prejudice, a narrowness of perspective that tends to accompany privilege, or a lack of representation, but because we are not as good. Or conversely, if we happen to have made our way, it is because allowances were made, quotas met, liberal consciences assuaged, but never, God forbid, did we get here on merit alone. The truth, which should be self-evident after more than five thousand years of publishing, is that greatness, like mediocrity, can come from anywhere. Diversity is not the enemy of quality – it is the realisation of it. Right now, diversity is something that is said more than done; all talk and no action. It has become a dubiously fashionable word that triggers a kind of cynical switch-off in our minds, a slump in our bodies and a pile-on in our social media feeds. We appear to be more interested in debating what constitutes diversity than actually increasing it. Meanwhile our publishing companies, literary organisations, and funding bodies – those in the business, lest we forget, of showing the world not just what exists but what is possible – bumble along much as they were. I think we can all agree that publishing, like any other industry, is woefully lacking in diversity. I think we can all agree with what Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie famously called “the danger of a single story”. And I think most of us can agree that we would like to do better. There is a long way to go, but we should take comfort from knowing that the way to get there is the way to get anywhere worth going: by listening to other people’s stories. • This piece was originally part of the Literature Talks series, commissioned by Literature Alliance Scotland • Chitra Ramaswamy is the author of Expecting: The Inner Life of Pregnancy