People sometimes talk about being blown away by a sporting spectacle. The 2019 Rugby World Cup is in danger of being remembered for the opposite. If the weather forecasters are correct, the onrushing super Typhoon Hagibis is way too big and powerful to be messed with. Not since the late, great Jonah Lomu burst on to the scene in South Africa in 1995 has a larger shadow loomed over the competition. The first thing to say is that everything in life is relative. Calling off a couple of rugby matches is a gnat’s bite compared with the potential destruction, both in terms of human lives and structural damage, that mighty Hagibis may yet wreak. Roaring in from the Pacific is a storm which, in terms of magnitude, is three times bigger than the one which caused three deaths and massive disruption across the greater Tokyo area early last month. That said, this is a World Cup and every self-respecting organising committee is supposed to have a range of contingency plans. In this instance, they seem to have consisted largely of crossed fingers. There is currently still no guarantee Japan and Scotland will play their all-important pool fixture in Yokohama on Sunday. Which means that, if the weather gods continue to be cruel, Scotland could be ejected from the tournament in the most head-clutching of circumstances. Within minutes of the World Rugby press conference concluding in Tokyo, the Scottish Rugby Union had issued a statement effectively demanding that their fate must be settled on the pitch.If that is not possible there is going to be an almighty row. Italy, whose game against the All Blacks has gone the same way as England’s cancelled pool game against France, have also been left snookered. The likelihood of the Azzurri beating New Zealand and sneaking into the last eight might have have remote but no-one will ever now know for sure. Either way their hooker, Leonardo Ghiraldini, was looking forward to a final hurrah after a distinguished Test career. He was reduced to tears by the cancellation news. And might France conceivably have surprised England and stolen top spot in Pool C, thus radically reshaping the quarter-final draw? Again, it is a question which can never be fully resolved. Which is why, whatever happens from now on, this World Cup looks destined to have a permanent asterisk beside its name. The tournament organisers insist otherwise, that the integrity of their event has been preserved because, after careful consideration, they have applied the same cancellation rules to everyone. They would have been on firmer ground in that regard had they taken the precaution of setting aside a spare day or two next week as protection against freak weather events. Virtually every other sport out there – golf, tennis, cricket etc – usually manages to find a way. What if next Monday or Tuesday had been allocated as reserve days, with facilities for double headers to be staged, in the event of final pool round games being disrupted? The organisers’ counter argument is that, logistically, it ultimately proved impossible to move teams around at such short notice. Tricky, sure, but impossible? This is a country justly famous for the speed and efficiency of its internal transport links. Might it be that, behind the scenes, some of the competing sides, particularly the Tier One ones, decided it suited them better to hide behind the letter of the tournament rules, which say that postponed games should be declared 0-0 draws and the points shared? What we do know is that the World Cup organisers went into this tournament with their eyes open. They have known for years when the typhoon season is; as long ago as September 2018 the tournament director Alan Gilpin called it “a real hot topic for us”. Had the competition kicked off even a couple of weeks’ later in September, there would have been less of a threat to keynote end-of-pool fixtures. The other aggrieved body of people who will be looking for some proper answers are those supporters who paid thousands to come over to Japan to watch the games. The cost of their match tickets will be refunded but nothing else. Should they simply shrug their shoulders and head to the hotel bar? Or are they entitled to ask if more could have been done. “I have just been walking around he streets and there are a lot of people with disappointed faces,” reported Eddie Jones, England’s head coach, who has relocated his squad away from the eye of the storm back to their pre-tournament training base in the southern coastal backwater of Miyazaki. “It is difficult for them because it was going to be a special occasion. We feel for them.” Jones also pointed his audience in the direction of the word “Shoganai”, which is used in Japan when something cannot be helped and it feels best to accept it and move on. “You can’t help typhoons. We would all like to think we’ve got the power above and beyond what’s happening in the world at the moment, but we don’t. These things happen and you just ride with it. We’ve had two relatively easy games, one tough game and then two weeks to prepare for a quarter-final. So someone is smiling on us – the typhoon gods, maybe?” If he were coaching Scotland, it is fair to suggest his tone would be appreciably different.