Eden Hazard scored his first goal for Real Madrid as an unlikely top-of-the-table clash had a likely ending, but that doesn’t tell the full story. Newly promoted Granada, the club with a budget 18 times smaller than that of their opponents, arrived at the Santiago Bernabéu fielding a starting XI with eight men who played for them in the second division and departed defeated 4-2, having fallen behind after two minutes. However, there is a reason they were second at kick-off and it wasn’t until James Rodríguez scored with the last touch of the game that Madrid secured a victory which proved more challenging than anyone could have imagined shortly before. Karim Benzema scored the first goal, Hazard and Luka Modric following him, but Darwin Machís got one back with 20 minutes left and then Domingos Duarte made it 3-2 to set up a tense final quarter of an hour. “No one can deny that we fight,” said Granada’s manager, Diego Martínez. Madrid, though, hung on and a breakaway allowed James to end it at the death. Granada, Spain’s great revelation, couldn’t take first place. Instead, Madrid lead the league after an impressive start gave way to familiar concerns. “We can’t suffer at home like this,” Dani Carvajal said. Ultimately, logic was imposed but that had not always been taken for granted pre-game and certainly was not as the last minutes ticked away here. Madrid were without Thibaut Courtois, withdrawn sick at half-time in their dreadful 2-2 draw against Club Brugge in midweek, the club forced to deny suggestions he had suffered an anxiety attack. Instead, Alphonse Areola started – and he instigated Granada’s comeback with a terrible error that unexpectedly reopened this game. Madrid had led after only two minutes, when Bale delivered a wonderful ball with the outside of his foot that bent low across the area to Benzema. “We couldn’t begin the game worse, letting a goal in after two minutes – in this stadium and against this team,” Martínez said. Madrid, meanwhile, could not have started better and at times they combined better than they have all season. There were decent chances nicely worked for Carvajal, Benzema and Fede Valverde, while Bale hit the side netting. Yet Granada’s keeper, Rui Silva, impressed and the second goal had to wait until just before half time. “It could have come sooner,” Martínez admitted; it did come when Valverde bundled through and found Hazard inside the area. “Eden was happy in the dressing room; he wanted that,” Zinedine Zidane said. “We’re happy for him, we hope it’s the first of many.” The finish, with the outside of the foot over the keeper, was an awaited glimpse of his class and looked like setting up an easy afternoon in the sun. Even the confrontations early in the second half, particularly between Casemiro and Roberto Soldado, didn’t necessarily presage the battle that would soon break out and the best goal of the game seemed to have ended it early, Modric hitting the top corner from 25 yards. Madrid, though, are not a team to trust and Areola got caught with the ball at his feet. In attempting to escape the pressure and clear, he kicked Carlos Fernández. Machís scored the penalty and Granada stepped up. Next, Duarte dived in to volley a flicked-on corner and make it 3-2. “Yes, we can!” Granada’s fans chanted and it seemed they could, too, Raphaël Varane diving in to block a shot, the momentum shifting, their manager later declaring himself proud” of his players – but the fans were wrong. On 94 minutes, Madrid broke, James scored his first Madrid goal in two years, and the Bernabéu breathed again.