In Disneyland, where England are staying for this semi‑final week, they specialise in blurring the lines between fantasy and reality. Perhaps that is why Eddie Jones has based his squad in a hotel full of people dressed up as Mickey Mouse wannabes. If you are looking to dream big, this is not a bad place to start. Even the late Walt Disney himself would have been impressed with Jones’s vaudeville act on a rainy lunchtime, a performance intended for a specific target audience if ever there was one. In between suggesting the All Blacks are a side under increasing pressure, dismissing the New Zealand media as “fans with keyboards” and hinting that persons unknown had been spying on England training, there was something for all the family. As with all great masters of illusion, it was left up to others to choose precisely what they wanted to believe. Someone was definitely (maybe) spotted on a distant balcony overlooking the training ground but, no, England could not categorically say the individual had Kiwi connections. Innocent until proven guilty? “There was definitely someone in the apartment block filming but it might have been a Japanese fan. Don’t care, mate.” OK, so why mention it? His potshots at the New Zealand media also had a knowing subtext: Jones is equally happy directing fire at their UK counterparts. “One week ago, I was going to get sacked, Owen Farrell couldn’t kick, someone wrote there’d be blood on the walls of Twickenham. Now we are in a World Cup semi-final and have a chance of going through.” So did he simply want to give the All Black management something good to read over their coffee? “Well someone has to ask them a question because the NZ media doesn’t … you guys are just fans with keyboards.” All good knockabout stuff: if you give it out, you have to be prepared to take it. The message Jones really wanted to sprinkle like Tinker Bell’s fairy dust, though, was that New Zealand are the team with the heavier weight on their collective shoulders this week, in comparison to England’s carefree troubadours. Quick as a flash he asked all those present who thought England would win this Saturday to raise their hand, before – shock, horror – declaring the poll closed a nanosecond later. “Well I couldn’t see too many hands go up. Your first reaction is always your most honest reaction, and if you don’t put your hand up straight away you don’t believe it. And you don’t.” Job done. Next. On and on it went, like a cartoon chase around the house. “We don’t have any pressure, mate. No one thinks we can win. There are 120 million Japanese people out there whose second team are the All Blacks. So there’s no pressure on us ... whereas they’ve got to be thinking about how they’re looking for their third World Cup. That brings an element of pressure. New Zealand talk about walking towards pressure. Well, this week the pressure is going to be chasing them down the street.” The digested read digested? Get under the All Blacks’ skin and you never know. Jones gets on well with Steve Hansen and admires what his coaching adversary has achieved but, in his eyes, the art of distraction is always worth trying. One, it may just cause one or two New Zealanders to take their eye off the ball. Two, it potentially hijacks the media agenda for a day or two. Three, it encourages his own players to demystify their opponents. Not many New Zealanders, journalists or otherwise, gave the British & Irish Lions much chance of emerging with a drawn series in 2017 so why should England not stand a chance in a one‑off semi-final? Jones seldom misses that kind of open goal. The head coach referred to the 15 England players who went on the Lions tour: “They went down there, they played in their back yard, and they know they’re human. They bleed, they drop balls, they miss tackles like every other player. It’s our job to take their time and space away so that we put them under pressure. I don’t think they are vulnerable but pressure is a real thing. “The busiest bloke in Tokyo this week will be Gilbert Enoke, the mental skills coach. It is potentially the last game for their greatest coach and their greatest captain and they will be thinking about those things. It is always harder to defend a World Cup and they will be thinking about that as well.” Credit where it is due: there are days when Jones makes even the Jungle Book’s python Kaa sound unpersuasive. Just before the final credits, though, it was time to deliver the serious section of the script. “I can remember being in Kyoto for the draw two and a half years ago. Even an Australian could do the mathematics: we were going to play New Zealand in a semi-final. Progressively we’ve built a game that we think we can take New Zealand with and we’ve done that over the last two and a half years. We’re just excited by the possibility.” Neverland? We will all find out on Saturday.