By making it illegal to “smack” children, the Scottish parliament has set an example for the rest of the UK, as well as countries around the world that have yet to legislate in this area (most of Europe already has, with Sweden leading the way in 1979). Rather than creating a new offence, the new law removes the defence of “justifiable assault” which used to be available to adults accused of assaulting children. Henceforth the law will give equal protection to victims irrespective of age. It was a mistake by the SNP not to bring its own bill, and a pity that the party has delayed the incorporation into Scottish law of the UN convention on the rights of the child. But the decision to support the bill introduced by Green MSP (and former policeman) John Finnie was a good one, while its smooth passage is a credit to Scottish parliamentarians. English, Welsh and Northern Irish campaigners must now step up their efforts on behalf of the rest of the UK’s children, and against the “reasonable punishment” defence that is the equivalent of justifiable assault in Scotland – and allows parents or carers to strike children, including babies, providing they do not leave marks on the skin. There are not many people nowadays who defend hitting children on principle. Evidence that violent punishments are more harmful than beneficial to young people’s emotional development and mental health has been accumulating for decades. Mostly, adults hit children when they are enraged and out of control (in other words, in a similar frame of mind to that in which they might strike other adults). Such conduct teaches children that attacking others is an acceptable way to deal with angry feelings. It also, especially given the disparities in size and strength between adults and children, carries risks, and is sometimes linked to domestic abuse. With the support of children’s charities and all four UK children’s commissioners, the Welsh government, like the Scottish one, is keen to act. Given the weight of international opinion, the commitment to “end violence” enshrined in the UN convention on the rights of the child, and years of work by the Global Initiative to End All Corporal Punishment of Children, this ought to be uncontroversial. Yet the UK parliament has not voted on the question since 2004 – when Tony Blair refused to give Labour MPs a free vote on an amendment that would have granted children equal protection. “Nanny state” rhetoric is one reason for this. In a democracy, laws are the rules we choose to live by. But the insinuation that voters are being patronised undermines public understanding of the positive changes they can bring about, by changing attitudes and behaviour. Scotland’s move at least puts the issue back into the spotlight, and gives children’s rights campaigners the best chance they have had for years to make the case that the law allowing adults to assault children is outdated. In future decades we will be ashamed it was not altered sooner.