By the time my 40th birthday rolled around last year, I was well-prepared for middle age. Tired? Tick. Stressed about finances, children, marriage and the imminent demise of the planet? Tick. A newfound appetite for milquetoast TV? Tick. The upscale buffet of high-quality TV on offer these days has come, unfortunately, at the wrong stage of life for me. Waking up every day in 2019 brings so many psychic challenges: even scanning the news headlines each morning feels like an extreme sport. The last thing I want to see before I go to sleep each night, then, is a comely assassin repurposing a vintage hairpin as a murder weapon, or a corpse being dispensed with in a barrel of hydrofluoric acid. But it’s taken me years to learn that the quality of the television shows I’m watching doesn’t correlate with my value as a human being. No matter how low or high end your viewing habits might be, in the end it all involves staring at a screen while eating ice cream in your PJs. So I’m finally ready to admit to passing on the myriad spoils of the gilded age of telly in favour of watching Escape to the Country every night. Babies need their bottles before they go to bed: I need an episode of Escape to the Country. It’s the TV equivalent of fairy floss dipped in chloroform, Stilnox on a screen. Not for Escape to the Country the manufactured theatrics and contrived plotlines of your average reality TV show: the closest we come to high drama in Escape to the Country is a couple incorrectly guessing the price of a barn conversion in the Yorkshire Dales. If that sounds impossibly boring, let me assure you: it is. And yet I’ve found no other show that functions so effectively as a balm for serrated nerves. There are plenty of television shows that fail to excite, of course, but few that manage to do so in such winning fashion. By the mid-point of the show, you can reasonably expect to be asleep, or at the very least fighting off a pleasant wave of fatigue. I’ve found no other show that functions so effectively as a balm for serrated nerves Everyone has their own version of Escape, a show guaranteed to send them peaceably into dreams. A show that allows you to doze off for a few minutes and come to without having missed any important details, unless you count a couple from Huddersfield bemoaning an over-abundance of ceiling beams as an important detail. Perhaps because of their historical tendency to ignore the unpleasant, the Brits are the undisputed kings and queens of this genre. Antiques Roadshow, Great British Garden Revival (“Christine treats us to a masterclass in carpet bedding”), The Repair Shop, The Great British Bake Off and Glamour Puds (“Eric Lanlard cooks a chocolate faberge egg in St Petersburg”) – if genteel lifestyle floof is your genre, the Brits have you covered. The same cannot be said for Australians. When the ABC launched a local adaptation of Escape to the Country, Escape from the City, I was as excited as one can be by a show the defining characteristic of which is a lack of excitement. But our scorched countryside, sweaty tropical outposts and endearing inability to speak naturally when cameras are present do not provide the pastoral, cream buns comfort of a Sussex seaside town or Cotswold stone cottage. Americans, despite their mastery of every other genre, also fail on the milquetoast telly front, owing to their tendency to adrenalise proceedings at every available opportunity. Participants on property search show House Hunters, for example, are obliged to buy one of the houses they’re shown. On Escape to the Country the participants are barely obliged to remain conscious. The Brits intuitively understand that the best way to relax is by discreetly removing all traces of the crude and confronting from view. Why sully one’s precious downtime with reminders of violence, inequality, rape and starvation? Phil Spencer’s Stately Homes, Penelope Keith’s Hidden Villages, Kirstie’s Handmade Christmas – in not one of these shows is anyone having sex with their twin sister. The Antiques Roadshow experts would never use a Wedgwood teapot to disembowel a co-presenter, even if they mistakenly valued a high school art project at £50,000. And my sleep angels on Escape to the Country are not hiding any handmaidens in the linen cupboard. For this I am grateful – and ready for bed. • Escape to the Country is on 7Two in Australia and BBC One and Two in the UK