Inspired By the East: How the Islamic World Influenced Western ArtFive-hundred years of European admiration for Islamic art are revealed in a fascinating perspective on global art history. • British Museum, London, 10 October to 26 January. Hogarth: Place and ProgressAll the hilarious and horrific painted stories of William Hogarth are brought together in the most atmospheric museum in Britain. It should be darkly magical. • Sir John Soane’s Museum, London, 9 October to 5 January. Elizabeth PeytonFan art becomes high culture in Peyton’s stylish daubs of celebrities. • National Portrait Gallery, London, until 5 January. Into the Night: Cabarets and Clubs in Modern ArtDecadence, dancing and modern art from 1920s Berlin to 1960s Nigeria. • Barbican Art Gallery, London, until 19 January. Rembrandt in PrintIt’s arguable that Rembrandt is even greater in print than on canvas – and this will show you why.Holburne Museum, Bath, until 5 January Cardinal Bessarion with the Bessarion Reliquary (About 1472-73) by Gentile BelliniWhen the Ottomans conquered Constantinople – today’s Istanbul – in 1453 and ended the long run of the Byzantine empire, last relict of classical antiquity, its intellectuals fled westward. This painting depicts one of them, John Bessarion, together with the painted reliquary containing pieces of the true cross and Christ’s clothing that he presented to a charitable foundation in his new home of Venice. Gentile Bellini, who depicts the faces venerating this holy object with such tender precision, had a love affair with the east. He was sent by the Venetian republic on a diplomatic mission to Istanbul, where he portrayed people from the sultan to a humble scribe in this same delicate style. Bellini was a human bridge between the rival civilisations of the Renaissance world. • National Gallery, London. Fons Americanus by Kara Walker The US artist has unveiled a fabulous fountain surrounded by shark-infested waters as her Turbine Hall commission at Tate Modern. Grotesque figures and sardonic caricatures refer to the painful history of the British empire, the transatlantic slave trade and past artworks. Read the full review Rachelle Meyer turned her Amsterdam commute into a cartoon strip Banksy’s MPs-as-chimps piece has sold for £10m Thierry Noir is repainting the Berlin Wall The National Gallery has gone prudish about Gauguin The sound of terror changed Turner finalist Lawrence Abu Hamdan’s life Gags, tapestry and pandas are in vogue at Frieze London Rembrandt might not have made the greatest cinematographer Grafton Architects won the Riba gold medal Artists with motor neurone disease reveal courage and passion Street art is helping to build New York anew … … while Banksy set up shop in Croydon We found out why Bauhaus was too much for the Brits Chairman Mao is everywhere in China again A portrait of Richard III went on public display for the first time The pre-Raphaelite sisterhood is coming Elmgreen and Dragset returned to their fake Prada store in Texas Giorgio Armani has declared his love of Japanese design For Txema Yeste, fashion is a world of fantasy … and Blackburn has gone mad for sneakers Tacita Dean caused a diplomatic storm The Alfred Fried photography award seeks peace Prince Harry took over Instagram in the name of trees Adrian Bradshaw saw the future arrive in China … while Ivor Prickett watched the Caliphate fall in Mosul The V&A will close its Raphael cartoons gallery for a revamp A Vienna design classic will be recreated for a cabaret show We looked back at Buckminster Fuller’s New Alchemists We remembered film title design master Wayne Fitzgerald … and Dutch typographer Wim Crouwel To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. If you’d like to receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here.