Lionel Messi scored two goals and set up two more as Barcelona thrashed Real Valladolid 5-1 to move top of La Liga. Ernesto Valverde’s side ran out comfortable winners at the Camp Nou, where Saturday’s clásico against Real Madrid was due to be played before it was postponed until December because of political tension. Messi teed up Arturo Vidal with a magical pass for the Chilean to put the hosts 2-1 ahead after Kiko Olivas cancelled out Clément Lenglet’s early deflected opener. The Argentinian then whipped a free kick into the top corner, fired home another and sent Luis Suárez through to ensure Barcelona moved top on 22 points from 10 matches, with another promoted side, Granada, slipping back to second. “Leo showed all the quality he has, when he’s like that the team really feels it,” said Vidal. “We see him every day and he surprises us every day, with the quality he has, he’s from another planet.” Atlético Madrid were held to a 1-1 draw at Alavés as Lucas Pérez’s sublime solo strike stopped the visitors moving into provisional top spot in La Liga on Tuesday. Atlético substitute Álvaro Morata scored his third goal in three games to fire them ahead in the 70th minute but Diego Simeone’s team struggled to find top form. Alavés’ Fernando Pacheco made fine saves to deny Morata a second goal and to foil Ángel Correa before former West Ham striker Pérez cut in from the right and lashed a thunderbolt into the top corner with seven minutes remaining. Atletico are third after 11 games, level on 20 points with surprise package Granada who face Getafe on Thursday. In Serie A, a stunning strike by Romelu Lukaku gave Internazionale a 2-1 win at Brescia, although they had to cling on for three points in the face of heavy pressure from the promoted side. The win took Inter back to the top of Serie A, at least for 24 hours until Juventus, who are two points behind, host Genoa on Wednesday. Inter also maintained a 100% away record with five wins out of five. Inter went ahead midway through the first half with a fortuitous goal from Lautaro Martínez, whose shot deflected off defender Andrea Cistana, before Lukaku scored with a stinging drive just past the hour mark. Milan Skriniar’s own goal in the 76th minute brought Brescia right back into the game and ensured a nervy finale for the visitors. “We got the three points and I’m not interested in anything else,” said Inter coach Antonio Conte, who complained about a crowded fixture list. “Sometimes you just have to win while suffering. This terrible sequence of matches continues. We will play seven times in 20 days, and I’ve never seen that with any other team. It’s very strange.” In the second game in Serie A, Verona beat Parma 1-0 thanks to an exciting goal from Darko Lazovic, with the Serbian player arrowing a shot into the top corner in the first half.