Twitter shares slumped in pre-market trading after the social network reported lower than expected revenues and higher costs and said it expected revenue “headwinds” to continue to drag on profits. Shares fell by almost 20% in pre-market trading to below $31.30, the lowest since March. Twitter said the numbers reflected “a number of headwinds including revenue product issues and greater-than-expected advertising seasonality in July and August”, although it said fared well in the US, its main market. The weaker than expected revenue was caused by bugs in Twitter’s adverts for mobile apps. The bug impacted Twitter’s ability to target adverts at users and to share data with clients, the company said. Twitter reported revenues of $824m (£639m) for the three months to the end of September, up by 9% year-on-year but lower than the $871m expected by analysts on average. Twitter’s record quarterly revenue was $908m, in the final quarter of 2018. Q3 revenue was $824M, +9%, reflecting Sep strength in US, as well as headwinds incl rev product issues and greater-than-expected advertising seasonality in Jul/Aug. Op income of $44M reflects lower-than-expected revenue + no significant changes to our ongoing investments. $TWTR Profits were weighed down by rising costs. Net income for the quarter was $37m, compared to an adjusted net income of $106m in the same period in 2018, excluding a one-off tax advantage. Costs rose by nearly a fifth year-on-year to $780m. The social network has been trying to tackle online abuse on its platform as it tries to prevent users from being put off. Jack Dorsey, Twitter’s chief executive, said: “We drove strong growth in monetisable DAU, up 17% year-over-year, driven by ongoing product improvements. “We also continue to make progress on health, improving our ability to proactively identify and remove abusive content, with more than 50% of the Tweets removed for abusive content in Q3 taken down without a bystander or first person report.” Earnings per share, a measure of profitability for shareholders, fell to $0.17, below the $0.20 expected by analysts. That was down from $1.58 in the previous quarter and the $0.21 recorded in the third quarter of 2018.