Mark Johnston stands on the brink of another record, just a year after becoming the trainer with most winners in British racing history. The Middleham man has had 230 winners this year and needs just five more to match the Flat-racing record of 235. That record has stood since 2013, when Richard Hannon Sr set it in his final season before handing on the licence to his son. Richard Fahey matched it a couple of years later, though it took him until after Christmas to get there and he had a handful of runners up to New Year’s Eve in an attempt to break it. It is amazing that Johnston has got so close to the record just a week into October. But, like all Flat stables, his operation slows down at this time of year and nothing can be taken for granted. As recently as 2014, he garnered just five winners from the final three months of the year. “I’m not thinking of it,” Johnston said, when asked about the record a month ago. “If it happens, it happens.” But surely he can’t avoid thinking about it now, not least because journalists at the races keep mentioning it. I’d guess he had a sinking feeling last week, when he went six days between Huboor winning at Newmarket and Asian Angel scoring at Southwell. But there have been another couple since then, including a Listed prize for Main Edition, so hopefully Johnston is breathing easier. He can’t bag the record on Tuesday, because the abandonment of waterlogged Catterick means he doesn’t have enough runners. But he could creep up so close behind it as to make the end of the hunt a formality, as three of his four runners at Brighton and Chelmsford are priced at 2-1 or shorter. He has another seven declared on Wednesday and plenty of possibles for later in the week. Good luck to him, to all his runners and to everyone at Kingsley Park who has put the stable in this position. Racing goes ahead at Leicester, which means we get to see if Eponina (5.05) can build on the promise she showed last time when beaten half a length at Thirsk. That was her best effort since midsummer, when she made all on soft ground at Chester. This step back down to seven furlongs should help and 11-2 looks big to me. Stallone is the obvious one, having run well in a much hotter race last week. But an extra furlong on this ground is no joke, so soon after such an effort, and his stable hasn’t had a winner for six weeks. Tarboosh (2.55) is the nap at even money, earlier on the card. This is more competitive than your average three-runner race but it was easy to like the way he sluiced through the mud at Beverley a fortnight ago. The ground should be much less testing at Brighton, where Global Agreement (2.00) is interesting at 9-2. The chestnut had no luck on his handicap debut when drawn wide at Bath and had to go all around the houses on his way to finishing a close fourth. It was an excellent effort and he can fare better from the same mark here. Chelmsford also stages a three-runner race, in which Habub (6.10) is the lowest-rated in the line-up. But he’s won on the surface and, most importantly, looks like getting the lead to himself, which should make him really dangerous under the in-form Jim Crowley. He’s 6-4 from 2-1 after early support. Leicester 1.50 Tigerskin 2.20 Goodwood Sonnet 2.55 Tarboosh (nap) 3.25 Indianapolis 4.00 Karisoke 4.35 Elzaam's Dream 5.05 Eponina (nb) 5.35 Another Boy Brighton 2.00 Global Agreement 2.30 Overwrite 3.05 Kyllachys Tale 3.35 Oleksander 4.10 Tremwedge 4.45 Necoleta 5.15 Firenze Rosa Chelmsford 4.40 Dragon Command 5.10 Alcance 5.40 Chairman Power 6.10 Habub 6.40 Spice War 7.10 Dr Jekyll 7.40 Mrs Ivy 8.10 Poetic Legacy Catterick abandoned due to waterlogging