A big week is looming in Japan, with the country’s new emperor set to be enthroned in the presence of dignitaries from around the world. Within the next fortnight global rugby will also be hailing new kings, although their identity remains uncertain. The highest compliment you can pay England is that even the All Blacks cannot take a place in the final for granted. It is even possible New Zealand have done Eddie Jones’s side a favour by thrashing Ireland so convincingly on their way to Saturday’s semi-final in Yokohama. Had they prevailed in a narrow, scrappy encounter, their next opponents may have been tempted to get ahead of themselves. Now the equation is starkly simple: nothing less than England’s absolute best will be remotely good enough. What makes the impending duel even more compelling is the marked contrast in styles. The world’s most lethal attack against the tournament’s tightest defence? In the modern game the equation is more complicated but the manner in which England kept their discipline and pulled away from Australia suggested a side who believe they possess the tools to fix almost any problem. In the relatively recent past there would have been a chance of England getting seriously flustered after the Wallabies, 14-3 down early on, had pulled back to 17-16 with 35 minutes left. Despite Australia’s poor second-half record against Eddie Jones’s England sides, the outcome seemed far from certain. For them, in such circumstances, to respond with 23 unanswered points and win 40-16 was no small achievement. If there was a bit of fortune about the two interception tries that widened the margin, England are increasingly making their own luck. The Wallabies were turned over in possession 18 times: some of it was the product of their own inaccuracy and rash decisions but England’s controlled aggression in and around the tackle area was also a major factor. Not for nothing did Tom Curry win the award for the man of the match, although Kyle Sinckler cannot have been far behind. New Zealand will be less profligate; they will also be less tactically gung-ho and possess a far better kicking game. But England, unlike Ireland, are a team on the up, having started to marry physical dynamism with surer judgment and calmer decision-making. Do the All Blacks have prop forwards who offer a greater carrying threat than Sinckler and Mako Vunipola? Do they have a hooker in better form than Jamie George? Are Brodie Retallick and Sam Whitelock superior locks to Maro Itoje? If, on the day, the answer to even some of those questions is “no” then England will feel they can, at worst, rattle the All Blacks’ cage. The fast-improving flankers Curry and Sam Underhill, who even gave the illustrious Wallabies duo of David Pocock and Michael Hooper a tough match, will also be key figures. It is ridiculous, as Underhill himself said afterwards, to think the all-action Curry is only 21. Collectively the pair have the ability to make England a nuisance against any opposition and the big stage is bringing out the best in them. If a British & Irish Lions squad were being selected this week, the depth of back-row candidates would be impressive. On the flip side, New Zealand’s Ardie Savea has been among the players of the tournament and Kieran Read, yet to experience a World Cup defeat after 11 years as a Test No 8, has chosen the perfect moment to rediscover the form that seemed to have gone missing following spinal surgery in late 2017. Beauden Barrett and Sevu Reece look scarily sharp and Richie Mo’unga’s crossfield chips have already caught out a succession of unwary opposing wings. No one should assume, in summary, New Zealand will tighten up under pressure or are due a bad day. Jones may well be minded, even so, to flick back through his digital library to rewatch Australia’s 47-26 victory over the All Blacks in Perth in August. Scott Barrett’s red card clearly inflated the margin but it was the Wallabies’ focused forward effort – curiously elusive ever since – that will intrigue the England management. Like any other side, New Zealand are far less comfortable on the back foot, although their opening pool game against the Springboks did show how swiftly they can turn defence into attack. England’s primary target is obvious enough: if, as at Twickenham last November, they can restrict the All Blacks to 20 points or fewer, anything is possible. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales While New Zealand have won the past six Tests between the teams, the margins have been steadily decreasing, with three of the last four meetings settled by three points or fewer. England lost 16-15 at Twickenham last November only after Underhill had a 75th-minute try disallowed for a fractional offside. As Jones was quick to stress afterwards – “sometimes the game loves you and sometimes it doesn’t … the next time we play them it might be a different story” – these things have a funny habit of balancing themselves out. Either way, England will be energised rather than intimidated by the onrushing challenge. Jones has locked horns with New Zealand sufficiently often to know the most critical battle is often played in the mind. “Sometimes when you play New Zealand, you think: ‘They’re the best team in the world, we can’t compete against them,’” he said last autumn. “You sit there, eat popcorn, have a can of Pepsi and watch the movie. By the time you realise ‘we can be in this’, it’s too late.” This time Jones’s England intend to direct the movie, not sit respectfully in the stalls.