Great Britain returned to life after a 12-year hiatus but the Tongan Invitational XIII spoiled the party, romping to a stunning victory in Hamilton. Tries from Michael Jennings and Sione Katoa in the first half were enough to clinch an impressive win for the Pacific nation. The Lions’ misery was compounded by injuries to centre Oliver Gildart and prop Luke Thompson. The Great Britain coach Wayne Bennett fears both are out of the rest of the tour. “I don’t think they’ll play again in the series. One’s got a rib issue [Thompson] and the other [Gildart]a dislocated shoulder. The Tongans had a little luck but they were formidable.” ‘“I’m happy with the squad right now,” Bennett said. “We can cover, it’s not panic time for us.” Put on the back-burner after 2007 to allow England, Wales, Scotland and Ireland to develop individually, excitement levels were raised among rugby league traditionalists about the return of the Lions as a grand old entity on a four-match tour. But Tonga, who announced themselves so impressively on the global stage at the 2017 World Cup, clearly did not get the message. For two years Tonga had failed to match their heroics by beating New Zealand and then going within a whisker of knocking off England in the World Cup semi-finals. In the lead-up to this match in New Zealand’s North Island, the Tongans had been embroiled in a messy political battle between their governing body and players, meaning this team had to be rebranded as an invitational side to ensure the game went ahead. Perhaps the dispute helped provide the extra motivation they needed to be back to their unpredictable best and defeat a strong team made up of NRL and Super League players. The stadium here is somewhat oddly located next to a graveyard. The Hamilton East Cemetery is more than 150 years old and if the souls of Lions legends Jim Sullivan and Mick Sullivan were watching on, they would have been concerned at the below-par display of the current representatives. Tonga put themselves on the back foot early when Salford half-back Tui Lolohea kicked the ball straight out from the kick-off. But they weathered the Lions’ early barrage and wrestled back control with some stinging hits in defence.Tonga were winning the yardage battle in the first 18 minutes and causing Great Britain problems. Twice they forced drop-outs as they effectively build pressure on their opponent’s try-line. The Lions made things harder for themselves with forced passes and simple errors. Spurred by a vocal sea of red support, Tonga broke the deadlock on 29 minutes. Gareth Widdop failed to clean up a kick behind the line. Tonga picked up the scraps, the ball was moved quickly to Jennings and the centre scooted over out wide. Sio Siua Taukeiaho added the extras to give them a deserved 6-0 lead. With six minutes left in the first half Manu Ma’u should have extended the lead, but he lost the ball as he fell over the line. But it mattered not as on the siren the magnificent Tongans struck again. Increasingly confident they threw the ball around at will and it finally ended with Jennings putting Katoa in for a try in the corner with a perfect grubber. Down 12-0 half-time came as a relief to a battered Great Britain. They were simply unable to match the energy and power of the tenacious Tongans. In the second half the Lions regrouped and tried to fight their way back into the contest. Gildart almost scored five minutes in, but his effort was ruled out by the video referee. Tonga’s defence held firm and again basic errors were Britain’s downfall. In the 59th minute it got worse for the Lions when Gildart was taken off holding his shoulder. Three minutes later Tonga went three scores ahead with Taukeiaho’s penalty from in front of the posts. Britain managed to hit back in the 69th minute when John Bateman barged over and Widdop converted but it was not enough on a dismal comeback for the Lions. Outgunned for the vast majority of the game, Britain need to recover quickly with the first Test against New Zealand at Eden Park, as part of a triple-header, a week away.