The women are coming: dark, dangerous, different. A good week for female choreographers brought two works that are unlike anything before, even though both have something to do with a name familiar from the origins of Romantic ballet. Crowd, choreographed by the French dance-maker Gisèle Vienne, opened Dance Umbrella 2019 (which will feature many more female creators, Oona Doherty and Lucy Guerin among them). With its roots in Vienne’s experiences in 1990s Berlin clubland, and a pounding techno score from artists such as Jeff Mills, Global Communication and Underground Resistance, it feels both like a particularly wild party and a triptych on the theme of heaven and hell by a painter such as Bosch. The setting also makes it bear a resemblance to Pina Bausch’s Rite of Spring. Opening as it means to go on, Crowd sets its 15 dancers moving in very, very slo-mo across an empty landscape of compacted mud, scattered with the detritus of a good night out. They look like the average reveller in their hoodies and sparkly shoes, but also like explorers on an alien planet. The movement is mesmeric but normal; these are natural gestures slowed down to the point where each pulse of each muscle is highlighted. The effect is both transfixing and slightly disorienting. Under Patrick Riou’s sharply sculptural lighting, the scene most resembles those slowed-down Bill Viola videos that turn human beings into medieval portraits of saints. But the people we are watching are undoubtedly sinners, fallible humans not gods. As the unbroken 90 minutes progresses, small narratives emerge all over the stage – fights, kisses, stories of longing, lust and loss. You identify people who maintain their characters throughout: there’s a Christ-like loner, a brawling man, a sexy girl, a shopping-bag lady. There’s a sense of story slightly beyond your grasp. Sometimes the movement becomes marginally faster, as the performers dance as at a rave, their raised jerky arms creating shapes that float across the space like the opening petals of a flower or the fierce breaking of a wave. At one startling moment, the music stops and they lie on the floor like the fallen, their bodies broken by exertion and pain. It’s a dazzling piece, transfixing and strangely resonant. Dada Masilo’s Giselle also makes its mark. This is yet another interpretation of the archetypal Romantic ballet about class war (an aristocrat tricks a peasant girl), betrayal (he steals her heart and then abandons her) and forgiveness (which is what she does at the end). However radical productions have been, they generally keep that arc. But not Masilo. In the early scenes, the South African choreographer vividly creates a picture of villagers and landowners, bound in inequality by tradition. Giselle and Albrecht dance tenderly sensual duets; when he leaves after seducing her, she is curled like a child. She dreams then of the Wilis, led by Llewellyn Mnguni’s utterly terrifying Myrtha, a healer, but one who seeks retribution. After Giselle’s betrayal, these warrior women (and men) reappear to take her side with relentless and unforgiving force. Masilo’s choreography mixes traditional African folk dance with contemporary and ballet to vigorous and emotional effect. Her use of colour is striking: Giselle doesn’t live and die in pastel shades but in vivid Technicolor, with the red-clad Wilis tracking their victims against a bright green sky. In the title role, Masilo herself, shaven-headed and apparently vulnerable, turns her Giselle into an after-death whirlwind, relentless in her pursuit of nasty Albrecht (beautifully danced by Lwando Dutyulwa). As she blew dust over his broken body, a symbol of her own liberation, it was hard not to raise a cheer. Star ratings (out of five)Crowd ★★★★Giselle ★★★★