“I’d never heard the word before. Stillicide,” a corporate executive named Steven thinks to himself around a third of the way through Cynan Jones’s fragmented, marvellously compressed novel of the same title. “Water falling in drops. I challenge myself to get it into a sentence for the [journalists].” I had not heard the word before either, though Jones helpfully opens with a dictionary definition. And it is this image of dripping water and its powers of erosion that comes to define his book as a whole, both as a novel that confronts the challenge of describing what climate crisis might look like, and in the way a slow accretion of pertinent detail gathers cataclysmic momentum. Stillicide takes place in the near future, when phases of extreme weather have plunged Britain into an alternating cycle of flood and drought. As temperatures continue to rise, smaller rural communities are becoming unsustainable, while the logistics of feeding and watering the growing city population has come to dominate the economic agenda. Steven is a PR spokesman for the corporation in charge of supplying an unnamed city with potable water. Previous attempts to augment the overstretched supply – an overground pipeline, an armoured freight train – have become the focus of terrorist activity, with raiding parties from the countryside violently advancing the demands of those who live beyond the urban centres. A new plan is hatched: an iceberg is to be towed from the Arctic and brought to an “ice dock” where its abundance of pure drinking water can be tapped and distributed. It is hoped that the iceberg will be largely immune from attacks by vigilantes and climate protestors. Moreover, meltwater from the berg – stillicide – can be utilised to irrigate agricultural land throughout the duration of its passage. The plan is controversial. Construction of the gigantic ice dock will necessitate bulldozing hundreds of homes, destroying established neighbourhoods and communities in the process. Meanwhile, unbeknown to the planners, a scientific discovery relating to the ecosystems in the path of the berg may bring the development of the dock to a standstill. The genesis of Stillicide was unusual. In an afterword, Jones explains how the idea for the book had been growing, though it was a commission from Radio 4 that finally brought the project to life. He was challenged to create a sequence of 12 short stories, each requiring exactly 15 minutes of air time, with the series to be broadcast in its entirety before print publication. “Being for radio,” he writes, “with listeners not having the chance to turn back a page, the world and its characters had to have an immediacy and be clear on first hearing.” Jones is famous for the economy of his texts – his short story “The Edge of the Shoal”, which won the BBC national short story award in 2017, was actually a ruthlessly abridged version of his short novel Cove – and it’s clear from the results that the strict parameters of the brief have acted more as stimulus than restriction. Reading Stillicide before listening to the audio version, I was surprised by how different the two experiences turned out to be. In its written form, Stillicide has a terse, minimalist quality that is at least partly down to how the text is presented on the page. Short paragraphs and generous line spacing encouraged me to read the novel as a series of prose poems. The radical distillation of language, the sense that every word has been individually chosen, results in a blunt perfection that heightens this effect. Narrative exists, but it is secondary to form. On first encounter at least, the pleasures Stillicide offers appear to be more aesthetic than dramatic. If climate chaos was previously too big a subject for 'serious' writers to wrestle with, it is now too big to ignore. The series of readings on Radio 4 reveal a different side to the novel: harsher, yet more immediate and narrative-driven, with the voices of the characters assuming greater weight and personality. If there is a leading man it is surely John Branner, a soldier who works as armed security on the beleaguered water train. “[The water train] is meant to look magnificent,” Branner muses, “impregnable, but it looks uncertain, like a person others have decided to make into their hero.” Branner has recently learned that his wife is dying, and his state of mind as he contemplates his future is equally precarious. Meanwhile, the men charged with towing the iceberg – “the calf” – are likened to whale-hunters, hard-handed heroes, yet the diminishing boundaries of their reality are brought shockingly home to us when we learn that the crew of this latter-day Pequod have never tasted fish. As Jones details the care the mariners lavish on their deteriorating hardware, we read his words as a warning of new mass extinctions: The pieces lay like artefacts, the crew’s care of them akin to the careful homage of archaeologists. They scraped away corrosion and the salt, with affection close to love. Treated the motors as things that were amongst the last of their kind. While mouthing corporate platitudes by day, executive Steven spends his evenings watching DVDs of old nature programmes, a tension he sees reflected in the ominous tap-tapping of a chaffinch’s beak against his office window, a troublesome, repetitive sound that threatens to disrupt an important press conference. The journalist pushing hardest for answers is Colin, who we learn is the husband of Ruth, the nurse who has been caring for Branner’s sick wife. “Colin must be hard to live with,” Steven observes, but as Ruth wonders if she is ready to abandon her marriage for still greater uncertainty, we are pressed in turn to ask ourselves if being hard to live with is the price that must be paid for asking difficult questions. The dense web of connections between characters and stories leaves no doubt that Stillicide is best described as a novel rather than a collection of shorter fictions. That these connections can be quantified not only in terms of character relationships but as a cumulative statement of theme lends further weight to this argument. In his book-length essay on literature and climate change The Great Derangement, the novelist Amitav Ghosh argues that for mainstream literary writers, the subject and details of climate catastrophe still appear too vast and too improbable to be used as subject matter by novelists accustomed to dealing with everyday reality. The result, he suggests, is that this most urgent of contemporary subject matter is being exiled to the borderlands of genre fiction, while literary fiction is in danger of becoming irrelevant. Unsurprisingly, he has been criticised for so summarily dismissing science fiction as an unworthy or less significant vehicle for the description, discussion and analysis of important subjects. The climate has been a central concern in sci-fi for more than five decades. Taking Ghosh’s argument on its own terms, though, I am sure he would agree that the tide is beginning to turn. If climate chaos was previously too big a subject for “serious” writers to wrestle with, it is now too big to ignore. Any writer who does not seek to address it in some way runs the risk of joining the dinosaurs in their oblivion. With recent novels from Megan Hunter, Jenni Fagan, Richard Powers, Ben Smith, John Lanchester and Ghosh himself working hard to imagine the effects of climate crisis at both the global and the personal level, Stillicide can be added to the growing roster of powerful and urgent meditations on the future. As a tract of written language, it is close to perfect. As a repository for ideas, it is imaginative and far reaching. As a story of and for our times, it is very human, and deadly serious. • Nina Allan’s The Dollmaker is published by Riverrun. Stillicide is published by Granta (£12). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.