Who is the biggest player in movie soundtracks? How about some moody 13th-century monks? This at least appears to be the wisdom coming out of the kookier corners of the film soundtrack community. A few weeks ago, the British cinematic composer Daniel Pemberton was reading online comments surrounding his score for The Dark Crystal: Age of Resistance. “One said: ‘This is Dies Irae,’” Pemberton recalls, with some sense of disbelief. “I was like: ‘Well, is it?’” Maybe. According to the geeks on the internet, this chilling, antique leitmotif is everywhere. Dies Irae is a medieval Latin poem about the Last Judgment, set to music for Catholic requiems or funeral masses. The best-known part, which may qualify as one of the world’s earliest earworms, is a spooky, descending four-note sequence, over which the monks chant the words “dies irae”; that’s Latin for Judgment Day, or more directly “the day of wrath”. That might not sound like box-office dynamite, but the tune has been reused for centuries since appearing in requiems by Mozart and Verdi. According to online commentators such as Vox’s Bridgett Henwood, composer, arranger and blogger Brian LaGuardia and HowStuffWorks’ The Soundtrack Show podcast, it can be heard in many hit movies. You can pick it out in the more sombre, funereal and spooky bits of The Shining (Wendy Carlos’s main theme pretty much reproduces it wholly), as well as Star Wars: A New Hope (weaved into John Williams’s score when Luke discovers Uncle Owen has been offed by stormtroopers), It’s a Wonderful Life (George begs for his life on the snowy bridge) and The Lion King when Scar orders the hyenas to kill Simba. Enthusiastic commentators also reckon they have found it in scores such as The Exorcist, Game of Thrones, Lost and Jaws. So, are movies caught in an aural Groundhog Day of Wrath? Perhaps. The British choral composer, conductor and singer Bob Chilcott conducted the Verdi Requiem at the Royal Albert Hall earlier this year, and understands the music’s enduring power. “It’s about judgment, about the end of the world,” he says. “If you believe what it says, then we’re all stuffed.” Pemberton is more circumspect. He says he didn’t consciously quote the phrase, and is sceptical as to whether quite so many of his colleagues have drawn on it, too. “You’re talking about a sequence of notes that are very close together,” he explains, playing a little over the phone. “These are not unbelievably unusual notes to use. It’s not surprising that a lot of composers are using them in their work.” One day perhaps, the good Lord will judge us all – film composers included – and find us wanting, but that day might not be here just yet, despite what you read online.