Boris Johnson has indicated the government is unwilling to notably compromise further on its proposals for a new Brexit deal, despite initial EU scepticism, as he formally presented the plans to the Commons. With Jeremy Corbyn calling the idea a “Trump-deal Brexit” that would risk regulatory standards and harm the Northern Irish economy, Johnson took a conciliatory tone in responding to MPs’ questions on Thursday but said it was now up to the EU to move. Alistair Burt, the former Foreign Office minister who was among 21 Tory MPs who lost the party whip for rebelling last month, commended Johnson’s approach but asked what further UK compromise might be possible given indications the EU would not accept every part of the plan. Johnson replied by saying the UK had “gone the extra mile” and should not be expected to move much more. He said: “People should be reminded that what the UK has done is already very considerable. We have already moved quite some way, and I hope that our friends and partner across the Channel do understand that, and I hope that my right honourable friend understands that as well.” However, answering another question from the Tory Brexiter Philip Davies, Johnson declined to confirm that this was his final offer to the EU, indicating some movement could happen. In a noisily received Commons statement, Johnson began by outlining his idea of replacing the Irish backstop insurance policy with a somewhat sketchily outlined new regime of checks. Johnson later insisted there would be no physical customs infrastructure anywhere in Northern Ireland: “The proposals we are putting forward do not involve physical infrastructure at or near the border – or indeed at any other place.” He said he had held “constructive calls” since unveiling the plans with the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and the Irish prime minister, Leo Varadkar. Johnson said the “driving purpose” of the Irish border proposals was to minimise any disruption, saying that while some new customs checks would happen, none would take place near the border. The new regime would allow the UK “to take back control of our trade policy and our regulations”, he said, arguing that he had made a considerable compromise, and that it was now up to the EU to do the same. “I do not for one moment resile from the fact that we have shown great flexibility in the interests of reaching an accommodation with our European friends and achieving the resolution for which we all yearn,” he said. “If our European neighbours choose not to show a corresponding willingness to reach a deal then we shall have to leave on 31 October without an agreement and we are ready to do so.” Responding, Corbyn called Johnson’s ideas, which have been coolly received by EU leaders, “a rehashed version of previously rejected proposals” that were worse than Theresa May’s plan. Noting Johnson’s desire to move away from EU standards and push for a US trade accord, the Labour leader said: “Deal or no deal, this government’s agenda is clear. They want a Trump-deal Brexit that would crash our economy and rip away the standards that put a floor under people’s rights at work, that protect our environment and protect our consumers. “No Labour MP could support such a reckless deal. It would be used as a springboard to attack rights and standards in this country.” Corbyn cited the comments of a series of businesses leaders in Northern Ireland that the checks would badly hamper commerce. He said: “These proposals are nothing more than a cynical attempt by the prime minister to shift the blame for his failure to deliver.” Corbyn added: “The only people who won’t suffer are the prime minister’s hedge fund donors who are currently betting against the pound and running down our fragile economy. He is doing nothing but seeking to divide and risking this country for his own political gain. An America-first deal with President Trump.”