The international development select committee (IDC) plays a critical role in ensuring the aid sector sustains momentum on driving out abuse and exploitation. But describing the work NGOs have done over the past year as “focused too much on theory” (Aid agencies accused of failure to make good on Oxfam abuse scandal pledges, theguardian.com, 18 October) is inaccurate and downplays the efforts made to tackle the abhorrent act of sexual abuse and exploitation in the sector. There also continues to be confusion around the difference between whistleblowing and reporting. Whistleblowing is an essential part of safeguarding, but it is a last resort when a survivor or victim has no way of getting their voice heard, or if an organisation has failed to listen and act. Victims and survivors first and foremost need to feel safe enough to report abuse to organisations, have easily accessible ways of doing so and feel confident that their report will be acted upon swiftly and appropriately. Strong safeguarding reporting systems are the best way to support victims and survivors when they need it most, and this is what the UK NGO sector has been working on. Thankfully more people feel able to speak out, so in the short term we are seeing an increase in the number of safeguarding incidents being reported. We’re also being honest about the issues we still need to address. We must get to a place where we can see the number of incidents go down in the long term. This means preventing them from happening in the first place, continuing to encourage people to report anything that doesn’t look or feel right, addressing power imbalances, and rooting out, and keeping out, those looking to enter our sector and exploit vulnerable people. It also means a commitment from the IDC, Charity Commission, NGOs and the Department for International Development to continue to keep safeguarding a top priority.Mike WriteDirector of membership and communications, Bond • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition