More than 400 new hardbacks hit bookshops today, on what has been dubbed Super Thursday by the book trade, as publishers release their hottest hopes for this year’s Christmas No 1. Jess Phillips, fresh from taking on the “bullies” in the House of Commons, reveals how to speak Truth to Power, while Philip Pullman shows us how Lyra handles adulthood in The Secret Commonwealth. With 426 hardbacks published today, the number is down on last year’s 544. But readers should also brace themselves for what The Bookseller has dubbed a “mini Super Thursday” on 17 October, when titles from Elton John, John le Carré, Adam Kay, Trevor McDonald and Nadiya Hussain are published. Here are 10 of the titles booksellers are betting on to bring them a happy Christmas. This standalone novel from the author of Me Before You is inspired by a true story. Englishwoman Alice Wright marries a wealthy American and moves to the stuffy world of 1930s Baileyville, Kentucky. There, she meets the daughter of a felon who is on a mission to spread the wonder of books, and needs Alice’s help. The first collection of short stories from the award-winning author of White Teeth moves from the tale of an Antiguan immigrant in north-west London in the summer of 1959 to a moral panic in the upper echelons of New York. The second volume of Pullman’s Book of Dust trilogy is set 20 years after the first. Lyra is now an adult, and she and Malcolm travel from Oxford to Asia as they search for a city haunted by daemons and try to solve the mystery of Dust. This memoir moves from the comedian’s early years as one of seven siblings in the midlands, where his parents moved from Jamaica, to his appearances on stage in working men’s clubs and Black Country discotheques – and then an invitation to a television audition. In a book subtitled “Seven Ways to Call Time on BS”, the Labour MP writes about her own experiences of speaking up and making a difference, and interviews the “accidental heroes” who have risked everything to fight back. The Poirot actor looks back over his 50-year career in this mix of photobook and memoir, chronicled by Suchet with his ever-present camera. “Look at me: I’m short, stocky, slightly overweight, deep of voice, passionate, darkhaired, olive skinned, hardly your typical Englishman. What chance did I have, going into the world of British theatre?” The other half of Wham! tells the story of how he and George Michael first met as teenagers in Watford in 1975, and formed the band that created the soundtrack of the 80s. In a book subtitled “A Guide for Occupants”, Bryson explores how the human body functions and how it heals itself. “We spend our whole lives in one body and yet most of us have practically no idea how it works and what goes on inside it. The idea of the book is simply to try to understand the extraordinary contraption that is us,” he writes. William Trundle and the extraordinary Christmasaurus are back. Here, they meet the magical Winter Witch, who controls time in order to allow Santa to travel around the world on Christmas Eve. The Suede frontman tells the story of the band, as well as exploring his relationship with addiction, when as a young man he “oscillated between morbid self-reflection and vainglorious narcissism”.