The early 2000s were a simpler time for comedy – people were happy to laugh at anything. David Beckham’s cornrows? Ha! John Malkovich and Rowan Atkinson being reduced to appearing in light-hearted spy flick Johnny English? My sides!! Lee Evans? I can’t spake!!! Now, a bit like Will Hughes on a Watford pre-season tour to the Algarve, The Fiver is feeling the heat. There are actual funny things to compete against now, like David Squires, the drawn-out demise of Manchester United and only last month, the memory of Lionesses manager Phil Neville pondering the “flattering” idea of replacing Jill Ellis as manager of current World Cup champions USA! USA!! USA!!! Things, you see, have gone pretty badly for Big Phil since that little carrot came out, with England five games without a win (including four defeats) after Saturday’s 2-1 defeat at home to Brazil, which is the same number of non-victories it took for the FA to smuggle Hope Powell out of their dressing room via a laundry basket marked Do One, back in 2013. If England fail to beat Portugal – a nation ranked 26 places below them – under pressure Nev might end up less Ellis, more Hope and solo. “I don’t feel vulnerable at all,” he shivered. “I was a coach at Manchester United and four games after the manager [David Moyes] got sacked I left because it was the right thing to do,” he added, skilfully reminding everyone that he was also part of a management team that constantly chose the wrong things to do. “If I thought the players weren’t listening to my messages, I would be the first to go and sit with Sue Campbell [the FA’s head of women’s football] and say: ‘Look Sue, we need to change,’ because ultimately the most important thing is the team.” That’s more like it. Wholesome, hypothetical gestures that depend more on Big Phil’s interpretation of apathy and less on actual reality, like that time he thought it would be a good idea to replicate Gareth Southgate’s exact World Cup wardrobe. Even if support for him appears to be waning, the nation is still firmly behind the team, with Saturday’s crowd of 29,238 in Middlesbrough a record attendance for a women’s international in England staged outside Wembley, which will itself welcome a record figure through its gates for next month’s game against Germany. Things are looking up! Or rather, people are looking. Which is something to hold on to. Join Michael Butler from 7pm for hot MBM coverage of Portugal 1-3 England. “Some critics are pointless — but many can offer me lessons. I like to read what people are saying about my performances” – Manchester United misfit Fred reveals that he may be a masochist. Next Generation: after five years, how has our first full class of picks fared? And we catch up with 2014 selection Harley Willard. Updates on our global classes of … 2018, 2017, 2016, 2015 and 2014. How our Premier League groups of 2018, 2017, 2016, 2015 and 2014 have fared. Case study: what happened next to 2014 pick Harley Willard? David Squires on … Untitled Premier League Managers Game! Football Weekly is right here. “6.58pm inbox arrival? Long lunch?” – Lloyd Mills (and 1,056 others) [apologies, Monster Munch-powered techies believe the issue is resolved – Fiver Ed]. “I think I know why Manchester United are struggling. Many good players and managers were crushed by the expectation at Liverpool after they stopped winning, especially during the 90s. I think Liverpool only really started rebuilding when expectations dropped to match the reality of the players they had. I think this was when it got to the point that Liverpool could lose away at Stoke and nobody thought anything of it. There’s a huge burden on United’s young players and this is obviously affecting their decision-making. Unfortunately this may take around 20 years or so to correct itself after such a sustained period of winning, but on the plus side I reckon we are already six years into the process. How time flies when you’re having fun” – Jimmy O’Brien. “You’ve got to feel sorry for Newcastle’s Sean Longstaff. Last week he was the best midfielder in the north east. Now he’s not even the best at his own house” – Mark McFadden. “I think this question is probably beneath The Knowledge so I’ll try it out on Fiver readers. On MOTD2 on Sunday, in what may have been an attempt to be dubbed the new Paul Merson, Martin Keown kept pronouncing Rodri as ‘Roddery’. Is this the simplest name that a pundit has repeatedly failed to pronounce correctly?” – Matt Fox. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’the day is … Jimmy O’Brien, who wins a copy of Numero 6. We’ve more to give away all week. Brighton say three fans are facing lengthy bans following incidents of racism at the Amex Stadium. Two fans were ejected from a match against Tottenham U-23s and one supporter was arrested during Saturday’s 3-0 win over Spurs. West Brom’s Matheus Pereira has apologised to QPR fans for celebrating his goal in Saturday’s win at the Kiyan Prince Foundation Stadium by dragging his fingers across his neck in a cut-throat gesture. “I [now] understand why my celebrations might have been misunderstood and caused offence,” he said. In a statement that sounds very much like a Hollywood power couple announcing their divorce, Championship strugglers Barnsley have bin-bagged manager Daniel Stendel. “Barnsley FC confirms that it has separated from Daniel Stendel with immediate effect,” said an emotionless suit. Jack Ross is also out at Sunderland. “This is a decision that has been made with a heavy heart,” blootered chairman Stewart Donald. “When we arrived at the club 18 months ago, we appointed Jack because we felt that he was the right man to take Sunderland forward over a number of years.” A pretty clear admission of failure, then? Phil Neville’s son Harvey has joined Theme Pub O’Fiver Jr in the Republic O’Ireland U-19 squad. You’d expect Mauricio Pochettino to be hunkered down in north London figuring out how to get his wobbly Spurs back on track but, instead, he’s presumably being paid handsomely to say nice things about the Aspire Academy in Doha. “Whenever we come here to Qatar and Aspire, we are encouraged and struck by the vision, planning, and passion this country shows for sports development,” cheered Pochettino, who might want to read this. And Wilfried Zaha says he was happy to scoop up the toys he threw out of his pram when he wasn’t allowed to leave Crystal Palace. “Obviously my head was a bit all over the place at the beginning of the season but I had to nail down and just get on with it,” he cooed. “I’ve got to prove every time I’m the top player I claim to be.” Ole Gunnar Solskjær didn’t break Manchester United, but can he fix them? Paul Wilson on the state of things at Old Trafford. Floating footballing brain/Star Wars geek in a jar Jonathan Wilson weaves a Death Star narrative into this analysis of Manchester City’s current glitches. Suzanne Wrack on how close England came to losing Lucy Bronze to Portugal. And the Mill wonders whether Aleksandr Sobolev might be Arsenal-bound and if Gareth Bale might be bundled out by Madrid. Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!