Homemade isn’t always better. Especially when we’re talking about the Asian store-cupboard. Many ingredients, such as kimchi and gochujang, which both feature in today’s recipe, but also soy sauce and miso, take practised hands, and years of fermentation and knowledge to make. Plus, they’re fairly easy to buy and, once bought, they obediently sit between the cupboard and the fridge like sleeping giants, ready to deploy big and instant flavour. Today’s dish is my take on Korean kimchi jiggae, a warming stew that is greater than the sum of its parts – happily, parts mostly pre-made and from the store cupboard. Given that the main ingredient in this dish is kimchi, buy the best you can – in my opinion, Kim Kong Kimchi and Eaten Alive are both exceptional. This recipe was originally written for Tenderstem. Prep 20 minCook 40 minServes 4 3 tbsp rapeseed oil 1 onion, peeled and finely chopped 2 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed 1.5cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and grated 300g good-quality kimchi 1 tbsp gochujang paste1 tbsp brown rice syrup 200g oyster mushrooms, cut into 1cm strips1 litre vegetable stock 400g extra-firm tofu, sliced 250g Tenderstem broccoli, halvedSalt 2 spring onions, trimmed and finely shredded Heat the oil in a casserole dish and, when hot, add the onion and fry for eight minutes, until soft. Stir in the garlic, ginger and kimchi, fry until the kimchi starts to caramelise – about eight to 10 minutes – then stir in the gochujang and rice syrup. Add the oyster mushrooms to the pot and fry for three minutes. Pour in the stock, bring to a boil, then turn down the heat to a whisper and simmer for 10-12 minutes, until it tastes like all the flavours have come together. Layer the tofu slices in a fan shape on one side of the pot, arrange the Tenderstem on the other side, and prod both so they’re slightly submerged in the hot liquid. Leave to cook for another six minutes, or until the broccoli is cooked, then check the seasoning – add salt, if need be. Transfer to a serving dish, scatter over the shredded spring onions and serve with bowls of steamed jasmine rice.