Nick Tosches emerged from the primordial swamp of the 1960s American rock press to earn a reputation as one of the most compellingly original biographers and novelists of his generation. To his subjects he applied a high style formed by an admiration of William Faulkner, Hubert Selby Jr and the King James Bible, a feeling for the lives of gamblers and gangsters, and a formidable erudition perhaps surprising in one who had declined a college education and learned many of his life lessons in the bar owned by his father in Newark, New Jersey. Tosches, who has died aged 69, won widespread praise for his biographies of the rock and roller Jerry Lee Lewis, the crooner Dean Martin and the world heavyweight boxing champion Sonny Liston. Among his fellow writers, many envied the confidence with which he slipped into the vernacular of his subjects as if it were his own while infusing the result with characteristics that made his work utterly distinctive. Some rivals were equally envious of a lifestyle matching anything described in his prose. Visiting the UK for the first time when Dino: Living High in the Dirty Business of Dreams was nominated for the 1994 Waterstones/Esquire non-fiction prize, Tosches – who had taught himself Latin and medieval Italian – approached various antiquarian booksellers with a list of volumes he hoped to acquire for research into future projects. They included Giovanni Benedetti Simbaldi’s Rare Verities (1658) and John Martin’s Gonosologium Novum (1709). Yet that visit was destined to enter London literary legend when he unwisely spent three days drinking heavily while taking Prozac, the anti-depressant, his conduct alarming interviewers and publishing executives, shattering the genteel calm of various dinners and parties and the prizegiving reception itself. He had to be escorted on to a flight home by one of his publisher’s security men, boarding the plane in his dinner jacket, a dress shirt and a silk bow tie, having lost his trousers along with his cashmere overcoat and the £1,000 awards cheque. Returning in 2000 when The Devil and Sonny Liston was shortlisted for the William Hill sports book award, a conversation with one of the judges, the distinguished but pugnacious Scottish sportswriter Hugh McIlvanney, turned into an impromptu heavyweight confrontation in which red wine was liberally spilled. Tosches did not win that award, either. He was born in Newark, to Muriel Ann and Nick Tosches; his paternal grandparents had emigrated to the US from Puglia, Italy, in the late 19th century. Showing no interest in college, he decided that he wanted to write. New rock magazines were being founded in which fearless young people were encouraged to flout traditional journalistic forms, and at the age of 19 Tosches had his first piece published by Fusion magazine. He established friendships with others, including Lester Bangs and Richard Meltzer, who aspired to make the tone of their writing reflect the sound and style of rock’n’roll at its most primal, sharing a scorn for the pretentiousness of the British progressive rock bands and the self-regard of the Southern Californian singer-songwriters. Subsequent pieces appeared in Creem and Rolling Stone while he supplemented his income by working as a paste-up artist in the advertising department of a lingerie company. Fired by Rolling Stone for taking one liberty too many (he had achieved a succès de scandale by reviewing a Black Sabbath album without bothering to listen to it), he began work on his first book. Published in 1977, Country: Living Legends and Dying Metaphors in America’s Biggest Music established his credentials as a master of long-form writing enriched by deep historical research. His gift for entwining past and present was evident throughout a book that also included a passage on the singer who became the subject of his next work, the one that would bring him worldwide acclaim on its appearance in 1982. In Hellfire: The Jerry Lee Lewis Story, he rewrote the rules of rock biography, showing no hesitation in recreating highly coloured incidents from the singer’s life with skill and panache; the opening scene, in which a drunk and gun-toting Lewis attempts to invade Elvis Presley’s Memphis mansion, is a stunning invention. His diligence in researching Lewis’s most distant antecedents lent an authenticity to his wildest flights of the imagination, as similar efforts were to do in the books on Martin, an enigma whose Rat Pack success seemed to feed on his own utter indifference to fame and its rewards, and Liston, whose family’s story he traced back to the 19th century, investigating how a black world champion came to bear a name going back to the Norman invasion of Britain, and proceeding to his mysterious death, possibly at the hands of the mafia, in Las Vegas. His love of recondite figures was displayed in Unsung Heroes of Rock’n’Roll (1984) and Where Dead Voices Gather (2001), the latter a richly detailed portrait of the blackface vaudevillian Emmett Miller, who embodied the dying tradition of minstrelsy. Power on Earth (1986) and King of the Jews (2001) were riffs on the lives of Michele Sindona, the corrupt Sicilian banker, and the racketeer Arnold Rothstein, the model for The Great Gatsby’s Meyer Wolfsheim. His output of fiction began in 1988 with Cut Numbers, set among small-time gamblers and grifters in the milieu he had witnessed in his father’s bar. Trinities (1994) portrayed the battles inside the heroin trade, In the Hand of Dante (2002) veered between the 14th century and the present day, linking the author of The Divine Comedy with a fictionalised Tosches called in to authenticate one of his manuscripts, while Under Tiberius (2015) rewrote the life of Christ through the invented memoir of a Roman functionary. All were written with an increasingly profane and reckless brio, supercharged with a dazzling breadth of references. In his later years, Tosches acquired the looks of a figure emerging from the shadows of a lost Caravaggio: part Roman senator, part southern politician with secrets. He is said to have been briefly married in 1972. • Nick Tosches, biographer, novelist and poet, born 23 October 1949; died 20 October 2019