In 1859, a newly unified Germany celebrated the centenary of the birth of Friedrich Schiller. The celebrations in Weimar, where the poet and dramatist lived for the last six years of his life, were particularly lavish, and the city’s kapellmeister extraordinaire, Franz Liszt, was commissioned to create their musical centrepiece. What Liszt produced, a processional march and a melodrama entitled Vor Hundert Jahren (One Hundred Years Ago) consisting of six tableaux vivants, was his only dramatic work to survive complete. But after just one performance, it was never heard again until Kirill Karabits revived it in Weimar earlier this year: Karabits included it in his first concert of the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra’s new season, too, with the original text by the Austrian dramatist Friedrich Hahn, translated into English by Richard Stokes. One Hundred Years Ago tells the the story of Schiller’s life through two characters, Germania, personifying the German nation and lamenting its troubled history, and Poesie (Poetry), who persuades Germania that it will be through the language and culture epitomised by Schiller’s work that her country will prosper. Liszt’s workaday score is mostly subsidiary to this high-flown dialogue; it quotes the well-known tune Gaudeamus Igitur, and other student and patriotic songs, as well as the setting of Schiller’s Ode to Joy in Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony. Jingling cowbells and echoing alpine horns dutifully herald a mention of William Tell, Schiller’s final play, but just occasionally Liszt’s real music snaps into view, especially in the Procession of the Artists that opens the work and the spinning music accompanying the appearance of the Fates from Greek mythology, though there’s never enough of it to lift the score above the level of historical curiosity. Still, the Bournemouth performance did what it could in a “dramatic conception” by Gerard McBurney. Sara Kestelman and Jemma Redgrave were Germania and Poesie, and Ruby Russell, Laura McKay and Jordan Finding, students from the Arts University Bournemouth, were the three Fates. Karabits had begun with another celebratory rarity, Hummel’s 1814 Freudenfest Overture, a medley of patriotic songs that reserves a central place for God Save the Queen, and he ended with the orchestral suite from Strauss’s Der Rosenkavalier, sounding sumptuous after the meagre musical rations before it. • Available to hear on BBC Sounds.