Never mind the red shoes – it’s a red cape that sends our heroine into a spin in Northern Ballet’s new fairytale for children, destined like its predecessors for a CBeebies broadcast. When Julie Nunès tries on the cape, her rapture is not merely childish delight with a new outfit but an embrace of what it represents: an independent skip through the woods to visit poorly granny. Not that there’s much to be feared in this sweetly pleasant but seldom cloying retelling. Harris Beattie’s wolf, resplendent in purple morning coat, tiny top hat and furry slippers, frolicks among flowers (those lupins are a nice touch). He doesn’t have sharp fangs so much as a sweet tooth, but scares the friendly bear selling honey, who closes his stall, leaving the wolf hungry. He wouldn’t dream of eating gran and ends up invited to a tea party instead. All of which inevitably makes this 40-minute tale a bit toothless, even if it is aimed at a very young audience. Still, Northern Ballet’s storytelling is as direct and unfussy as ever in Mariana Rodrigues’s production, with some episodes retold by one character to another gently reinforcing the plot. A flurry of shimmering pointe work and an ensemble finale make it an attractive introduction to ballet’s magic. Nunès is a bright and inquisitive Red, at her best when questioning grandma’s unusually whiskery appearance. As the sneezy gran, Ommaira Kanga Perez’s drowsy moves capture the fog of a head cold, each blow of the nose sending her body rippling. Beattie’s wolf has a zany butterfly dance that nods to hip-hop and as enough of a slink to match the woodwind in a four-piece band. The reworked plot offers useful lessons for children about teamwork and overcoming worries but the most affecting moment is for adults. An aching pas de deux shared by Red’s parents (Aurora Piccininni and Albert Gonzalez Orts) captures their fragility as they realise how quickly their girl is growing up. Cradling arms then become outstretched before being wrapped around each other in comfort. It has a delicate glow of love, too, but this domestic duet evokes fears unmatched by those wild woods beyond. At Stanley and Audrey Burton theatre, Leeds, until 2 November. Then touring.