Peer-to-peer pawnbroker Funding Secure has collapsed, leaving thousands of investors at risk of major losses. The Buckinghamshire-based company ran into trouble after an increased number of borrowers struggled to pay back their loans. Funding Secure also became embroiled in a fraud lawsuit involving the art dealer Matthew Green, who the lender claimed owed it about £3m. About 3,500 Funding Secure investors are now waiting to hear how much of their money will be recovered, after providing 486 loans worth £80m in total through the website. Most were high-interest rates loans secured against UK properties and other assets including jewellery, cars and boats. CG & Co, which has been appointed as the administrator, said: “The company’s difficulties have been documented online and investors are aware that certain loans have not performed in line with expectations, in addition to the issues caused by the fraud-related litigation in which the company has become embroiled.” Funding Secure is the second peer-to-peer player to go into administration in a matter of months. The property lender Lendy collapsed in May after a rise in borrower defaults. Its demise marked the largest collapse of a European peer-to-peer lender to date, having owed lenders £152m. The Financial Conduct Authority sent letters to peer-to-peer lenders last month over poor practices, raising concerns that firms were exposing investors to undue risks. It warned that they would otherwise face a crackdown by the regulator. Funding Secure’s borrowers are expected to continue paying off their loans despite the collapse, but administrators said it was not yet clear how much would be recovered. “It is too early for the administrators to say how much money they will be able to return to the creditors and to the investors, and when any payments will be made to them,” CG & Co said. “The administrators are now evaluating the company’s current financial position and working to maximise recoveries either in the short or longer term. The administrators will continue to update the creditors and investors with the progress that they are making with their investigations.”