Early in The Great Society, the sequel to the Tony-winning All The Way, President Lyndon B Johnson (Brian Cox) recalls the women of his youth in the Texas Hill Country, mothers and aunts with bent backs and hands crabbed by a “dog’s life”. When a younger Johnson finally made it to Washington, he did whatever it took to bring them electricity – kissed up, begged, told “a lie or two”. The ends justified the means, he was sure. “When that first electric pump brought water into the house at the turn of a tap,” he asks, “do you think any of those women thought, ‘Oh no, I can’t use this, Lyndon lied.’” The story is told as a cover for a small obfuscation to the press about new military bases in Vietnam, a moral compromise whose ends, Johnson thought, would also justify the means. An affectless, black-and-white ticker above the stage has already counted 435 American dead, 1,278 wounded in Vietnam by the play’s beginning, on 4 January 1965 – a small shock that, under Johnson’s watch, will soon burn the house down. But that comes later. The Great Society, also penned by All The Way’s Robert Schenkkan, traces a stark and moving arc from hope to decay under the “accidental” 36th president of the United States. Johnson has already proved to be a fruitful hinge for examining the exhaustive political bargaining of the 1960s; All The Way follows Johnson (played by Breaking Bad’s Bryan Cranston, who won a Tony for the role), Martin Luther King Jr, Stokely Carmichael and others as they fought to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964 after the assassination of John F Kennedy. The play concludes with Johnson’s election, in fall 1964, to his first full term. The Great Society picks up in early 1965, as Johnson switches tack from the intoxicating rush of rising to the occasion and dogged pursuit of a worthy goal to the stickier, far more assailable task of governing. Cox, as Johnson, ably conveys, with his consistent bellow, the manic ambition of Johnson’s domestic agenda, a series of programs aimed to eradicate poverty and racial injustice toward no less a vision than America’s own “Great Society”. Under the direction of All The Way’s Bill Rauch, Johnson commands the center of a stage shaped as a congressional floor. The aforementioned ticker is a metastasizing, off-stage weight doomed to spill into Johnson’s presidency below, where he pinballs around a dizzying schedule of caustic phone calls with Bobby Kennedy (Bryce Pinkham), meetings with a chagrined Martin Luther King Jr (Granthan Coleman) and testing Vice-President Hubert Humphrey’s (Richard Thomas) loyalty. Vietnam slinks in between meetings, first in the form of the defense secretary, Robert McNamara (Matthew Rauch), with a request for security forces, which snowballs into deflections to cover the security forces, lies to the press, then 40,000 ground troops and the great shame of the Johnson presidency. Though the road to hell in Vietnam is paved early on, an increasingly toxic weight that sags Cox’s shoulders and desiccates the set as the play goes on, The Great Society predominantly focuses on Johnson’s continued effort – and, at times, mishandling – of civil rights at home. Schenkkan’s script is perhaps most moving, reaching the peaks of hope and frustration, when it travels to Selma, Alabama, and the less successful efforts to fight entrenched racism in Chicago. The Great Society is a man’s show; the focus on Johnson and King and Kennedy, with small parts for Lady Bird Johnson and Coretta Scott King as concerned and embittered wives, ones who feel underutilized. That being said, it’s difficult to justify any less stage or speaking time for Cox, whose sublime swings from bullishness and crippling guilt capture the real Johnson’s notoriously volatile moods, even if the Texas drawl is more evocative than spot-on. What he lacks in Johnson’s physical stature – the real president was 6ft 4in – Cox recoups in palpable energy; as he strides about the room, literally strong-arming lobbyists and senators into public promises, shading his vowels brassier or less so depending on the audience, it’s a brilliant portrait of intimidation and presence. But his Johnson is also a portrait of guilt, weighed down by hope soured on the realization that America’s fractures ran deeper than political pragmatism, and haunted by a bloody, increasingly unjustifiable war. “All the Way is a drama,” Schenkkan told the New York Times, “and The Great Society is a tragedy.” It’s not a spoiler, then, to say that by the show’s end, in December 1968, the ticker reads 38,620 American dead in Vietnam, 192,616 wounded. Martin Luther King Jr and Bobby Kennedy are dead. The Great Society’s arc ends with a defeated president and a world on fire, although it invokes a legacy – Medicare, a voting rights law – that might still point toward justice.