Questions of interpretation drive Nancy Harris’s teasingly clever new play, The Beacon, for Druid Theatre and Dublin’s Gate theatre. When a celebrated painter of abstract canvases, Beiv (Jane Brennan), moves to her late husband’s cottage on a West Cork island, she immediately knocks down the outer walls and replaces them with glass. To her son Colm (Marty Rea), who is visiting from the US with his new wife, this seems to be a statement to the local community that she has nothing to hide – which he suspects is not true. Whether Beiv owes him an explanation for anything in her life or her art is a problem that hangs over them. Colm’s return to the island where he spent teenage summers reunites him with his old friend and former lover, Donal (Ian-Lloyd Anderson). Using elements of a murder mystery, Harris probes into secrets and lies, making acute observations about complex relationships. Delving into the past doesn’t always help to change the present, as one painful, compelling scene between Donal and Colm shows: some things just can not be made right, especially unrequited love. Tightly wound by director Garry Hynes and superbly performed this play’s strength is its insight into motivation and self-reflection, with designer Francis O’Connor’s limpid seascape adding Bergmanesque intensity. The Trojan war has long been emblematic of all wars, and in Marina Carr’s version of Hecuba, the defeated Trojan queen makes her point clearly. “This is genocide,” she protests to the victorious Greek leader, Agamemnon (Brian Doherty). In Lynne Parker’s strikingly stark production for Rough Magic, the audience sits in the round, watching the tension coiling from up close. Enslaved Hecuba (Aislín McGuckin) is pushed from imperious control to desperation as her children are killed one by one. Her final moments with her daughter Polyxena (Zara Devlin), as she prepares to watch her be sacrificed by Agamemnon, are particularly moving. McGuckin and Doherty are riveting. What doesn’t convince is that Hecuba would share Agamemnon’s bed, especially since, in Carr’s adaptation, she does not take violent revenge for her suffering. Instead, she is portrayed as the grieving victim, the moral and cultural superior of the “barbarian” Greeks, which reduces the complexity of the relationship. Uncovering hidden social and political histories in site-specific spaces is Anu Productions’ specialism. In a labyrinthine building on Parnell Square, their latest immersive show, Faultline, recreates Dublin’s underground LGBT+ scene of the early 1980s with painstaking period detail. Through frenetic dance and minimal dialogue, the cast of five moves from a nightclub to a helpline call centre to a men’s toilet, as small audience groups squeeze into the background. The shifting scenes recreate a period of violent threat to gay men, including intrusive police investigation and harassment, at a time when homosexuality was illegal in Ireland. Eloquently directed and choreographed by Louise Lowe and performed with total commitment, the cast’s proximity is designed to challenge to the audience. As a gay rights campaigner (Matthew Malone) struggles to cope with the misery of one caller to the helpline, he asks the audience: “What would you have said to him?” More contained and specific than some of the company’s previous work, this production is a powerful spur to empathy, and a reminder of just how recently the victories for social justice and sexual equality in Ireland have been won. Dublin theatre festival runs until 13 October.