The Mill has been waiting years to be given a more prominent role on this website. The idea was that we’d hang around until no one was left and then could choose the best office and do what the hell we wanted, instead of following incomprehensible instructions every morning. It’s a tactic that hasn’t been particularly successful seeing as we’re typing this out in a broom cupboard with no natural light. Perhaps our experience is why Mesut Özil is reconsidering his tactic of trying to outlast Unai Emery at Arsenal so he can remember what it was like to play regular football again. Reports in the USA suggest the playmaker had been hoping Emery would be sacked so he could come back in from the cold at the Emirates, but with that still looking unlikely he’s mulling over the idea of a move to MLS, where DC United are in the market for a European player three seasons past their best to replace Wayne Rooney. David Beckham vanity project Inter Miami may also wave wads of cash in Özil’s direction to divert him down to Florida. And after Sunday’s shenanigans, who could blame Granit Xhaka if Arsenal’s captain felt like joining him. Real Madrid will strap £90m to Gareth Bale and dangle him from a crane outside Ed Woodward’s office at Old Trafford in the hope it will tempt him into letting Paul Pogba live out his dream by becoming a galáctico. The problem is, United physios have taken a look at Bale’s injury record, winced loudly, and instructed the club to swerve any deal for the Welsh winger. So good luck with that one. In fact, if you look closely at what Woodward’s up to, you may see that he’s counting out £125m in cash so Manchester United can make a double swoop on Bayern Munich for talented midfield tyro Kai Havertz and ageing schemer Thomas Müller. They still haven’t given up on Jadon Sancho, either, and may test Dortmund’s resolve with a £100m bid for the former Manchester City youngster. Another player who Real Madrid want to offload is James Rodríguez. They’re hoping they can use him as a sweetener in a deal for PSG’s Kylian Mbappé. Though some reports suggest Liverpool may be in the running for the lightning quick France striker now that Nike are confirmed as the club’s kit manufacturer. Mbappé is part of their swoosh stable of footballers you see and, in modern football, stuff like that helps, apparently. The mind boggles. Look away now Tottenham fans: Napoli and Juventus are sniffing around Son Heung-min. They have serious cash to offer too and we all know that that sparkly new stadium isn’t going to pay for itself anytime soon. Barcelona and Manchester United both like the cut of Lautaro Martínez’s jib. The Internazionale forward won’t come cheap, though. He has a release clause of £96m. Mind you, Inter have the hots for Ivan Rakitic, another United target, so they’re more likely to thrash out a deal with the Spanish champions. If United want a midfielder, a more realistic option is Leeds United’s Kalvin Phillips. Mike Phelan has been watching the 23-year-old very carefully and his ability to run around a lot while looking vaguely interested puts him ahead of pretty much every United midfielder other than Scott McTominay. Arsenal and Tottenham have heard that Joe Gomez is not happy with being a bit-part player at Liverpool and they’re ready to go toe-to-toe for the defender in a bidding war this January. And Wayne Rooney’s son, Kai, is off to Manchester City’s academy. He’s nine – just let him play Fortnite for goodness sake!