It seems some Labour MPs do believe you can polish a turd (Parliament puts brakes on Johnson’s race for Brexit, 23 October). Lisa Nandy justified voting for Boris Johnson’s Brexit deal because she is going to improve it as the bill goes through parliament. But in supporting a deal that should be anathema to the Labour party, Nandy and the other 18 Labour MPs who voted for it – including Jim Fitzpatrick, Ruth Smeeth, Jon Cruddas and Gloria De Piero – actually voted to make their constituents, some living in some of the poorest parts of the UK, worse off. They failed to protect jobs and the economy; failed to protect each region and nation in the UK. They claim they are representing their constituents, but nobody voted for this. Many in the north of England and in Wales were opposing austerity as much as unlimited immigration when they voted for leave; now they are going to be force-fed something even worse than austerity, by the very people they elected to look out for them. This wasn’t about MPs representing their constituents; this vote was about them being scared of losing their jobs. The five Labour MPs who voted for the defeated programme motion that would have rushed the bill through parliament to meet Johnson’s 31 October deadline – Kevin Barron, Jim Fitzpatrick, Caroline Flint, Kate Hoey and John Mann – should have the whip removed.Julie PartridgeLondon • As your editorial (21 October) said, Boris Johnson’s Brexit deal “paves the way to ripping up much of this country’s economic settlement and replacing it with a free-market vision more radical than anything attempted by Margaret Thatcher” and “the country’s less prosperous regions will bear the brunt of that race to the bottom”. So why does Caroline Flint continue to vote for a Tory Brexit that is wholly repugnant to Labour’s history and aspirations? Harold Wilson’s Labour established our European status over 40 years ago, and the party’s and the TUC’s policy in 2016 confirmed this decision. Johnson’s terrible deal needs fresh consent, and Flint’s constituents should have that democratic option.Michael CuthbertEdinburgh • I voted remain but respect the view of any MP who takes the opinions of their constituents into account. Caroline Flint is right to be guided by her constituents on Brexit. Her Don Valley constituency supported Brexit overwhelmingly in June 2016. It is easy for Polly Toynbee to lambast Ms Flint for her position (Labour MPs will not be forgiven if they hand Johnson victory, Journal, 22 October), and yes, Labour will not forgive the MP. However, the public, particularly the non-partisan element, does not care for political parties seeking to bully local constituencies on their choice of candidate. Ms Toynbee gave several examples of Labour MPs defying their constituents in leave-voting areas, but Ms Flint does not have to follow their example. As an experienced MP of 22 years’ standing she knows her own mind and, despite the uncertain path of Brexit, she is also aware that democracy matters.David RimmerHertford Heath, Hertfordshire • It may be right that the Labour party is tolerant enough to accommodate MPs like Caroline Flint who believe they cannot ignore the “democratic” mandate given to them by their leave-vote-leaning constituencies. What is not a defensible position is to dismiss the serious implications posed by Johnson’s deeply flawed EU withdrawal bill without sufficient space for democratic scrutiny and the availability of impact assessments to corroborate or challenge the claims being made. As someone who famously admitted not having read the Lisbon treaty while Europe minister, Flint must surely appreciate the dangers of a light-touch approach.Paul DolanNorthwich, Cheshire • The inevitable consequence of how Flint et al voted is a Conservative government. They must therefore believe that the best interests of their constituents lie under Tory rule. Why then are they in the Labour party? Alan MarsdenGamblesby, Cumbria