Sark bills itself the “crown jewel” of the Channel Islands, a peaceful, safe, car-free slice of paradise where the visitor can escape the hustle and bustle of modern day life. But the outgoing top police officer has launched an extraordinary critique of Sark, claiming it is “awash” with people who have criminal convictions and calling for his successors to be armed with batons and pepper spray. Mike Fawson, who has just completed a year as the elected connétable (constable) on Sark, said the lack of a customs post meant there was no way of stopping drugs or other illegal goods being smuggled on to the tiny island. Though there are no cars on Sark and the population of a few hundred souls get around on horse-drawn carts, bicycles and tractors, Fawson called for the laws on driving under the influence to be tightened and for police to be kitted out with drink and drug driving testing kits and speed guns. Fawson said CCTV cameras should be set up at strategic locations, suggested underage drinking was widespread and claimed that a “code of silence” made it very hard for people up to no good to be brought to justice. Day-to-day policing on Sark is done by the constable, a deputy (the vingtenier) and a small team of special constables, though if things get heated the island can ask nearby Guernsey for help. Fawson’s warning to his fellow islanders was not universally popular. Jeremy La Trobe-Bateman, who is the seneschal – Sark’s judge – insisted the island was perfectly safe. “I may be the judge but I don’t sit that often,” he said. La Trobe-Bateman said the last serious crime he sat on was about two years ago – an assault. “Like in any small community, people do squabble but it is a peaceful place.” In his report to the island’s parliament (known as the chief pleas) as he left his post, Fawson said the Sark police were dealing with an ever-increasing range of incidents. He argued the island needed a permanent customs presence. “Currently there is no way of detecting or preventing illegal narcotics or other illegal goods entering Sark on passengers coming off vessels entering the Sark harbours,” he said. Fawson said no legally enforceable checks could be made on anyone entering Sark and added: “Possibly all externally recruited seasonal employees should by law be made to have a DBS vetting check performed on them before they are employed on Sark. “Additionally anyone wishing to live on Sark should be made to have a criminal records check … Sark in the past (and current) has been awash with people who have various criminal convictions, which in many cases we have no knowledge of until another offence is committed.” He added: “Most unlawful incidents … that the Sark police constables are called out to involve people who are intoxicated through alcohol. Also underage alcohol consumption on Sark appears to be widespread. We as a community need to do more to address the issues of excessive alcohol consumption.” Turning to what he called a “code of silence”, he said: “In many cases when an unlawful incident occurs, the Sark police constables are met with a wall of silence and an unwillingness of people to make an official complaint that would enable someone being brought to account for their actions. It can and does perpetuate a vicious circle of violence/drunkenness/disorder/abuse, this vicious circle then moves on from one generation to the next and is never broken.” Fawson listed 267 “issues and incidents” that had been reported in the past 12 months. There were 11 alleged assaults, four burglaries – plus eight “carriage usage” and five “equine” issues. The largest number of complaints was about “tractor usage including out of hours” and there was one knife crime and one firearm incident. There was a single road rage problem, 11 incidents when people were adjudged to be wasting police time – and two cases of unexploded bombs being found. Like its neighbours, Jersey and Guernsey, Sark is a crown dependency with its own independent administrative and legal system. In 2008 after 400 years of feudalism it held democratic elections. But Fawson called for a fundamental review of the legal system, saying that some of Sark’s laws were simply not enforceable. His remarks have caused some consternation on Sark. Beth , one of the workers at the tourist information office, said islanders were surprised. “Sark is incredibly safe,” she said. “We don’t lock our doors here; I don’t ever lock up my bicycle.” Beth said that some visitors did get a little “lairy” sometimes. “But it’s nothing like being in a city centre at the weekend.”