Donald Trump has said US authorities will speak to the wife of one of its diplomats suspected of involvement in the death of a British teenage motorcyclist to “see what we can come up with to do some healing”. The president’s comments to reporters on Wednesday night followed a call from Boris Johnson in which the prime minister asked him to waive immunity for the woman and as the teenager’s family announced they will start a civil action to try to force her back to the UK for questioning. The family spoke after a 45-minute meeting with the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, that they said left them frustrated and feeling like it had “just been a publicity stunt”. Harry Dunn, 19, died when his motorcycle collided with a car on 27 August. On Wednesday night a Downing Street spokesman said that Johnson had discussed the case in a call to the US president. “The prime minister urged the president to reconsider the US position so the individual involved can return to the UK, cooperate with police and allow Harry’s family to receive justice.” Anne Sacoolas, the wife of a CIA operative, left the UK days after the crash, with the US State Department claiming she was covered by diplomatic immunity. Dunn’s parents have been urging the UK government either to challenge that claim or to put more pressure on the US to waive immunity. This would allow her to return to the UK to face questioning by Northamptonshire police over the incident. A Volvo car allegedly driven by Sacoolas struck Dunn after leaving RAF Croughton. The Downing Street spokesman said that Trump was aware of the case and expressed his condolences to Dunn’s parents in his call with Johnson. “The leaders agreed to work together to find a way forward as soon as possible,” he said. Later, in his comments to reporters, Trump said it sometimes “happens” that Americans drive on the wrong side of the road in the UK. “It was an accident. It was a terrible accident,” he said. It is unclear at this stage what caused the collision. Raab met Dunn’s mother, Charlotte Charles, and his father, Tim Dunn, on Wednesday afternoon after having talks with the US ambassador, Woody Johnson, on Tuesday. Charles told reporters afterwards: “I can’t really see the point as to why we were invited to see Dominic Raab. We are no further forward than where we were this time last week. Part of me is feeling like it was just a publicity stunt on the UK government side to show they are trying to help. But, although he is engaging with us, we have no answers. We are really frustrated that we could spend half an hour or more with him and just come out with nothing.” Radd Seiger, the spokesman for the family, said of the meeting: “To say we are disappointed with the outcome is an understatement.” Accusing Raab of being cold in the meeting, he said that following conversations with lawyers expert in the field of diplomatic immunity, it was not right to suggest her claim of diplomatic immunity was not open to challenge. He said the law on immunity was outmoded and understood by only a handful of experts. The family felt let down by Raab simply repeating the US assertion that it never allowed waivers on diplomatic immunity, he said. Seiger said the family did not know much about the law around diplomatic immunity. “This is a complicated area of law with outdated laws, and many lawyers struggle to understand. The parents don’t know the law. They do not understand much of this, but this a right/wrong situation.” Raab insisted he shared “the frustration of Harry’s mother and father”. The foreign secretary added: “They have lost their son and the justice process is not being allowed to properly run its course. “We are continuing to press the US authorities for their cooperation to ensure the police can pursue this case unimpeded and to allow Harry’s family to get justice. “We will use every avenue and opportunity open to us to try to right the wrong and allow the justice system to follow its course.” Raab has also spoken by phone to the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, as well as the US ambassador. The Foreign Office said it was in no doubt that Sacoolas’s family was covered by diplomatic immunity under the Vienna convention, and that it could not challenge that fact.