The government’s plan to rush through a law calling a general election in December has hit an obstacle after a majority of MPs supported a backbench effort to allow the one-line bill to be amended. The amendment to the bill, tabled by Labour’s Stella Creasy, was passed by 312 votes to 295. This does not, however, mean the bill is doomed, given a December election is now also backed by Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Scottish National party (SNP). Boris Johnson and his ministers had tabled the business of the house motion, which set out the timetable for calling an election on 12 December but did not allow amendments to the bill itself. The government was concerned that allowing amendments on areas such as permitting votes for 16- and 17-year-olds or for EU nationals could derail the election bill. It remains to be seen whether such amendments would be regarded as being within the scope of the bill, and therefore permitted. The decision on this will be made by Lindsay Hoyle, the deputy Speaker, as the process will happen when the Commons is sitting in the committee stage, when he traditionally presides. Creasy tabled the amendment to the programme motion allowing amendments to the bill, saying that in trying to prevent these, the government was trying to “rig today’s debate”. A single copy of the programme motion was released at 10pm on Monday, Creasy said. “To do that late at night, and without any consultation with the opposition, and in the hope that nobody notices, is frankly – and I hope the leader of the house understands this concept – not cricket. “It is to admit that rather than win the case for this bill, as it stands, the executive wants no challenge to it at all. And that, whether you think this is a good bill or not, should be a concern for all of us in this house.” The amended programme motion was then passed by MPs without a vote, meaning amendments will be tabled. Downing Street has made it plain that it believes a December election would be impossible if the electoral register had to be updated, saying this would bring “administrative chaos”. A No 10 source later confirmed that it would withdraw the election bill if an amendment was passed that gave the vote to EU nationals or 16- and 17-year-olds. “You cannot honestly argue that you are supporting an election on 12 December and vote for a change in the franchise,” the source said. “It’s quite clear a vote to change the franchise would create a six-month delay.” However, it is possible No 10 could agree to an amendment changing the election date to 10 or 11 December. It is also not known whether Labour or other opposition parties would fully push for significant changes to the bill, even if they could pass, or if any amendments would be seen as mainly symbolic. Introducing the bill, Johnson said an election was needed to deal with Brexit: “Not only has this house been considering this issue for three-and-a-half years, but last week, when this bill was being debated, there was not a single new idea, there was not a single new suggestion, and all they wanted was more time, more weeks, more months, when they couldn’t even provide the speakers to fill the time allotted.” Earlier, Jeremy Corbyn announced that Labour was ready to back a general election now that the EU had granted a three-month Brexit delay. The Liberal Democrats and the SNP had already signalled they were preparing to support the one-line bill. The Labour leader told the shadow cabinet: “I have consistently said that we are ready for an election and our support is subject to a no-deal Brexit being off the table. “We have now heard from the EU that the extension of article 50 to 31 January has been confirmed, so for the next three months, our condition of taking no deal off the table has now been met.” Speaking after Johnson in the debate on the bill, Corbyn said: “Whatever date the house decides the election will be, I’m ready for it, we’re ready for it. “Because we want to be able to say to the people of this country there is an alternative to austerity. There is an alternative to inequality. There is an alternative to sweetheart trade deals with Donald Trump.”