A blockbuster exhibition of Leonardo da Vinci’s works at the Louvre could be without one of his most famous works after an Italian court suspended its loan to the Paris museum following a last-minute legal challenge. Italia Nostra, a heritage group, argued that Leonardo’s Vitruvian Man drawing, currently in Venice, was too fragile to be transported and risked being damaged by the lighting in the Louvre if displayed for a long period. The court’s decision is the latest hurdle in a plan to bring together Leonardo’s works in Paris to commemorate the 500th anniversary of the artist’s death that first hit problems when Italy’s former populist government – often at odds with Emmanuel Macron, the French president, on issues such as migration – threatened to block the initiative in its entirety. The exhibition is due to open on 24 October. Italia Nostra warned that because the Vitruvian Man could only be displayed for short periods at a time every six years, it risked having to be concealed for as long as a decade if shown at the Louvre because the drawing was already exhibited in Venice’s Accademia galleries earlier this year. In filing its appeal to the court, the group referred to a law that bans the transportation of artworks beyond Italy that could be damaged in transit or by unfavourable conditions in the host museum. “All the technical reports have advised against the transfer of the very fragile design,” Lidia Fersuoch, the president of the Venice unit of Italia Nostra, said in a statement on Monday. The court has scheduled a hearing on 16 October, during which the recently reappointed culture minister, Dario Franceschini, will put forward his arguments against the appeal. As a symbolic gesture, Franceschini and his French counterpart, Franck Riester, last month signed a memorandum of understanding in Paris that solidified agreements already made between Italian museums and the Louvre for the loan of seven Leonardo works. In return, France is lending Italy paintings by Raphael for events marking 500 years since his death next year. A spokesperson for Franceschini said several of the Leonardo works were already on their way to France. Franceschini began the negotiations when he previously served as culture minister under the centre-left Democratic party’s government in 2017. But the plan hit a stumbling block when a coalition between the Five Star Movement (M5S) and the far-right League came to power in 2018. The then culture minister, M5S’s Alberto Bonisoli, claimed the deal was unbalanced and his deputy, Lucia Borgonzoni, from the League, threatened to cancel the loan of Leonardo works last November. Accusing France of trying to take centre stage in the commemorations and sidelining Italy, she said: “Leonardo is Italian; he only died in France.” The M5S-League coalition collapsed in August, leading to the Democratic party’s return to government in alliance with M5S.