A group of 150 citizens, selected as a sample of non-working people in France, including pensioners and factory workers, will this week begin advising Emmanuel Macron on how the country can cut carbon emissions to tackle the climate crisis. The panel was chosen by selecting people, aged from 16 to over 65, from towns and villages across France. More than 25,000 automatically generated calls were made to mobile numbers and landlines to find a representative “sample of national life”. Coming from various backgrounds and professions the citizens are not experts on environmental issues but are expected to have views on the difficulties of combating climate change and to offer ideas. They will be asked to consider the role of individuals, and society as a whole – covering housing, work, transport, food, shopping and methods of production — and suggest solutions for cutting emissions, which will be put before parliament. Julien Blanchet, overseeing the process, said the citizens would represent “the diversity of the French population”. Environmental campaigners said the process, which will run until February, should not be used as an excuse to delay urgent climate action. Macron, the French president, had promised to appoint a citizens’ consultation body after he faced a crisis in climate policy last year when the anti-government gilets jaunes (yellow vests) protesters took to the streets against a new carbon tax intended to urge motorists to change their behaviour. People in the countryside said it was deeply unfair to raise taxes on fuel use where there was no alternative transport to private cars, and while vast corporations were not doing enough. The tax was later abandoned. Macron has presented himself as a world leader on the climate emergency. But despite France’s ambitious promises to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, in reality the country is far from delivering its goals, the French independent advisory council on climate has warned. Everyday life in France does not match political promises – particularly with regard to transport, car use and building renovation – and the government is seen as not doing enough to meet a net zero emissions target for 2050. The new citizens’ panel will advise on how France can cut carbon emissions by 40% before 2030, in terms of building construction and housing, transport methods, food production and consumption At their first meeting the participants will be briefed by climate experts and will then meet over several weekends until the end of January. Of the thousands of French people contacted by phone to join the consultation, 30% quickly expressed interest, 35% asked to consider the idea, and 35% refused.