Spoiler alert: this article contains details of events in episode five. If there were any justice, everyone would be talking about The Capture right now. Ben Chanan’s surveillance thriller isn’t just one of the most cleverly plotted dramas of recent years – it’s also one of the most satisfying. In part, that satisfaction comes from the many ways the show uses technology to keep the audience off balance. From the moment it became clear that while DI Rachel Carey (Holliday Grainger) was convinced her detectives were outside the house Shaun Emery (Callum Turner) was being interrogated in he clearly couldn’t be, to the jaw-dropping explanation by an image manipulation expert of just how that scene could be faked, The Capture has created outlandish scenarios that are also strangely plausible. The UK is the most spied on country in the world, our images constantly caught on CCTV, body cameras and drones and even controversially used by private companies. From there, it’s a small step to The Capture – a world in which security forces don’t simply spy on citizens but manipulate images to ensure that “justice” is served. And while the show’s shadowy organisation, The Correction, might be a classic thriller trope (it was the governments what done it), it remains just this side of believable. The nifty tricks deployed by said organisation – the splicing of footage, the manipulation of CCTV – feel darkly credible. It may not have happened yet, but you wouldn’t be at all surprised if it did. Adding to that sense of plausibility is a refusal to cheat the audience by providing easy explanations. Chanan’s script doesn’t withhold crucial information to deliver cheap gotcha moments later; instead, we discover things as Carey and Emery do – a fact never more obvious than with this week’s penultimate episode. Thus we learned how the injustice at the heart of the story came about: that barrister Hannah (Laura Haddock) had her own agenda all along. That she and her colleague Charlie (Barry Ward) never had Shaun’s interests at heart. In fact, it was another case entirely that held their attention. The case, as it happened, that made Carey’s name: a possible miscarriage of justice involving four young Muslim men, now jailed for terrorism offences, which they hoped to bring into the spotlight using Emery as collateral. And if Emery was simply a pawn, who really cared? He was only a soldier, after all, and one who may well be guilty of the crime they fought so hard to exonerate him for. As treachery has piled upon treachery and Emery came to realise just how much he had been used, we were treated not only to an immensely rewarding experience but also a refreshingly grownup hour of television. And, in an era defined by endless cliffhanging twists and turns, there is something fascinating about a show that refuses to spoon-feed its audience. It helps, too, that the acting is so strong. As Carey, Grainger expertly walks the line between ruthless and concerned (it’s a pleasure, too, to see a female character so unapologetic about her ambition). But the show really belongs to Turner, whose Emery is a plausible mix of vulnerable and dangerous – a man who has undoubtedly been set up, yet whose capacity for violence always simmers just under the surface. The real reason The Capture strikes such a nerve, though, is that it references not the whizz-bang edge-of-your-seat thrillers of the current era but darker, more complicated stories of the 1970s. Deeply paranoid films (Three Days of the Condor, The Parallax View, The Conversation, The Manchurian Candidate) hit a nerve in febrile times. Similarly, the creeping paranoia of The Capture – the sense that we could and should trust nothing, not even the evidence we see in front of us – feels like the perfect fit for the increasingly untrustworthy age in which we are living. As it moves towards the climax, it is genuinely unclear how events will play out. Will Carey manage to save Emery? What is the truth about the original war crime for which he was convicted? Will The Correction be exposed? In a lesser show, the temptation would be to go for the happy ending, making the bad guys pay and allowing Carey to have her moment of glory. But everything about The Capture so far suggests that it is a very different kind of thriller, one that knows the easy ending is not always the right one. Here’s hoping, then, that Chanan holds his nerve and delivers not a pat wrapping up of loose ends but something more nuanced and complex, as befits the most adult and interesting thriller on TV this year.