Paul Gauguin was the first European artist to find brown skin more beautiful than white. He makes that plain in his 1902 painting Barbarian Tales, a highlight of the National Gallery’s ultimately frustrating exhibition. Who is the “barbarian” of the title? The gnome-like European who squats like Rumpelstiltskin, or the two serene Pacific women he is next to? It’s not quite right, however, to call the male colonial interloper who gloats over the pair’s unabashed bodies “white”. His flesh is a horrible bright pink. Gauguin painted this self-excoriating work just a year before his death in the Marquesas Islands in 1903. The grotesque European voyeur is surely a guilty expression of his own appetite for “exotic” female flesh. In 1891, aged 43, he set sail for Tahiti with funding from the French government. He lived in and painted the Pacific world for the rest of his life, apart from a short return to France. More particularly, he portrayed Oceanian women, naked as often as not. When Gauguin painted his bold and intimate portrait Two Tahitian Women, now in New York’s Met, was he merely enjoying their bare-breasted voluptuousness – or was he doing something more subtle? They stand strong in friendship, defying the racist contempt of Gauguin’s age. But this great portrait, like other key Pacific works by the artist, isn’t in the National Gallery’s nervous cop-out of a show. Barbarian Tales appears to have been let through because its inclusion of a horrid western voyeur undercuts the calm, clear admiration with which Gauguin dotes on women’s breasts. It’s not hard to understand why, in an age of anxiety and anger about representations of race and gender, the National Gallery has turned its eyes away from Gauguin’s most intense works of art. But this self-censorship doesn’t just betray the artist, it’s also a somewhat futile gesture from a gallery whose collection is full of nude white women. Gauguin’s 1892 painting Woman of the Mango reveals his sensual joy in the new world he found in Tahiti, but this woman wears a violet European dress that covers her up to the neck. The National Gallery effectively takes the side of the missionaries who made Tahitians wear such “decent” clothes. The scaredy-cat evasiveness becomes surreal when you reach Gauguin’s 1893-94 Self-Portrait with Manao Tupapau, in which he poses in front of a painting of a woman lying naked on her front that can itself be seen as a portrait. Yet we’re only allowed to see it indirectly here, in a colourless lithograph. Where is the closely related work Nevermore in which a woman lies in psychological torment like a character from Poe, except nude? So you turn the corner and find … a room full of flower paintings. Huh? The curators claim these still lifes are “substitute portaits”. Fine. A bowl of sunflowers probably is a symbol of Gauguin’s tragic friend Van Gogh. But it’s a poor substitute for a full survey of Gauguin’s many actual portraits of Pacific people. The timidity of replacing nudes with flowers is painfully obvious – and troubling. If we can’t see art, we can’t debate it. And there is so much to debate. Whatever you feel about this artist – who lived at the height of outright European imperialism and racism and, by choosing to live in colonised lands and paint their people, put himself at the anguished heart of that history – we need to look at him frankly to test those feelings. There is one great Tahitian painting here that encapsulates what I think Gauguin was doing. It’s called Merahi Metua No Tehamana, which means Tehamana Has Many Parents. It portrays Teha’amana a Tahura sitting in a striped European dress of the type Christian missionaries imposed on their flocks, with a collar up to the neck. But she’s put flowers in her hair that suggest a richer, more sensual civilisation. Her eyes look off into regions of inward thought. She is remembering. Behind her are monuments to the art and beliefs the missionaries want to destroy. There are mysterious glyphs inspired by inscriptions on Rapa Nui (Easter Island), a carved wooden goddess, and ghostlike ancestral heads. Gauguin is not just referring to his young lover’s literal parents. He is saying she is the heir to the tremendous artistic achievements and long history of the Pacific world. This was painted at a moment when no other European was standing up for non-western art. Gauguin shows his respect for Teha’amana a Tahura’s cultural heritage - but he also shows, in his meticulous depiction of her confining European dress that denies who she is, why he was driven to portray Tahitian women as bold self-confident nudes. We don’t see many of those. Instead, there’s more than we need of Gauguin’s early career when he painted in Brittany and promoted himself as leader of the avant garde. Portrait of the Painter Slewinski shows a man who’s a flattened tableau of mottled tans, eclipsed by a dazzling bunch of flowers. Is Gauguin a great portraitist, in the conventional sense? No, because he is not that interested in other people. Compared with portraits by his contemporaries Cézanne and Van Gogh, those of pre-Tahiti Gauguin lack empathy and compassion – except for himself. In his 1889 painting Christ in the Garden of Olives, he gives the suffering Jesus his own features. He rarely looks at others with such feeling. He became obsessed with the features of his artist friend Meijer de Haan. One of the tremendous sculptures scattered through the show turns De Haan into a wicked sprite emerging magically from a tree trunk. It’s a monstrous, not tender, image that resurfaces, merged with Gauguin himself, as the demonic European in Barbarian Tales. That coldness reaches its nadir in the small selection of works he did in Arles, when he lived with Van Gogh in the Yellow House. They are much less passionate that Van Gogh’s – even though the Dutchman copied his drawing of Madame Ginoux. He needed to go further south than Van Gogh to find his own soul – all the way to the south Pacific. But just when it should soar, this exhibition puts on the brakes. Its treatment of Gauguin in Tahiti is a mess. His greatest and most controversial achievements are sidestepped in favour of all those flowers. Tahiti is presented as the last chapter of a long development. In reality, it was Gauguin’s redemption. • At National Gallery, London, from 7 October to 26 January.