The unveiling of a secret database holding all referrals to Prevent has sparked a fresh debate over the controversial anti-radicalisation programme. Prevent is one of the four “Ps” of the government’s counter-terrorism strategy, along with Pursue, Protect and Prepare. Prevent was created by the Labour government in 2003 and its remit was widened by the coalition government in 2011. Its stated purpose is to safeguard and support those vulnerable to radicalisation and to stop them from becoming terrorists or supporting terrorism. Individuals suspected of being vulnerable to radicalisation can be referred to police for further assessment. One of the most controversial aspects of Prevent was the statutory duty introduced in 2015 on schools, NHS trusts, prisons and local authorities to report concerns about people who may be at risk of turning to extremism or terrorism. Once referred, the individual will be assessed to see whether or not further intervention is required. If an individual is assessed to be vulnerable to radicalisation, they may be offered support through the Channel programme in England and Wales, or the Prevent Professional Concerns (PPC) programme in Scotland. This is a voluntary process. Channel is run in every local authority in England and Wales and addresses all types of extremism, including extreme rightwing and Islamist-related. Between 2017 and 2018, a total of 7,318 individuals were subject to a referral but only 394 were escalated to the Channel process. There are other aspects to the Prevent strategy. For example, the strategy says the government seeks to stop the spreading of terrorist material online as well as build counter-terrorist narratives. In 2016, the Guardian revealed the UK government had embarked on a series of clandestine propaganda campaigns intended to bring about “attitudinal and behavioural change” among young British Muslims. The most common criticism levelled at the Prevent strategy is that it disproportionately impacts people of Muslim faith or background and inhibits legitimate expression. There have been numerous reports over the last 15 years that have fuelled this perception: an eight-year-old questioned by Prevent after his teachers mistook his T-shirt slogan for Islamic State propaganda, a 17-year-old referred because he wore a “Free Palestine” badge to school and a student of counter-terrorism questioned after an official spotted him reading a textbook entitled Terrorism Studies. The Prevent brand has been labelled “toxic” in parts of the Muslim community. But senior policing and security figures continue to back Prevent. The UK’s most senior counter-terrorism officer, Neil Basu, vigorously defended the programme in a speech in Israel last month, while security ministers and former home secretaries have insisted it has saved lives.