It had been 12 years and 20 days since the All Blacks had last lost a game at the Rugby World Cup. In New Zealand, there was some complacency: do or die; sure, but who could challenge the world’s greatest rugby team? England. Apparently. At the Bullock Bar in Wanaka, a small farming and tourist town in the alps of the South Island, the mood was sombre at half time, and turned black as the end approached. Not good enough, not fast enough, not World Cup winners. Outside a storm blew in, the wind sharp and jarring, as World Cup glory stormed out of reach. Gareth Lewis, 44, short, stocky, a lifelong fan, wore his All Blacks jersey skin tight. At the conclusion of the match, as the Bullock Bar emptied quietly and in record-time, his eyes were moist, his expression stunned. “I’m pretty despondent. But England deserved to win. They outplayed us,” he said. “It’s like our religion here. We’re not a country of faith strongly, rugby is what brings us all together, you know? It’s like the glue that keeps New Zealand together. When we lose it’s tough, it’s hard work.” Lewis said it would take him a few days – at least – to recover from the shock defeat. “She’ll be a long old night. But we’ll have a laugh tomorrow. Like George Gregan said – four more years, you know, we can have another crack.” Otago University sports psychologist Steve Jackson said while many Kiwis would be experiencing genuine feelings of sadness about the loss, 2019 had been a trying year already, and the nation was well equipped to swiftly move on. “Kiwis will be disappointed but those who know rugby will accept they were beaten by a better team,” Jackson said. “The depth of pain will depend on how much individuals care. The media will claim national disaster but New Zealand has faced earthquakes and terror attacks [recently]. Life will go on.” New Zealand’s sport and recreation minister, Grant Robertson, was in Yokohama for the game. A lifelong All Blacks fan, he tweeted gracious defeat. “The better team won on the night. England accurate in every facet of game. Our lads didn’t fire. ABs still have a lot to be proud of but just not to be #allblacks.” In Wanaka, as Kiwis put down their drinks and headed to the 24/7 grocery store for mince pies and small buckets of chips instead, sadness was matched by pragmatism, following the lead of All Blacks coach Steve Hanson, who praised England’s “tremendous” footy. “Tonight we just weren’t good enough,” Hansen said. “And we’ve got to take that on the chin – as does everybody back home.” Dave Reed, 60, of Canterbury, quietly nursed a beer at the bar, staring dumbstruck at the screen as England celebrated – demurely, politely – at Yokohama stadium. “I’ve been better,” said Reed, smiling, following Hansen’s lead. “I’m very sad, I’m pretty gutted. But England deserved to win. I’m an All Black through and through but they deserved to win. Definitely. The All Blacks didn’t turn up today. They didn’t let us play. We never got to play today, did we?” Like many at the bar, Reed wondered if England needed this win now more than New Zealand. “I mean, they’ve got Brexit right? They’ve got that Boris guy in charge? Damn. Maybe they need this, who wouldn’t need this with what they’ve got going on up there? We’ll be ok.”