Davina James-Hanman rightly identifies austerity policies, including legal aid cuts, as contributing to an average of three women a week being killed by their partners or former partners (‘There’s no secret abuser’s handbook. It’s called mainstream culture’, 10 October). However, I wonder if she has considered the devastating impact of the ill-considered Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004 which made breach of a family (civil) court non-molestation injunction a criminal offence. Implemented in 2007, this egregious example of a law of unintended consequences actually weakened the protection such orders afforded victims, by prohibiting judges from attaching powers of arrest. Prior to this, when an applicant reported breach, the police had only to arrest the respondent and return him to court the next working day, for immediate contempt proceedings. With up to two years’ custody for breach, 90% of orders were obeyed, providing essential calm while the court resolved the issues keeping victims trapped – long-term living arrangements, finance, divorce, and, crucially, children. Now, on breach, victims lose the court’s protection, and their legal aid, to rely on criminal proceedings – if there is enough evidence and if they can face these. As a former practising family law solicitor now sitting on my local police and crime commissioner’s domestic abuse scrutiny panel, I see police struggle to meet victims’ needs. Desperate to safely end abusive relationships (when most deaths occur), victims rarely find criminal proceedings helpful – which is why civil protection was first developed, and why the new criminal bill is likely to make little difference. Letting family judges again attach powers of arrest to their protective orders would be a sensible and significant step towards reducing the numbers of domestic killings.Jan WilliamsThe Campaign for Effective Domestic Abuse Laws • Your article on Rosie Duffield’s harrowing Commons account of domestic abuse highlights the importance of the draft domestic abuse bill (MP leaves Commons in tears with moving domestic abuse story, 3 October). Sadly, domestic abuse is still a widespread problem throughout England and Wales, with an estimated 2 million adults aged 16 to 59 suffering domestic abuse in the year ending March 2018 (Office for National Statistics). The bill has the potential to change millions of lives, and many of its proposals – such as creating a domestic abuse commissioner, prohibiting the cross-examination of victims by their alleged abuser and widening the definition of domestic abuse – are long overdue. However, for the bill to be effective in protecting victims, the government must put the necessary funding into legal aid, support services, education and wider government policy. We urge the government to carry the domestic abuse bill over into the next parliamentary session, which – with the necessary funding – will help to give domestic abuse victims the access to justice they deserve.Simon DavisPresident, Law Society of England and Wales • Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com • Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters • Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition