1) Let’s start by saying farewell to Bastian Schweinsteiger’s career. His best goals were either free-kicks or clever flicks. See for yourself. He scored some belters for Germany too. Here are all 24 of them. Schweinsteiger announced he was leaving Bayern Munich in 2015 with this high-concept, soft-focus production, and he left Manchester United for Chicago with a heartfelt message. He is also a Deutscher Fussballmeister off the pitch, as Lukas Podolski found out. And he deals well with very silly questions, too. Most of all, though, he should be remembered for his energy during the 2014 World Cup final, in which he was inspirational. 2) Michel Bastos and his mighty left foot have retired, too. It was even mighty when it was off target. Folllowing Michel Bastos’ retirement, enjoy some of his best strikes for #TeamOL!pic.twitter.com/d5SLBKGIuq 3) The best try last week didn’t come at the Rugby World Cup. Nope, how about this from Bayonne’s 29-27 defeat of Agen in the Top 14, featuring a blind miss-pass and a throw between the legs to set up Sean Robinson, who dived into the corner to cap a beautiful move. 4) Welcome to the (potentially scary) world of self-driving race cars. 5) Simone Biles made history by winning a record 21st World Gymnastics Championships medal. She did so by landing two of her signature moves too, the Biles and the Biles II. 6) Of course you wanted a timelapse video of Tottenham’s football pitch being broken into three sections and rolled out of the ground to make way for the synthetic NFL one below. 7) If anyone can explain to us the thinking behind this free-kick routine (that went predictably wrong), we’d be eternally grateful. They can be just as bad in the professional game, mind. But here’s Leipzig showing how an over-the-top set piece can work. German teams have form when it comes to creative set pieces, as this novel approach from Dortmund showed last season. 1) When you play footy at the Queenstown Oval, be ready for some gravel rash. 2) Maradona celebrating a Gimnasia goal with some David Brent-style moves in the changing room. 3) Compilation of supercar shunts – take the time to watch it all. 4) Different races, different pit stops. Spotters’ badges: GrahamClayton, Chambazi, whobroughtoranges Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy.