A £4.9bn takeover battle has broken out for the food delivery group Just Eat as the investment group Prosus launched an all-cash offer in an attempt to break up Just Eat’s merger with its Dutch rival Takeaway.com. Prosus, which is part of South Africa’s Naspers, a large tech investing group, has held talks with Just Eat but has yet to reach an agreement on terms, so said it had decided to go direct to the shareholders. The group said: “Prosus has recently approached the board of directors of Just Eat with a number of indicative proposals to acquire Just Eat. Prosus and the Just Eat board have not managed to reach agreement. “Consequently, Prosus is making this announcement in order to give Just Eat shareholders the opportunity to consider the offer.” However, the bid was swiftly rejected by Just Eat, which said it was pressing ahead with the Takeaway.com deal. “The board of Just Eat has considered the terms of the Prosus offer and believes that it significantly undervalues Just Eat and its attractive assets and prospects both on a standalone basis and as part of the proposed recommended all-share combination with Takeaway.com.” Just Eat said it had “fully engaged” with Prosus but had already rejected initial proposals of 670p and 700p a share. The Prosus offer is worth 710p a share – a 20% premium to Just Eat’s closing price on Monday. It is also a fifth higher than the value of the all-share Takeaway.com bid, which has fallen by 19% since it was announced in July. Just Eat’s shares surged 24% to 729p on news of the Prosus bid. Just Eat’s success was built on an ordering website that linked restaurants with customers but it did not initially handle deliveries itself. It has recently branched out into deliveries, too, responding to competition from Uber Eats and Deliveroo. Prosus said it would provide “substantial investment” to help Just East grow its own delivery arm. “Based on Prosus’s global experience and having met Just Eat management and reviewed the information provided, Prosus believes that the business will require substantial investment, in excess of that planned by Just Eat management.” The Prosus move comes only a day after Just Eat disappointed investors with its latest financial results. Its revenue growth slowed to 25% in the third quarter of this year, down from 30% in the first half, raising fears that it is losing market share to rivals. Neil Wilson, chief market analyst at Markets.com, said: “The Prosus offer is in many ways very cheeky and even more low-ball – it’s still under the 731p initial offer from Takeaway.com and whilst it has been rejected, will certainly up the ante and could force Takeaway.com into raising its offer as it looks in a weakened position due to the stock’s decline.”