As voting on “super Saturday” looms, many of today’s papers home in on the cross-party amendment that could yet throw a spanner in Boris Johnson’s Brexit plans. The Guardian focuses on how Johnson’s plan for a Brexit “new deal or no deal” today looks likely to be frustrated by the amendment led by Sir Oliver Letwin and Hilary Benn that would withhold final approval until Brexit legislation has passed. “PM faces Brexit extension even if his deal is passed.” It reports: “News of the amendment came as a serious blow to Johnson, with strategists meeting on Friday night to try to decide how to respond if it passed.” Guardian front page, Saturday 19 October 2019: PM faces Brexit extension even if his deal is passed pic.twitter.com/yIMiWz3W33 The Sun seeks to spruce up the years-long political saga with a picture of Johnson’s head perched atop the dancing body of a John Travolta-esque figure, with the headline “Saturday night leaver”. In the inside pages, the prime minister has written a letter to readers, explaining why MPs should back his plan. The FT mixes athletics with cowboy westerns, opting for the headline: “Johnson faces fresh hurdle before Brexit high noon in Westminster.” It says Letwin’s amendment could derail the prime minister’s deal and carries a picture of the Extinction Rebellion protests around Westminster. Just published: front page of the Financial Times UK edition Saturday October 19 2https://on.ft.com/2P2bqEC pic.twitter.com/GyBsywvKdP The Times also goes with the Letwin amendment but focuses on the angry reaction from 10 Downing Street. “Anger over bid to delay decision on Brexit deal,” is the headline. It says the manoeuvre is hampering Johnson’s efforts to secure majority backing for his deal, at a time when he is still trying to stitch together a “precarious alliance”. The Telegraph carries a picture of a tired-looking Johnson alongside a combative headline: “Johnson edges towards victory as rebels hatch new plot.” It says the PM is within touching distance of a deal after securing the support of up to 12 Labour MPs. It claims 319 MPs are for the deal and 312 against. Tomorrow’s @Telegraph front page:“Johnson edges towards victory as rebels hatch new plot”#tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/hmuaDulHbC The Daily Mail says Johnson’s Brexit deal has popular appeal with the public, citing an online poll of 1,000 people, of whom 50% back a vote for it today. “You demand: do the deal,” is the headline. The Express carries Johnson’s public appeal to get Brexit done, with the headline: “Respect the will of the people and let’s move on.” The i calls it “Johnson’s day of reckoning” with a list of bullet points highlighting how close the vote appears, European reluctance to grant an extension, and the Letwin amendment. The Mirror mentions “Boris’ frantic battle to win Brexit vote” but it splashes on new evidence it says could clear serial killer Jeremy Bamber.