Lucy Ellmann’s Ducks, Newburyport, a 1,000-page novel written mostly in one sentence, is already shortlisted for the Booker prize. Now Ellmann has made it on to the final line-up for the Goldsmiths prize, a £10,000 award celebrating “fiction at its most novel”. Published by Norwich independent press Galley Beggar, Ellmann is one of six writers in the running for the Goldsmiths, which goes to “fiction that breaks the mould and extends the possibilities of the novel form”. Judge Sjón called Ducks, Newburyport “a massive achievement of a novel, which plays masterfully on every one of the reader’s senses”. Told through the perspective of an Ohio woman, it is, he said, “an inspired demonstration of what it’s like to be the warm vanishing point of a hostile universe”, and is “as playful and urgent, humanist and unflinching, as the other big novels that precede it in the literary canon”. Four of the titles chosen by judges this year are from small presses: alongside Ellmann, Amy Arnold’s Slip of a Fish, a stream-of-consciousness narrative from a vulnerable young mother, is from Sheffield-based And Other Stories; Good Day? by Vesna Main, a novel in dialogue between a husband and a wife, is published by Cromer-based Salt; and Isabel Waidner’s We Are Made of Diamond Stuff is from the Manchester-based Dostoyevsky Wannabe. Just two of the contenders, Mark Haddon’s riff on the myth of Apollonius, The Porpoise, and Deborah Levy’s The Man Who Saw Everything, are from major publishers. The shortlist is a reminder that the novel remains a flexible and innovative form Chair of judges Erica Wagner said the shortlist was “a reminder that the novel remains a flexible and innovative form”, as well as a reflection of “our 21st-century political and cultural concerns”. She praised the “vast eidetic capaciousness” of Ducks, Newburyport and the “slender and hectic compression” of We Are Made of Diamond Stuff. “Amy Arnold’s Slip of a Fish deconstructs an English summer through the haunted consciousness of its protagonist and Vesna Main’s Good Day? uses dialogue alone to ask that deceptively simple question: who gets to tell the story?” said Wagner. Deborah Levy examines “what it means to see politics and culture” in The Man Who Saw Everything, she continued “venturing from East Berlin just before the fall of the Wall to post-Brexit Britain”, while “Mark Haddon’s The Porpoise begins like a thriller but veers into the mythic echoes that underpin all our lives”. The winner will be announced on 13 November, joining former winners including Eimear McBride and Nicola Barker.