Any sense that Dover [where they put up four illegal posters in one night] is the climax of the project, that we’ll soon be winding down, is rendered redundant by the reaction to the posters. Many of the most influential journalists and commentators in the country are now following us, and we have a vaguely influential platform from which to offer our own commentary on the Brexit farce. We’re being inundated with suggestions for new posters – many of them examples of thermonuclear hypocrisy – and by the end of the day Will has knocked up five new designs and we’re discussing where and when to strike next. There are scores of demands that we take the campaign national. Ideally we’ll hit the north-east, preferably Sunderland. Its place in the Brexit story was cemented when it declared early on the night of the EU referendum, and became the first indicator that Britain had voted to leave. Certainly we need to get out of the south-east. But how can we get our posters up across the country, when we all have young kids? Until now we’ve been putting the children to bed, then pulling on our high-vis gear to paste up posters in the dark, but always (with the exception of Dover) getting back in time to get the kids to school and nursery in the morning. Sunderland is 300 miles away. Even if we got the billboard up in half an hour, the whole thing would be a 12-hour operation. For the first time we start to entertain the possibility of setting up a crowdfunder – an online push for funding from the public. A lot of people are asking us to do it: they want to see the posters proliferate, they want to be involved, and donating cash would give them a way. It seems it isn’t just us who find Led By Donkeys cathartic. We chew it over on our WhatsApp group #PosterChat. By going legit we could certainly expand our reach. If we were to raise £5–10k (unlikely, but you never know), we could get billboards up across the country. Yet more examples of fantasy and hypocrisy are flooding in from the public. Then we’re contacted by the people at crowdfunder.co.uk On the other hand, this was never meant to be a legitimate advertising campaign. For us, the illegality of the pasting is part of the reason we’re doing it. Our side of the Brexit debate seems to us mired in technocratic (albeit important) assertions about jobs, rights and standards. What it lacks, we think, is passion. Where’s the edge? We’ve taken our fair share of direct action over the years, be it against the Iraq war or climate change. Now Britain faces the single biggest political moment in its postwar history, the nation has cleaved in two and the debate is as brutalising as anything we’ve experienced. A band of charlatans and frauds is on the verge of taking us out of Europe, based on a vote that was swung by lies and corruption. And yet nobody is so much as sitting down in the road. No, the fact that we’re breaking the law to put up our posters is, in a way, the whole point of the project. The next day though, the Times runs a double-page spread on our billboards. Davis, Fox and Rees-Mogg are called by journalists to account for their quotes. Yet more examples of fantasy and hypocrisy are flooding in from the public. Then we’re contacted by the people at crowdfunder.co.uk. “We think your project could really work,” says Simon, the founder of the site. “You could raise a bit of money.” “We’d prefer to stay anonymous,” says James. “Of course. Why not start out asking for ten thousand, see how it goes?” We’re still not sure. But then we’re sent a film from the Kent Messenger newspaper website, showing our posters being ripped down by the company that owns the sites in Dover. The footage includes a shot of the Rees-Mogg billboard being picked at and peeled off by a guy up a ladder. Less than 48 hours after we trespassed on a platform overlooking an MOT centre in Dover, we resolve to become a legitimate campaign organisation. We quickly agree on the £10k target and at 7am the next morning we go live. We hit the target in three hours. We sit at our computers – Ben and Olly in London, James in Bristol, Will in Sweden – staring at the screen, pressing refresh, watching the totaliser rolling over and over. By the end of the first day the crowdfunder has raised £30k and by the following evening we have £56k in the bank. We’re now buyers in the cut-throat world of outdoor overhead advertising. And we have precisely no idea what we’re doing. Where do you even buy a billboard? Do you just phone someone up and order it? The guys at Crowdfunder put us on to the biggest billboard company in the country. James calls them and outlines the concept and the support we’re getting from the public. “Hmm, sounds fascinating,” their woman replies. “Send over your designs.” So we email her what we want to put up across the country. It takes her 10 minutes to reply. “Absolutely no way. Sorry, this is all too political for us.” Too political? In the past they happily plastered Ukip posters up and down the country. But they won’t be budged. By now we have £65K in the bank and the fund is growing every minute. People are clamouring for posters in their region, in their city, in their town, in their street. This has the potential to be a total disaster. Should we just give all the money back? Can you even do that? But then we get a message from an independent billboard company called Airoutdoor. They love the project, they say. Can we help? We mainly have sites in Yorkshire and the Midlands. Are you interested? Yes, we are. We’re very interested indeed. We decide to launch with 12 designs – 11 decided by a Twitter poll, plus one quote that for us is non-negotiable. It’s going up, whatever the public thinks. But first we need to check it with the billboard company. “You’re OK putting up the Boris one, right?” asks James after emailing them the design. “We’re not OK with putting that one up, no,” says our new friend at Airoutdoor. “You won’t put FUCK BUSINESS on a billboard?” “I’m afraid not.” “Even though he said it.” “Yup.” “What about F-star-star-K BUSINESS?” “Nope. We’re just not allowed to put stuff like that up. Regulations. I’m sorry.” It’s the same at Build, another independent billboard company that is keen to work with us. No-go for Boris. James breaks the news on #PosterChat. But we won’t take no for an answer. The billboard regulators can star-star-star-star off. Ben texts: I’ve found a site half a mile from the Jaguar Land Rover factory in Solihull, heading towards it. We could do FUCK BUSINESS there. James: GENIUS!! Will: Whoop! Olly: Boom! Love it. So it happens that on a Sunday evening Olly puts his kids to bed, straps the ladder back on to the roofrack of his car and heads north towards Birmingham to meet James for our last guerrilla posting operation. If we were worried about standing out in Dover, we’re even more worried about Solihull – not so much because it’s another Leave-voting town, but because of the content of the billboard. Before getting the poster printed, we discussed whether we should asterisk the quote (the road we’ve chosen is on a school run), but in the end we decided that Johnson said it, so he should own it. Jaguar Land Rover is already laying off workers because of Brexit; if we drop the “F”-bomb on a billboard, it might spark a local conversation about the direction the former foreign secretary and his allies are taking the country in. It’s nearly midnight before Olly arrives at the arranged meeting point in Solihull. James and his brother-in-law Pete, who have driven up from Bristol, have already been waiting for 20 minutes. Time to get to work. The site we’ve chosen is right next to a tunnel, it’s not well lit and at this time of night the street is quiet. We park up around the corner, grab the gear and arrive at the site. It’s another cold night and our hands ache with pain from being covered in freezing paste. But after half an hour the billboard is almost finished. The final incriminating sheets – Boris Johnson’s face and the word FUCK – go up last. We stand back. It’s a powerful poster for its simplicity, while the location so close to the car factory gives it real relevance. We think it captures Johnson’s arrogance, his disregard for anything that stands in his way, his fundamental lack of concern for other people. But there’s no time to dwell on it. We say our goodbyes and head for home. With long drives ahead, it will be after 3am before we’re in bed. The poster certainly sparks a local conversation. “Fury over giant “f***” billboard ad posted on busy road near school”, runs the headline in the Birmingham Mail. The newspaper quotes various posts from the local residents’ Facebook group. Lindsey Crompton has declared: “I complained to the company who own the billboard who told me they knew nothing about it. They removed it within 2 hours.... What offends me is that these activists think it is OK to put such language on a billboard in a residential area. Utter disgrace by Led By Donkeys.” But resident Emily McKenzie has responded, saying: “I hope everyone outraged by the language used on this billboard because children will see it was equally outraged when this statement was made by someone who literally shapes the future of those same children. If my children asked me what that statement meant, I’d tell them who said it and what his job was. In an ideal world the billboard wouldn’t be there, but in an ideal world our foreign secretary wouldn’t be the type of person who thinks ‘f***k business’ is an acceptable response to people losing their jobs.” And Chris Hammond has written: “Yes, the expletive is unfortunate. But it’s had an impact and got people talking.” Which is the whole point of Led By Donkeys. • Led By Donkeys: How Four Friends With a Ladder Took on Brexit is published by Atlantic (£10). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020-3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99