Millions of Californians prepared to be in the dark for days as the United States’ largest utility once again said it was switching off power to prevent powerful winds from damaging its equipment and sparking more fires. Meanwhile, firefighters were battling wildfires across the state on Tuesday, as powerful winds were expected to pick up again. The Kincade fire in Sonoma county in California’s north had destroyed 123 homes and other structures by Tuesday morning and was 15% contained. Crews were also working to control a fierce fire near the Getty Museum in Los Angeles that had prompted evacuations on Monday. “I know this moment generates a tremendous amount of anxiety,” California’s governor, Gavin Newsom, said on Monday about the two major blazes. Strong winds were expected to complicate firefighting efforts on Tuesday. “The worst of this [weather] is coming later today and tonight,” said Marc Chenard, a forecaster with the National Weather Service’s Weather Prediction Center, early on Tuesday. “The winds in the south will really pick up, 50 to 70mph, with some gusts up to 80mph in the Los Angeles mountain area.” The so-called Santa Ana winds in the south could hit their worst levels of the season and last into late Thursday, Chenard said, adding that northern California will not be spared either. Until at least Wednesday, in the bone-dry wine country about 70 miles north of San Francisco, winds will hit up to 65mph in the mountain areas and 35mph in the valleys and coast, he said. Pacific Gas & Electric Corporation (PG&E) said its latest blackout will start early Tuesday and affect 605,000 customers, about 1.5 million people. The announcement came even before the last blackout had ended, which shut off power to more than 2.5 million people. It wasn’t clear if power that for many went out Saturday would be restored before the next round of outages. What was clear was that patience was wearing thin and frustration at the utility was growing. From the suburbs of San Francisco up north to the wine country, people searched for places Monday to charge phones and stocked up on ice for the non-perishable food. Petaluma resident Scotty Richardson, whose lights went out Saturday, said the prospect that power might not be restored for days makes him “furious, furious”. Richardson was out Monday getting breakfast, charging his phone and making business calls at the Lumberjacks restaurant in Petaluma. He vented frustration at the on-again, off-again rollercoaster of outages but also anger at the utility’s role in causing deadly fires in the past, and apparently sparking some of this season’s fires. “PG&E can’t figure out how to deliver power reliably without killing people,” he said. “This is more than three strikes, it’s a failure of epic proportions.” PG&E, which was driven into bankruptcy because of legal claims over its role in several deadly wildfires in recent years, admitted on Monday that despite the outages, its power lines might have started two smaller fires over the weekend in the San Francisco Bay Area. It has also said its transmission lines may have been responsible for the Kincade fire. The utility has been roundly criticized for its handling of the blackouts, the first of which came early in October. And in a new, 230-page report made public on Monday, PG&E acknowledged “significant shortcomings”, admitting that its communication with customers and agencies was inadequate. PG&E stock dropped 24% Monday to close at $3.80 and was down more than 50% since Thursday. Southern California Edison had cut off power to about 800 people as of Monday night and warned that it was considering disconnecting about 400,000 more as winds return midweek. The company also faced a growing backlash from regulators and lawmakers. US congressman Josh Harder, a Democrat from Modesto, said he plans to introduce legislation that would raise PG&E’s taxes if it pays bonuses to executives while engaging in blackouts.