“Berlin resembles the Holy Roman Empire, described by the great jurist Pufendorff as Monstro Simile – like unto a Monster. Seek not to understand – only to preserve!” With these words, old Dr Kohn, the Bonn embassy’s legal adviser, would begin the induction of each incoming British ambassador into the mysteries of divided Berlin. But that Berlin, the city with a wall down the middle, was only one of several. It’s the one Iain MacGregor describes in this lively book of anecdotes and interviews. And yet this great town is a shape-shifter. Every generation or so, it shakes itself – or is shaken - and becomes unrecognisable. From a pretty little provincial dump, it turned in a few years of frenzied building into the towering capital of a Wilhelmine empire. Then radical Weimar; then Hitler. Then the RAF gutted and levelled its centre. Then the victor powers divided it into four sectors. In August 1961 Walter Ulbricht split it with the wall, which stood for 28 years – the Berlin I used to live in (while Berlin correspondent for this newspaper). And then, just 30 years ago, the wall came down and the place became unrecognisable yet again. So often, in my time, I would take returning exiles around and hear: “But there used to be an enormous church here. And just next, a little square with trees. Where am I? Are you sure this is it?” Only to hear myself, returning in the 1990s: “No, there was never an art gallery here. There should be a ruined station opposite, not a new hotel. Give me the map!” As his title suggests, MacGregor is fascinated by the monstrosities, the web of Berlin rules that grew up in the cold war. I loved his chapter about how US diplomat Allan Lightner’s trip to the opera with his wife Dorothy in East Berlin ended by nearly incinerating Europe, as Soviet and American tanks went muzzle to muzzle at Checkpoint Charlie. All because an East German guard, not a Soviet one, had demanded to see their IDs. Nikita Khrushchev used to call this sort of niggling “pouring hot water into bedbugs’ ears”. But he is also supposed to have said: “Berlin is the testicles of the west. Every time I want to make the west scream, I squeeze on Berlin.” That was the point. The wires were drawn so taut in the divided city that the slightest touch – the wrong official unblocking a drain running under the wall – jangled as Soviet or British or American or French officers asked: “What are they trying to tell us?” In that sense, Berlin’s mad complexities were a valuable signalling system. Perhaps espionage was another. MacGregor naturally gives a lot of space to spies and spooks. But I soon learned that nothing in Berlin stayed secret. The Russians, through George Blake, knew all about the tunnel excavated by the Americans to bug their military phone lines. The Americans knew that the East Germans were going to seal off the western sectors days before 13 August, 1961, when the barriers went up that became the Berlin Wall. As a reporter, I learned that most of the spying in the city was not so much cold war drama as simply a black market in information, less profitable than petrol or blue jeans, but safer. Many Berliners never even saw the Wall. 'Why should I,' a neighbour asked me. 'It isn’t on my way to work' Iain MacGregor’s stories come mainly from the American or British military. Most interesting, because little known, are the bizarre adventures of the military missions permitted by the Four Power agreement to circulate freely in each other’s “occupation zones”. BRIXMIS (the British Commanders’-in-Chief Mission to the Soviet Forces) was located in Potsdam in East Germany, and spent its time tracking and photographing Soviet military movements – a licensed espionage. The western missions were constantly harassed and their cars pushed into the ditch, and in 1985 a Soviet sentry shot and killed an American officer, Major Nicholson. Rightly, MacGregor sets the limited sufferings of the western garrisons against the 140 men and women known to have lost their lives at the Berlin Wall ( rightly, too, he adds the names of the eight East German border soldiers who were killed on duty). The misery of the many thousands of families divided by the wall comes out in many of his interviews. Yet there were other Berlins beyond the city heroised by John F Kennedy in 1963. Many Berliners never even saw the wall. “Why should I,” a neighbour asked me. “It isn’t on my way to work.” The middle classes had long since fled to Frankfurt or Munich, replaced by a brilliant, very young population of students, writers and draft-dodgers from West Germany who were to make the “student revolution” in the late 60s. They don’t form part of MacGregor’s story. As for Checkpoint Charlie, the hours spent waiting there were so bleak, one remembers only the surprises. The Sicilian barrel-organ man, Squarcialupo, who seemed mysteriously free to cross the border as he pleased. The guard grimly checking through my little daughter’s passport, then, noticing it was her fifth birthday, silently fetching her a flower from a concrete pot by the wall. Or MacGregor’s chapter about Nachama, the Auschwitz survivor with a heavenly voice, who commuted through the checkpoint to sing at East and West Berlin synagogues. MacGregor isn’t always good on history, saying that “Stalin schemed to ensure that Germany remained divided”, when in fact he schemed to hold it together under allied rule, or, in 1956 “Soviet tanks” in Warsaw had “quelled” Polish nationalism. But the voices he has saved, and the richly researched skill of his narrative at big moments, rescue an echo of one of the many lost Berlins. • Checkpoint Charlie by Iain MacGregor is published by Constable (£20). To order a copy for £17.60 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 020 3176 3837. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99