As autumn creeps in, porridge is once again what mornings call for. It is the perfect breakfast. It fills you up, it keeps you warm. It’s quick to make and, tastewise, it can go in many directions. You can add nuts and dried fruit, honey and cream, banana and Nutella; or you can go savoury, with seeds, cheese, harissa, bacon, soft-boiled eggs or spring onions. But porridge does not stop with oats, which is good news for anyone scarred by a childhood of lumpy grey gloop. The world over, you find cereal grains and starchy plants chopped, ground, rolled or otherwise processed and boiled in water (or milk, or stock) until they release their starches and thicken into something creamy. Technically even risotto and congee qualify as types of porridge. (A political analyst called Abigail Pile ushered in 2019 by writing a 1,250-word essay on how to stir your porridge. She took cues from the traditional risotto method – use water, don’t stop stirring and get yourself one of those wooden rods that the Scots call spurtles.) To cater to gluten-free and other alternative diets, supermarkets now stock an impressive array of grains. The following list of alternatives to oats shouldn’t have you scouring the shelves in your local health shop, or emptying your wallet. There’s a reason you find porridge the world over: it’s cheap. So buy a bunch of grains to try, and stock up on toppings. Mornings are about to get interesting. Just as porridge oats are simply steamed and rolled grains, rye and other cereal kernels, not to mention an array of seeds, can be flattened into flakes. Rye doesn’t result in as creamy a porridge as oats do, so chef Anna Jones suggests a 50/50 ratio of rye flakes and oats. She also recommends soaking the flakes overnight, then straining and toasting them in a dry pan for a bit before boiling. Her flavouring of choice for rye is cocoa powder and almond butter, with a pear compote on the side. It’s a combo that is hard to beat, but blueberries, banana or other fresh fruit would be tasty, too. Alex Hely-Hutchinson, meanwhile, who founded the London porridge restaurant 26 Grains, ranks the Danish øllebrød – made from stale rye bread – as one of the best. You soak the bread in beer (porter or stout works well) overnight, then cook the lot until it’s nice and soft. It’s often flavoured with citrus zest and juice, honey, cinnamon, raisins and a pinch of salt. Hely-Hutchinson plumps for pears, coconut yoghurt, cardamon and maple syrup. “Filling and delicious and completely different from any porridge I’ve ever tasted,” she says. Also known as kasha, buckwheat groats are not a cereal but the triangular seeds of a pretty, white-flowering knotweed. Soaked overnight, then toasted in a pan and simmered in water for half an hour, they make a mean bowlful: nutty, full-bodied, wholesome. The Ukrainian food writer Olia Hercules grew up eating them slathered with melted butter and sugar. You can add a cinnamon stick to the cooking water (or milk) or sprinkle the finished dish with the spice instead, along with any garnish, from fresh fruit to cacao nibs and nuts. And if you make a big batch, it will keep in the fridge for a few days. Southern grits, South African pap, Jamaican porridge, polenta: there are countless uses for cornmeal. While Nigerian fufu and Zimbabwean sadza, say, are less spoonable porridge than grabbable starch with which to eat a meaty stew, the basic idea of cooking ground maize down for breakfast works a treat, too. Choose a finer cornmeal for something smooth, or coarse for more texture, whisk it into boiling water (or a combination of water and whichever milk you like), add spice, sweeten to taste (Jamaican tradition calls for condensed milk) and don’t stop stirring. Beautiful served with a blob of butter, a dash of cold milk or a helping of fruit compote. This small-grained cereal is a staple on the Chinese table, from breakfast to dinner. It is boiled until tender in water, and sweetened – or salted – as you like. Maggie Zhu, who runs the website Omnivore’s Cookbook, suggests a savoury take with pickled vegetables and fermented tofu. Some sticky pork on the side would not go amiss. For a sweet brekkie, though, Erin Alderson at Naturally Ella cracks her millet first in a coffee grinder or blender, then fries it in a knob of butter before boiling it in a mixture of milk and water. She serves it with roasted strawberries sweetened with maple syrup and cardamom. Like millet, savoury rice porridge is commonplace throughout Asia – from okayu in Japan to Chinese congee and Thai khao tom – mostly because it is an excellent way to use up leftover rice. Very broadly, you simmer the rice in stock (fish, or chicken, but veggie would work, too), season with something salty (depending on the cuisine, that will be soy, fish sauce etc) and serve variously with pork, chicken, shrimp, greens, pickles or soft-boiled eggs and a garnish of some kind (sesame seeds, spring onion, fried garlic and ginger, chopped peanuts or coriander). But rice makes great sweet porridge, too, like the Swedish Christmas favourite risgrynsgrröt. Short-grain pudding rice is cooked in milk and water with a cinnamon stick, sweetened with sugar and served with butter. Quinoa is prized as a porridge base for its high protein content. The food writer Sara Buenfeld cooks hers with water, a dash of vanilla essence and creamed coconut, then stirs in coconut yogurt and chia seeds. To serve, she adds more coconut yogurt, fresh berries and flaked almonds. Honey and Co’s Sarit Packer and Itamar Srulovich say this is their favourite – richly flavoured with vanilla and cream, and topped with strawberry compote infused with black peppercorns and bay, plus a spoonful of yoghurt. Another pseudocereal, from another flowering beauty. These seeds are small and round, and cook down into something much tamer than buckwheat could ever manage. The New York Times’s Martha Rose Shulman does this with a mixture of milk and water, brown sugar, maple syrup and a pinch of salt. Which, you will note, is the sort of technique that works for every other porridge base here, oats included. In other words, if you like bogstandard oats, none of these – however unknown to you – should prove anything less than pure comfort.