The bid for Just Eat by Prosus is the latest in a string of tech bets which have transformed an old newspaper empire into one of the world’s most forward-looking and valuable companies. Prosus, which became Europe’s biggest listed consumer internet firm when it floated on the Amsterdam stock exchange at a valuation of more than €100bn in September, is controlled by Naspers, one of Africa’s most valuable companies which also owns South African media empire Media24 and online retailer Takealot. Founded in Stellenbosch, South Africa, in 1915 to produce a Dutch language newspaper, Naspers moved into book publishing in the 1960s and pay TV in the 1980s. Its newspaper titles, including Afrikaans title Die Burger, backed apartheid – with Media24 only issuing a formal apology in 2015 for its role as a propaganda tool. The group took its first step into the digital world in 1997 with the founding of MWeb, a pay TV channel. But it was a lucrative early bet on China’s Tencent Holdings in 2001 that propelled the South African company into the big league, as the Shenzhen start-up rose to dominate China’s online world. Prosus holds a 31% stake in Tencent and the group netted $9.8bn from the sale of a 2% stake last year. That bet has made chairman Koos Bekker, who joined Naspers in 1985, fabulously rich. He and his wife own Babylonstoren, a 200-acre estate outside Cape Town and last year opened The Newt in Somerset, a multimillion pound hotel at the Grade II-listed Hadspen House and set in 800 acres in the West Country. Meanwhile Naspers pumped money into Indian ecommerce company Flipkart, collecting a $1.6bn profit from the sale of its 11% stake last year, and took full control of Russian classified ads site Mail.ru in January this year. The group spun off its African pay TV group, MultiChoice, which owns African sports broadcaster SuperSport, in February. A $40m investment in Brazil’s mobile content developer Movile in 2015, led to the group’s first interest in food ordering and delivery via the South American firm’s iFood business. Two years later Naspers pumped €380m into Germany’s Delivery Hero and made an $80m investment in India’s Swiggy.