The shrine in Marunouchi is a little different to the 1,500 or so others in Tokyo. It has the same trappings, an altar, a bell, paper lanterns and a coil of twisted rope, but it sits on a patch of bright green AstroTurf, and its torii, the distinctive red entry gate, is in the unmistakable shape of a set of goal posts. They even have a wrap of foam padding. There’s a bilingual sign outside inviting you to stop and “pray for the happiness of all people who love rugby”, and a little how‑to guide for all of us who don’t know how to do it. Ring the bell. Bow twice. Clap twice. Bow again. It was busy on the Monday morning after Japan were knocked out. I sat on the bench opposite and watched a stream of people, little kids, middle-aged men, elderly ladies, go through the ritual. It sounds solemn, but it wasn’t. Everyone was smiling, and posing for photos. Then an old man asked if he could join me and we sat there together in silence. Until finally he started to laugh, a happy, high-pitched giggle that swirled like birdsong. He stopped to snort fresh breath, slapped one hand on his slacks, used the other to dry his eye, then started up all over again. “But,” he said, “but,” barely able to get the words out his mouth, “but Japan lost!” He didn’t mean it scornfully. There wasn’t a hint of admonishment in it. He was just delighted by everyone else’s newfound enthusiasm for a sport they had never really cared for before. They were almost as merry about it as he was. No one was crying, scowling, or scolding the players or calling for the coaches to be sacked, there weren’t any furious inquisitions in the papers or on the radio or TV shows. Instead there was a quiet, jolly pride at what the team had achieved in the past few weeks. • Fixtures, tables and results • Top try and points scorers • Stadium guide • Referee guide • Our latest minute-by-minute live reports • Sign up to The Breakdown, our free rugby union email newsletter Team guidesPool A: Ireland, Japan, Russia, Samoa, ScotlandPool B: Canada, Italy, Namibia, New Zealand, South AfricaPool C: Argentina, England, France, Tonga, USAPool D: Australia, Fiji, Georgia, Uruguay, Wales Alec, though, is an irredeemable cynic. But then he’s been working in sports politics for the past decade or so, on the Olympics beat, Beijing, London, Rio, and now Tokyo. We met at a match back in the first week of the World Cup. I liked him very much, which is why I’ve changed his name. He’d never covered rugby before, and he couldn’t have been any less impressed. The game, he complained, seemed slow and stodgy, the rules incomprehensible, and most of the players came across as so damn posh. A month later I saw him again, in Yokohama this time. I’d come scurrying down to the press room right after Japan had beaten Scotland. “That,” he said, breathlessly, “was brilliant.” He was grinning like a little kid. Grinning, in fact, like my six‑year‑old nephew in the photo taken on his first day back at school in Sapporo after the opening week of the tournament. He had never picked up a ball before, but he and his friends were so excited about the Rugby World Cup that they played a game in the break on Monday morning. He knocked out his two baby teeth making a tackle. He was pretty proud of his gap-toothed smile, they were wobbly anyway, he explained, and it saved him the trouble of teasing them out. There are serious discussions to be had about Japanese rugby. About whether the Japanese union has resources it needs to push through the necessary reform of their amateur league, and get the schools, universities, and corporations who run the game all working to the same end. About where they fit into the world game. The latest reports out of New Zealand are that, thank goodness, the southern unions have decided to keep Japan’s only fully professional team, the Sunwolves, in Super Rugby, and they are looking to fast-track the national team into the Rugby Championship too. And we could strain to explain the significance of it all, get at how sport has helped to bring everyone together, given people an outlet for all those pent-up emotions, maybe even reshaped their idea of what it means to be Japanese. And we could ask whether this World Cup is going to have any kind of legacy, as all big tournaments are now supposed to do, look at the regeneration of the stadiums or the development of new infrastructure, ask whether it has led a new great wave of enthusiasm for sport and exercise and all those other things they promise in the brochures. But really, it’s enough to say that this Japanese team spread a little happiness around, at a time when the country is still in mourning for the 80 people who died in Typhoon Hagibis. And what else is it all for, anyway, but entertainment? Japan were good at that, maybe the best of all the teams in this World Cup. It was there in Kotaro Matsushima’s dash and swagger, his perfectly swept hair, each strand in place even after he had thrown himself up from one of those headlong dives for the tryline, and in Kenki Fukuoka’s ridiculous speed and skill, and the way he plucked that grubber from the air like he was pulling down one last apple as he was sprinting away from the farmer who had caught him scrumping, in Shota Horie’s wildman style, dreadlocks flying behind him as he threw himself into another collision, and Timothy Lafaele’s bottomless top-hat of magic tricks, flicks, kicks and passes. And in Michael Leitch, always indomitably charging on. They played with style and courage, and, even in defeat, for the “happiness of all people who love rugby”.