Cashew fondue and gnocchi with shiitake and coconut sauce are among the dishes on the seasonal menu of the organic, vegan restaurant attached to this gorgeous rural hotel in the green hills of Lladurs, between Barcelona and Andorra. The restored 18th-century farmhouse includes rooms with handmade oak furniture and eco-friendly furnishings from local producers. It also offers massage and yoga, and has bikes for rent to explore the Catalonian countryside.• Doubles from £88, casaalbets.cat In a valley in the foothills of the Sierra de Almijara, this vegan B&B and restaurant serves a mix of homemade food, such as vegan sushi, meze, crispy fried cauliflower “wings” with sweet chilli, and burgers with “beefy patties” and vegan cheese. The restored 18th-century building is less than 30 minutes drive from the coast, and nearby walking and cycling routes pass the River Turvilla and old flour mills. Or there is the Mudejar Route, which heads through a series of Moorish whitewashed villages and small towns.• Doubles from €60 B&B, mesonmudejar.com Villa Vegana’s hilltop location, close to the town of Selva, has views through the orchards to the nearby Tramuntana mountains. Lemon, orange, almond and olive trees surround the hotel. Being vegan, even the furnishings, cleaning products and toiletries are cruelty-free. The plant-based hotel restaurant – which has published its own cookbook – serves a menu of ethnic dishes and comfort food, from a different region of the world each day. Breakfast includes Spanish coca (flatbread) and homemade croissants, and dinners feature Mallorcan aubergine tumbet and tacos with vegan chorizo. The hotel also has an outdoor pool.• Doubles from €120 B&B, villavegana.com An early 20th-century townhouse with futuristic interiors, AM/PM is in Smedenpoort in the historic centre of Bruges, a 15-minute walk from the station, market square and basilica. The vegan breakfast includes breads, spreads, cereals and a vegetable and fruit “slowjuice shot”. For later in the day, owners Kevin and Tiny recommend nearby restaurants De Brugsche Tafel and Royal Frituur & Eetboetiek for vegan food.• Doubles from €80 B&B, bruges-bedandbreakfast.com This restaurant-with-rooms is on the Nieuwe Merwede canal in Biesbosch national park, a 45-minute train ride from Rotterdam. In the evenings, it serves a vegan tasting menu (four to seven courses, €45 to €66) that includes dishes such as asparagus panna cotta, leaf broccoli with smoked leeks, and beetroot sorbet with citrus crumble, and can be paired with natural and organic wines. Next door is Huiskamercafe Fluitekruid (“living room cafe”), which serves light veggie meals and snacks. There are boat tours, plus cycling and walking routes throughout the park.• Doubles from €89 B&B, kopvanhetland.nl Vegotel now has four locations in the far north of the Netherlands (in Blije, Heegermeer, Wyns and Schoonoord), each offering different styles of accommodation and activities – all serving 100% vegan food. Vegotel Blije is on the Zeedijk, close to the Wadden Sea, in a farmhouse dating to 1885, offering either B&B or full-board. Vegotel Heegermeer has several cottages for two to six people and is close to beaches and watersports. And the cottages at Vegotel Wyns, in the meadows near Leeuwarden, and Vegotel Schoonoord, in the inland province of Drenthe, are good for walkers and cyclists. There are bicycles (both manual and electric) for rent at all properties – and electric cars at Blije. All rooms and cottages come with a breakfast of plant-based cheeses, sliced “meats”, vegan pâté, organic bread and jams.• Doubles from €87.50 B&B, cottages from €350 B&B for three nights, vegotel.nl There are quiet reading spots among the strawberry beds and wildflower banks at this rural, vegan eco-hotel in the village of Artalens-Souin. Ingredients grown in the permaculture garden are used for breakfasts, picnic lunches, dinners and homemade cakes in between. The hotel has three double rooms (a dorm house is due to open soon), and is low-chemical, zero-waste and uses solar power and composting toilets. From the garden there are views of the Vallée des Gaves and often snow-capped peaks. • Doubles from €57 B&B, lamaisondebernadette.com Close to the ancient stone-terraced vineyards of the Wachau wine region, this vegan hotel serves homemade food and organic wine. The medieval property has been renovated and modernised to offer bedrooms in the former farm buildings, which are set around a courtyard garden. It’s accessible by train from Vienna and close to the River Danube, Göttweig Abbey and the ruins of Dürnstein Castle. There are thousands of apricot trees in the region, in full rosy-white bloom in mid-April and harvested in July for use in Austrian deserts such as sweet dumplings and strudel.• Doubles from €96 B&B (minimum two-night stay), landhaus-furth8.at Jerusalem artichokes with truffle cream and homemade vegetable charcoal tagliatelle with extra virgin olive oil (produced onsite) are among dishes on the seasonal menu at Coroncina, in Marche, in eastern Italy. The farmstay is in woodland close to the town of Belforte del Chienti, between the Sibillini mountains and the Adriatic coast (both around 30 minutes by car). There are three bedrooms in the main house and a small cabin made from old barrels. Outside, olive groves and orchards are home to roe deer and wild boar (along with the resident cats and dogs). There’s also an outdoor pool and an indoor wellness space with a sauna, herbal steam bath and hot tub.• Doubles from €120 B&B, coroncina.it Le Carrube’s menu changes daily, with vegetarian takes on Puglian and other Italian classics such as homemade orecchiette, aubergine parmesan, warm mushroom and chicory salad, and lavender panna cotta with honey and toasted almonds. The farmhouse renovation project has restored the vaulted ceilings, cavernous fireplaces and a paved courtyard – and transformed the former sheep pens into two swimming pools. Close by is the città bianca (white city) of Ostuni, less than 15 minutes by car, and the sandy beaches of the east coast, including Costa Merlata, Lido Morelli and Quarto di Monte, all around a 20-minute drive away.• Doubles from €126 B&B, masserialecarrubeostuni.it Homemade pasta, risotto and local cheeses are the order of the day at this agriturismo in the Sabine hills, 90 minutes’ drive north-east of Rome. On a hillside overlooking the countryside, there are valley and river views from the outdoor pool and terrace – where dinner is served. Each of the five bedrooms greets the sunrise and some come with a small balcony, or a bath facing out of a large window. This rural location is also home to the ruins of a Roman villa and its ancient olive groves.• Doubles from €110 B&B, lemolesulfarfa.com This hostel makes for an affordable stay in an expensive city. It offers weekly family-style dinners and cooking classes: pasta-making on Thursdays, hand-making tagliatelle(€25); and pizza-making on Tuesdays, with tips on cooking them in a domestic oven (€20). It’s a five-minute walk from Rome’s central station and 20 minutes to the Colosseum and Trevi Fountain. There’s also a paved garden with a banyan tree and local wine served in the evenings.• Dorm beds from €25, doubles from €60 (shared bathroom), the-beehive.com This former farmhouse – an hour’s drive south of the city of Lugo – is named after one of its previous residents, Tia Cabaza (Auntie Pumpkin), nicknamed for her wide, traditional petticoats. Breakfasts feature homemade sourdough bread and organic jams, and the hosts can arrange a meat-free picnic basket of local produce for lunch. There’s also an optional three-course vegetarian dinner or tapas, which is served on the terrace (groups of 4+). There are bikes for rent or horse-riding available to explore further into the Courel mountains and the Os Ancares bioreserve.• Doubles from €75 B&B, casacabaza.com This eco-retreat in Odiáxere, close to the coast and 7km from Lagos, encourages guests to reconnect with nature. There are floor-to-ceiling windows looking over large gardens with a saltwater pool and firepit, and terraces with hammocks. Breakfast is a Mediterranean-style buffet with ingredients from the garden’s, olive, almond, carob, orange and banana trees, and superfood plant moringa – also used for meals and products sold in the farm shop. It runs yoga and cooking classes, and has opportunities to get involved with regenerative farming projects and harvesting, including picking herbs for tea infusions.• Doubles from €90 B&B, casavaledalama.pt In the hills of Sintra national park, this small country house has sea views, an outdoor pool and does veggie breakfast, including chocolate salami, homemade apple cake and warm baked apricots. Nearby Sintra town – Lord Byron’s “glorious Eden” and a Unesco heritage site – has fairytale castles, palaces and botanical gardens to explore. The hotel offers free bus passes to Sintra or Cascais (both around 30 minutes) and a shuttle to Almoçageme village and Adraga beach (under 10 minutes).• Doubles from €99 B&B, colinaflora.com Close to the medieval port of Zadar, this small, family-run guesthouse is surrounded by gardens of flowers, organic vegetables, fruit and herbs. Breakfast, which includes smoothies, homemade cakes and herby cheese, is served outside at a large table, where guests can also join the hosts most evenings for a veggie feast. The sea is less than five minutes’ walk away, and it’s around 10 minutes to the old town. There are five bedrooms in the modern building, free bikes to use and a patio with loungers. Guided excursions with the hosts are available to Paklenica, Krka and Plitvice Lakes national parks, and the Kornati Islands for sailing or kayaking on the Zrmanja river.• Doubles from €73 B&B, bajlo.com This 300-year-old family manor, comprised of several restored stone houses, is now home to a vegetarian hotel, with a chef, Tea Đukić, referred to as an “alchemist”, who “turns plants into gold”. The regional menu is served at communal tables in the kitchen or in the leafy courtyard – including a breakfast of seasonal fruit, yoghurt, local cheese and freshly baked bread. The terrace also hosts live music, art workshops, wine tastings and other events. In the surrounding Vinodol valley, there are hiking routes through karst mountains and woodland. The Adriatic coast – with opportunities to paraglide and sail – is only 7km away.• Doubles from £88, hotel-balatura.hr Between Rennes-le-Château village and the hot springs of Rennes-les-Bains, Lavaldieu is a partially restored former hamlet surrounded by organic vegetable gardens and orchards. The B&B serves homemade vegetarian breakfasts and communal alfresco dinners. There’s also an apartment and a campsite in the garden woodland, set beside meadows of wild flowers, which is home to more than 80 species of butterfly. The region surrounding Lavaldieu is said to have mystical powers – being close to the inverted peak of Pic de Bugarach in the Corbières massif, megalithic stone slabs and the Devil’s Armchair monument.• Doubles from €52 B&B, lavaldieu.com A seaside stay close to the Baltic, the Carpe Diem hotel is certified organic – as is the wine, coffee and wholemeal sourdough that is baked onsite for breakfast. Accommodation is available in double rooms and apartments. The wellness area includes a gym, steam room, sauna and Kusatsu pool bath, and alternative therapies on request. A 1km-long white sand beach is a 25-minute walk away, and nearby Vorpommersche Boddenlandschaft national park has extensive hiking and biking routes through wild coastal landscapes.• Doubles from €140 B&B, carpe-diem-prerow.de A rooftop spa, central Friedrichshain location and organic vegan as well as veggie options make this a great choice for a city-break stay. Bedrooms are stripped-back in style – and come with mats and enough space to practise yoga. The bistro serves breakfast and brunch, including vegan bratwurst, scrambled tofu and homemade bread, along with Mediterranean food throughout the day. The Friedrichshain district is a vegan haven, including cafes such as Emma Pea and Vöner, hand-rolled ice-cream at Delabuu, and vegan fashion at Loveco.• Doubles from €98, almodovarhotel.de Looking for a holiday with a difference? Browse Guardian Holidays to see a range of fantastic trips This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information.